                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MACROECONOMIC EVIDENCE ON THE COMPOSITION
                 OF EFFECTIVE HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS
                   DURING THE 196Os AND l9TOs


                          Edward J. Kane



                      Working Paper No. 1319




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1984




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #13)49
                                                  May 198)4




           Macroeconomic Evidence on the Composition of Effective
                Household Savings During the 1960s and l9IOs



                                  ABSTRACT




        This paper studies the impact of broad changes in the economic and

financial environment on the savings rate and portfolio composition of indi-

viduals in different age groups and household types. Employing survey data,

household savings are cumulated as increases in net transactable wealth

observed across three benchmark dates: January—February 1962, the first

half of 1970, and August—September, 1911. This paper describes how savings

rates and the allocation of accumulated savings across different financial

and real—estate assets varied with household circumstances. A sharp turn-

around is observed between the 1960s and 1910s in the profiles of saving

and homeownership for younger and older households.




                                                 Edward J. Kane
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Ohio State University
                                                 Columbus, Ohio )43210
                                                 (6i)4) )422—8708
      MICROECONOMIC EVIDENCE ON THE COMPOSITION
      OF EFFECTIVE HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS DURING THE 1960s AND 1970s

      Edward 3. Kane*


Employing survey data on consumer balance sheets, this chapter describes mean
differences in effective savings rates and in the allocation of accumulated savings
across financial and real-estate assets for households in different demographic
circumstances. Adopting a balance-sheet perspective, effective saving is defined
as the net increase between survey dates in the amount of wealth a household holds

in the particular assets and liabilities for which survey data are collected.
Effective saving is an ex post and data-determined concept.        It differs from
anticipated saving not only because of income and expenditure surprises, but also
by the amount of the unanticipated capital gain or loss that accrues on a
respondent's overall portfolio position. In that it includes the effect of revalua-
tions of existing assets, it differs also from the concept of ex     saving that is
embodied in the national income and product accounts.'

     Three surveys conducted by the Survey Research Center (SRC) of the
University of Michigan serve as our principal source of data. Because survey
instruments did not regularly include questions about the value of pension claims,
claims against insurance reserves, and tangible assets other than real estate, these
assets are neglected in our study. To assign a name to the wealth concept that
corresponds to the net-worth account of these truncated survey balance sheets, we
introduce the term "net transactable wealth."

     In this paper, household savings are cumulated as increases in net transact-
able wealth observed across three benchmark dates: 3anuary-February 1962, the
                                                                                  2

first half of 1970, and August-September 1977. These time intervals are chosen
because in each of them the SRC conducted a comprehensive national survey of
household balance sheets. Because data were collected from over 2,000 households

in each instance, the samples are large enough to support some analysis of cross-
classified data.

      Our goal is to develop and to interpret data on cross-sectional differences in
wealth trajectories through time. Our unifying hypothesis is that changes in the
economic and financiaPenironment seldom lead individuals in different demo-
graphic circumstances to effeèt parallel adjustments either in their saving rate or
in the composition of their equilibrium portfolios. This hypothesis implies that
class-level differences in the rate of wealth accumulation reflect returns from
active portfolio management as well as the passive realignment of portfolio shares
occasioned by unpredictable fluctuations in the prices of individual assets. We
strive to show that, over 1962-1977, wealth redistribution had an active as well as
a passive dimension.

     Our analysis can be likened to examining the slopes of line segments drawn

triangularly through three data points. For most partitions of survey respondents,
we concern ourselves mainly with differences in the orientations of the 1962-70
and 1970-77 legs of the triangle. However, for specified age cohorts, we look also
at data covering the longer 1962-1977 segment.



     A PRELIMINARY LOOK AT THE DATA
Although the 1962 and 1970 Surveys of Consumer Finances record holdings to the
nearest dollar (i.e., asked respondents for point estimates), most of the balance-
sheet data collected in the 1977 Consumer Credit Survey sponsored by the Federal
Reserve Board are in interval form. To aggregate 1977 observations across asset
                                                                                      3

 classes   to estimate an individual household's transactable wealth, it is first
 necessary to convert the interval estimates into point estimates.           Detailed
 aggregation procedures, which draw on mean values recorded for various asset-
 holding intervals in the 1962 and 1970 surveys, are explained in Shumay and Kane
 (1983).

       Because the accuracy and representativeness of survey data are always in
 doubt, a responsible researcher must endeavor as far as possible to collate survey
 measurements with comparable figures from other data sets. Reported percentage
 allocations of consolidated transactable wealth to financial assets and real-estate
 equity differ greatly between SRC surveys of households and institutionally derived
 Federal Reserve Flow of Funds (FOF) data. Averaged across survey years, SRC
 portfolio weights for financial assets are roughly 3/8. This is just over one-half of
 their average weight in FOF data. For real-estate equity, the situation is reversed:
SRC weights range between 60 and 65 percent, while FOF weights vary between 25
and 35 percent. These discrepancies have many sources. First, in sample
                                                                        surveys,
respondents have both a tendency to forget and an understandable reluctance to
disclose sensitive economic information. This leads respondents to misreport (and
on average to underreport) their positions in various financial assets (Ferber,
Forsythe, Guthrie, and Maynes 1969a and 1969b; Goldsmith 1982). Shumay and
Kane (1983) describe the error-detection and error-correction procedures to which
the 1962, the 1970, and particularly the 1977 data sets were subjected. Answers to
straightforward questions of fact such as whether a household is a homeowner or
has mortgage debt should be more reliable than value estimates. In an interview
situation, a household that owns a wide variety of stocks and bonds may easily
overlook its position in particular securities. Second, valuation skills may differ
across respondents, especially for real-estate assets. Third, valuation principles,
                                                                                   4

intrayear timing, and reporting categories differ between the SRC and Flow of
Funds accounts. In the Flow of Funds accounts, the household sector includes
personal trusts and nonprofit organizations, and a category of miscellaneous assets
exists. A fourth complication is that the interviewing unit in SRC surveys shifted
after 1964 from the "spending unit" to the "family unit."
      In view of these discrepancies, the purpose of this paper is not to produce
unbiased estimates of consolidated balance sheets for the household sector as a
whole. Rather, it is to examine differences in saving and portfolio behavior across
households nartitioned by ae and family
                                —   -- comoosition. To assess the reoresenta-

tiveness   of SRC samples and of our aggregation procedures vis-a-vis patterns of
incremental wealth accumulation, Table 9-1 compares cumulative movements
                             Place Table 9—i near here            -



shown   for the pooled cross-section sample between survey dates with time-series
changes reported in FOF data covering approximately the same intervals. SRC and
FOF estimates of cumulative growth rates for deposits and savings bonds and for
owner-occupied real estate are similar in both periods, but especially for 1962-1970
other categories diverge considerably. In part this is because, in an effort to
compensate for the greater nonreporting of financial information by high-income
households, SRC surveys oversample high-income households (Katona, Mandell, and
Schmiedescamp, 197 1:3-4; Durkin and Elliehausen, 1978: 97-99). Measured against
Census data, the concentration on hii nrome households increased from the 1970
to 1977 survey. In Table 9-1, the divergences are greatest for assets favored by
wealthy households:     for corporate equities, for marketable bonds (where, by
recording increases in par values without respect to ongoing price depreciation,
SRC surveys seriously overstate value growth in an era of rising interest rates), and
                                                                                   5

 for the category of investment real estate (which has no strict counterpart in the
 Flow of Funds accounts). In addition, these same assets bulk large in the portfolios
 of personal trusts and nonprofit organizations. Goldsmith reports that nonprofit
 organizations greatly reduced the weight of bonds and stocks in their portfolios
 between 1964 and 1975. Except for corporate equities, the alternative estimates
 of cumulative growth in net transactable wealth prove doser f or the 1970-77
 period (which makes use of the same concept of interviewing unit at both end
 dates) than for 1962-70.

      For equity in homes, it proved impossible to maintain complete comparability
 between 1977 and earlier survey data. First, fully 6.6 percent of 1977 respondent
households reported themselves as homeowners without revealing either the value
of their home or information about the terms of their mortgage. Second, unlike
the 1962 and 1970 survey instruments, the 1977 questionnaire did not ask for the
value of outstanding mortgage debt. Fortunately, in all but 57 cases (2.2 percent
of sample respondents and 5.2 percent of the 1,099 mortgagors in the sample), it
proved possible to estimate the book value of mortgage debt from information
concerning the terms of the mortgage. In the sample analyzed in this study, the
homeownership rate falls short of the 64.8 percent Census estimate for 1977
reported by Carliner (1982), even though the unedited survey sample showed a
homeownership rate of 68.9 percent. Moreover, the deletion bias does not fall
uniformly across various demographic partitions. In particular, because families
that have undergone some form of breakup or have occupied a home for a long time
are more likely to fail to report the value of their home as well as to forget
relevant information or to report inconsistent mortgage terms, the cases deleted
include a disproportionately large number of older mortgagors. The edited sample's
lack of representativeness can be assessed from Table 9-2, which compares
                                                                                    6

                              Place Table 9-2 near here
 homeownership rates in our 1977 sample with two-age dass partitions published in
Carliner (1982). Data presented in Table 9-9 show that the percentage of deleted
homeowners increases steadily with the age of a household's head.



      FACTORS DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECTING HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS
      PATTERNS IN THE 1960s AND 1970s
Modern theories of consumption emphasize that, for a representative household,
savings behavior differs as it moves through the life cycle. Life-cycle theories of

saving (Modigliani and Brumberg 1954; Ando and Modigliani 1963) hold that, over
its lifetime, a household accumulates and decumulates wealth to smooth the
timestream of its consumption expenditures by offsetting the effects of anticipat-
ed and unanticipated variation in income receipts and in spending goals. Spending

goals indude predictable and partly controllable bulges in expenditure, such as
those occasioned by retirement, college expenses, vacations, and downpayments on
big-ticket items such as cars and houses. They also indude provisions for bequests

and unpredictable (and often uncontrollable) bulges in expenditure such as for
household repairs and health emergencies. If it could ignore complications due to
uncertainty about the age of death, this theory would predict that, as a household
approached the end of its expected life span, it would plan to decumulate wealth to
the level of intended bequests.

     Because differences in implicit and explicit transactions charges and in
securities' minimum denominations affect the liquidity of various assets, the
existence of a life cycle in saving patterns suggests the likelihood of a correspond-
ing life cycle in patterns of asset holding. In this second life cycle, we may expect
differences in age-class transactions costs, tax structure, and portfolio risks to
play an important role. 1-listorically, securities dealers and brokers have priced
                                                                                       7


 their services in ways that discourage small individual trades: imposing odd-lot

 fees, transactions minima, and per-trade charges. Calculated as a percentage of
 the value of a trade, explicit transactions charges fall as the dollar amount
 increases.   Although we may presume that this schedule of charges mirrors
 underlying broker costs, it predisposes financial investments by low-wealth house-
 holds toward small-denomination retail assets such as deposits and U.S. savings
 bonds. At the same time, households must worry about the exposure of their
 accumulated wealth to implicit and explicit taxation and to various kinds of risk.
 Differential changes between survey dates in age-class transactions costs, tax
 structure, and portfolio risk-return loci should lead to a change in the equilibrium
 composition of age-class portfolios.     For convenience, we may call this the
portfolio-churning hypotheses.
      Of course, the distribution of wealth across age dasses may change without
active churning of household balance sheets. Passive churning occurs when the
prices of assets held to a disproportionate extent by particular age classes appreci-
ate or depreciate faster than the prices of other assets. Over any interest-rate
cycle, passive churning occurs because the assets favored by low-wealth households

(checking accounts and passbook savings accounts) are fixed in value, while the
value of highly wealth-elastic assets such as stocks, bonds, and real estate
fluctuate with market forces. As Table 9-3 shows, between the 1962 and 1970

                            Place Table 9-3 about here

survey dates, savings accounts and U.S. Treasury bills both returned about 12.5
percent after inflation while common stock and single-family homes both appreci-

ated 28 percent. However, in the 1970-1977 period, while liquid investments in
Treasury bills held their real value only slightly better than savings accounts did,
stocks and bonds appreciated at greatly divergent rates. As stock prices rose less
                                                                                   8


 than 8 percent, the value of single-family homes increased 85.4 percent. Even
 ignoring the implicit or shelter services a house provides, over 1970-77 housing
investments far outperformed financial assets.
      Real-estate and stock prices move in response to private economic forces
such as exogenous movements in construction costs, to demographic pressures, and

to government taxes and subsidies. In particular, much of the active and passive
churning observed in the 1960s and 1970s was driven by the interaction of
unanticipatedly accelerating inflation with the inherited structure of deposit-rate
ceilings, deposit insurance, federal income taxes, and housing subsidies. House-
holds also responded to changes in taxes and regulations that, after a lag,
authorities made to adapt taxes and regulatory policies to ongoing inflation.
      For households, the federal income tax is nonneutral with respect to inflation

in two principal ways. First, capital-gains taxes (though set typically at only a
fraction of tax rates on ordinary income) are levied even when purely nominal price
increases are realized in the sale of physical assets. Second, federal taxes are
levied progressively on nominal incomes. For both reasons, inflation tends over
time to push given levels of real personal income into potentially higher and higher
tax brackets. Bracket drift simultaneously puts pressure on Congress to lower
statutory tax rates and raises the incentive for households to engage in tax-
avoidance activity. Estimates of average marginal tax rates on personal income
show a small upward drift between survey dates (Barro and Sahasakul 1983).
Moreover, the changing structure of tax rates, particularly on explicit capital
income as documented by Estrella and Fuhrer (1983), ought to have affected
various types of households differently.

     During 1970-77, effective tax rates on capital gains were increased in several

ways. First, over 1970-1972, the maximum tax rate on long-term capital gains was
                                                                                    9


 increased in three steps to 35 percent. However, until 1978, the tax rate on the
 first $50,000 of an individual's capital gains was capped at 25 percent. Second, the
 holding period necessary to qualify a capital asset for preferential long-term
 capital-gains treatment was raised from six months to nine months in 1977 and to
one year in 1978. Third, beginning in 1970, net long-term capital losses of $1000 or
less could no longer be deducted in full against ordinary income. Henceforth, only
50 percent of these losses could be deducted, again up to a maximum deduction of
$1000 (now $3000) in any tax year.
      It is widely believed that, because service returns and capital gains from
investments in owner-occupied housing continued to be treated preferentially
throughout the 1970s, unanticipated increases in inflation and inflation risk tended
to raise the price of owner-occupied homes relative to stock prices (DeLeeuw and
Ozanne 1979; Summers 1981; Hendershott and Hu 1983).2              Tax preferences
accorded owner-occupied housing include nontaxation of the value of the services
provided by an owner-occupied home, the capacity for repeated deferrals of capital
gains due on changes in residence, and a once-in-a-lifetime forgiveness of some of
the capital-gains taxes that would otherwise be due on the sale of a principal
residence once the seller has attained a designated age. Before July 26, 1978,
gains on the sale of a principal residence with an adjusted sales price of $35,000 or
less were not taxable for sellers who were 65 or older and who had occupied the
residence for five of the eight years preceding the sale. In cases where the
adjusted sales price exceeded $35,000, sellers who met the age and occupancy tests
could still exclude a portion of the gain from taxation. In 1978, the critical age
was lowered to 55, the occupancy rule shortened to three of five years, and the
excludable amount raised to $100,000. (While not strictly indexed with inflation,
                                                                                  10


the maximum exclusion has since been raised to $125,000.) Although the alteration

in the capital-gains tax forgiveness on sales of homes occurred after the 1977
survey date, it would not have found a place on the legislative agenda unless
households who were in or approaching the 55-64 age range were fighting for it
politically during the preceding years. The cost of mobilizing political resources to
extract a new tax advantage suggests that, during the 1970s, many so-called
"empty nest" households must have been contemplating the sale of what had
become in terms of its size or implied burden of school taxes an inappropriate
house.

      It should be clear that the value of the in-kind services a house performs for
its occupants varies with the composition of the household residing in it. Because
these services are not taxed for owner-occupants, changes in the structure of
explicit taxes differentially affect implicit rates of return on rental and owner-
occupied types of housing.
      Leveraged investments in housing financed with regulatorily subsidized fixed-

rate mortgages benefited additionally from unanticipated inflation. Unanticipated
inflation lowers the real burden of fixed-rate mortgage debt (see Hendershott and
Hu 1981). With returns on financial instruments distorted by deposit-rate ceilings
and multiple regulatory subsidization of homeownership and home financing (see
Kane 1981), no other easily available financial transaction offered established or
growing households of low or average wealth as high an anticipated real after-tax
rate of return or as favorable a hedge against unanticipated inflation.
     Extended to savings-and-loan associations in 1966, ceilings on nominal
interest rates payable on deposits discriminated against low-wealth households.
Regulators selectively relaxed these ceilings in the 1970s by tying differences in
ceiling rates on certificate accounts to differences in maturity and minimum
denominations. This helped deposit institutions to discriminate more effectively
between interest-sensitive and interest-insensitive low-wealth customers. As
                                                                                   11


 Table 9-3 shows, this discrimination pushed inflation-adjusted explicit returns in
 the 1970s on savings accounts below those on Treasury bills and left them sharply

 negative for passbook savings.

      Opportunities to counterbalance the negative real after-tax rates of explicit
 returns on deposit assets differed with the level of household wealth. For wealthy
 households, they differed also between the 1960s and 1970s. In either era, wealthy

 households could better extract a compensating stream of implicit returns from
 deposit institutions and move wealth more efficiently into stocks and bonds.
Transactions costs and the risks of being underdiversified made these avenues less

feasible for low-wealth households. Similarly, when money-market mutual funds
(whose rate of growth first surged in 1974) and the variety of high-rate certificate-
of-deposit (CD) accounts expanded in the 1970s, financial-market opportunities
improved f or households of moderate and high wealth. But these changes did little

for low-wealth investors. Hence, while wealthy households could reallocate their
portfolios to escape most of the ex ante burden that anticipated inflation and
deposit-rate regulation would otherwise place on them, throughout the period of
observation, poor households were more tightly constrained. Two principal avenues
of adjustment were open to low-wealth households: (1) to make highly leveraged
investments in housing and durable goods, and (2) to cut back their overall rate of
saving.

      This study focuses on transactable and noncontractual savings, forms of
household wealth that are not administered by outside parties such as insurance
companies, pension funds, and the Social Security System. However, we must
recognize that wealth accumulated in contractual arrangements should, as explain-
ed in Munnell (1981), condition a household's decisions about how to accumulate and

to manage transactable wealth. Whatever life cycle in portfolio structure we
observe must be interpreted in the light of the lifetime pattern of simultaneous and
                                                                                     12



partly exogenous growth in the risk-adjusted present value of households' pension-
fund and social-security claims.3 In 1972, the decision to increase real social-
security benefits and to double-index them to an upwardly biased consumer price
index may be interpreted as a governmental redistribution of wealth from younger
to older households.         This redistribution, which also reduced older households'
exposure to inflation risk, might have altered each group's need for transactable

saving.


      I%I'  A V LIFIf1LI
      U '.J'...tIL.           CC '/&T1T!
                    LI I %J I I1I)E        TI &ITL1r*.I
                                    JL'....JKLU1     1TTfTT!r TI r ,.iv
                                                        UI! I.CI"4       1
                                                                      I IttL
      SAVINGS BEHAVIOR

         We hypothesize that a household's effective saving rate over any period
varies with its place in the life cycle, its size, and the marital status of its head.
We further hypothesize that, as the economic and financial environment changes,
class-level saving rates and portfolio structures vary actively as well as passively.
Passively, any dass of households tends to gain or lose wealth relative to other
classes whenever assets in which that class historically maintains a disproportion-

ately large position experience an unanticipated increase or decrease in value.
This hypothesis implies that on average windfall gains and losses on particular
assets impact saving as well as consumption. Asset revaluation is only partly
offset by readjustments in the level and composition of new savings (Jianakop1os
1983).     Actively, households in any dass adapt their portfolios to differential
movements in the net after-tax risk-adjusted real returns anticipated on different
assets. Because anticipated returns were not observed for survey respondents, the
institutional facts developed in the previous section are used along with the ex
returns listed in Table 9-3 as proxies for the set of information on which a rational
respondent would have conditioned his or her rate-of-return forecasts. Particular
                                                                                 13


stress is placed on the roles played by three factors: differential changes in
implicit returns on owner-occupied housing, the 1965 expansion of deposit-rate
regulation and its subsequent decline in effectiveness, and the level of a house-
hold's wealth as a restraint on incentives to engage in disintermediation.

      To examine what we may call the life-cycle, family-size, and marital-status
hypotheses, we develop a series of statistical tables. The first two tables present
evidence on differences in propensities to save and in patterns of real wealth
accumulation. These tables are reported for every partition we examine. Other
tables track differences in class-level positions in particular assets. These tables
throw light on the extent to which active and passive portfolio churning may be
observed at the dass-level.

      Although portfolio churning is examined in detail only for age classes, we
compare summary distributions for all sample partitions of class-level positions in
selected financial and real-estate assets with the percent of sample families in
each class. These tables amount to a series of Lorenz curves for assets.

      For age classes and age cohorts, various additional tables are developed. Two

of these disaggregate percentage and dollar changes in class-level wealth across
specific financial and real-estate opportunities. These tables support inferences
about the allocation of new saving. A third table reports mean wealth and
homeownership and mortgagor rates for each class. Finally, for age classes only,
wealth-based Engels curves are estimated for four types of financial and real-
estate investments.    Differences in Engels-curve coefficients are tested both
across survey dates and across age classes at each date. This analysis provides
additional evidence on the extent of active and passive portfolio churhing.


     OBSERVED SI-LIFTS IN LIFE-CYCLE SAVINGS PATTERNS

Tables 9-4 through 9-9 compare househo'ds at identical stages of the life cycle
across time. Table 9-4 focuses on mean savings in dollars and on ratios of real
                                                                                    14


(i.e., inflation-adjusted) saving to real income. The ratios reported in the table
tend to overstate the magnitude of age-class average propensities to save because

incomes reported by survey respondents tend to be understated. Survey responses
are subject to deliberate underreporting and omit imputed income such as
unrealized capital gains, the services of owner-occupied housing, and implicit
interest received as subsidized accountholder services from deposit institutions.

      This error in measurement tends to raise reported saving-to-income ratios for

all groups.   If we ignore possible differences in measurement errors across
demographic classes, Table 9-4 indicates that, during the 1960s, households whose

                             Place Table 9-4 near here

heads were at least 55 years old saved a much larger percentage of their real
incomes than younger persons did.       Moreover, unless it reflects age-related
reporting bias in 1977 home equity or unanticipated passive appreciation of existing
portfolio holdings, the high rate of accumulation observed in the 1960s f or
households in the 65-and-over category is hard to reconcile with the life-cycle
theory.   But increased life-cycle decumulation by older households and the
hypothesized redistributive impact of social-security indexing is consistent with
the turnaround between the 1960s and the 1970s in effective patterns of life-cycle
saving reported in the table. This pattern pivots like a mirror image around the
breakpoint observed at age 55.       Below this age, households increased their
effective saving rates substantially during the 1970s. However, over the same
period, older households greatly reduced their effective saving rates. Comparing
1972-73 with 1962 behavior in an income-expenditure data set, Lieberman and
Wachtel (1980) report a similarly sharp dedine in the savings rate of older
households that predates the 1974 adjustment in social-security benefits.

     Table 9-5 reports cumulative growth rates for mean nominal wealth and mean
                             Place Table 9-5 near here
                                                                                     15


 real wealth. As explained in the note to the table, the cumulative rate of increase
 in real wealth is calculated from the ratio of mean end-date wealth to inflation-
 adjusted base-date wealth. The table provides further evidence that age-group
 wealth trajectories differed sharply between the two periods. During the l960s,
 wealth accumulation by households whose heads were 55 and older greatly outpaced

the savings growth achieved by younger households. In the 1970-77 period, the
reverse proves true. Although two-thirds of the population of sample households
were on balance net savers during the 1970s, these households were the youngest
ones. Because the proportion of transactable wealth controlled by households in
the designated age dasses rises on average with the age of the household head, the
pooled growth rate in real saving fell by almost two-thirds.
      Table 9-6 shows mean dollar increments experienced in three broad compo-
nents of net transactable wealth: retail financial assets (deposits and savings
bonds), wholesale financial assets (stocks and bonds), and equity in real estate (i.e.,
value of real-estate assets less mortgage debt). To allow readers to unravel the
                             Place Table 9-6 near here
effect of mortgage leverage, an additional column describes the cumulative
increase in the market value of real-estate assets. The table indicates that, for
households above and below age 55, differential rates of wealth accumulation
spread across portfolio categories during the 1970s, but (in keeping with the wealth
constraint on opportunities for disintermediation) differences observed during the
1960s were dominated by differences in the flow of new savings into wholesale
financial assets.
     Table 9-7 illustrates the proportionate weight carried by real-estate invest-
                             Place Table 9-7 near here
ment as a vehicle of household wealth accumulation. Real-estate equity is defined
as the difference between the market value of real-estate owned and the book
                                                                                 16


value of mortgage debt secured by these holdings.4 This variable is dominated by
equity in homes. For survey respondents in the 1960s and 1970s, real-estate equity
carried roughly 60 percent of the overall increase in mean household wealth.

        For each survey date, Table 9-8 shows the distribution across age classes of
retail financial assets (deposits and savings bonds), wholesale financial assets
(stocks and marketable bonds), real-estate equity, net transactable wealth, and the
value of owner-occupied housing. This table presents something like a Lorenz
curve

                              Place Table 9-8 near here

for age classes. It lets us see that the age structure of the population interacts
with life-cyde patterns of asset accumulation to determine the share of national

wealth controlled by a given age group.          To assess the degree of wealth
redistribution occurring across age classes between survey dates, it is useful to
focus on changes in what we may call the control ratio: the percentage of net
transactable wealth held per each one percent of respondents in a given age class.

For this purpose, it is convenient to consolidate households into three age dasses:
under 35, 35 to 54, and 55 and older. In 1962, older households held the greatest
percentage control of transactable wealth. Their control ratio stood at 1.44, as
against 1.14 for rniddle-.aged households and 0.34 for young ones. Between 1962
and 1970, and in keeping with the savings rates shown in Tables 9-4 and 9-5, older

households improved their control ratio even further, to 1.73 as against declines to

0.95 and 0.23 for middle-aged and young households, respectively. However, the

high saving rates maintained by young and middle-aged households during the 1970s
improved their 1977 ratios. In 1977, the control ratios were 0.42, 1.28, and 1.26,

respectively.    If these changes were due only to passive portfolio churning,
percentage control of component assets would not change at all. Contrary to the
                                                                                    17


temporal variation shown in the data underlying Table 9-8, control ratios for
individual asset categories (e.g., for the value of homes) would have to remain
constant over time.
      Table 9-9 shows that at each survey date mean wealth, homeownership rates,
and use of mortgage leveraging differed across age groups. For the first of these
                               Place Table 9-9 near here
variables, the table also reports the standard error of the mean. Even allowing for
age-level differences in leverage, variation in the percentage of wealth allocated
to leveraged investments in housing across age-group portfolios made passive
opportunities to benefit from unanticipated inflation in 1962 lowest for very young
households and highest for middle-aged ones. This table provides evidence that
unanticipated returns on accumulated wealth cannot account fully for the turn-
around in the age profile of effective savings performance during the 1970s. New
saving by young households is suggested by their establishing a steadily higher
percentage of homeownership. Even allowing for the bias in our estimates of age-
class homeownership rates, the table suggests that during the 1970s, some empty-
nest housing was bid away from households in the 55-and.-over group.5 Given young
families' typically high use of leverage in their housing investments, their expanded
homeownership rates repositioned them to realize portfolio gains from anticipated
and unanticipated inflation.


     TESTING FOR SHIFTS IN WEALTH-HOLDING PATTERNS

These data show that wealth-holding patterns differ both across age groups and
across time. This section fits these patterns into a framework of optimal choice.
     Modern portfolio theory portrays balance-sheet choices as allocating wealth
in response to variation in the mean vector and covariance matrix of asset returns
                                                                                 18


(Friedman 1982).    In this application, these choices should be conditioned by
unobserved differences in the composition of an individual's holdings of nonmarket-
able assets such as pension claims and human capital (Mayers 1973). Taxes and
transactions costs may (at least as an interpretive first approximation) both be
presumed to vary with portfolio size. However, the means and covariances of asset
returns (although not necessarily the marginal risks) should be the same for all
households at each date. Hçnce, a particularly straightforward way to explain
differences in asset-holding patterns is to estimate for every age group at each
survey date a set of wealth-based Engels curves for the main components of
transactable wealth. We interpret each curve as showing how the increment in
wealth that a household desires to place in a particular portfolio component varies
with the level of household wealth.
     Using a quadratic approximation, Tables 9-10, 9-11, 9-12, and 9-13 report
                     Place Tables 9-10 through 9-13 near here
estimates of wealth-based Engels curves for retail financial assets, wholesale
financial assets, home equity, and equity in investment real estate.       Because
reported portfolio positions in these assets never fall below zero, a Tobit limited-
dependent-variable estimation procedure is employed.         Respecting individual
balance-sheet constraints, when the censored-regression equations for any age
dass are summed across the four portfolio opportunities, the wealth coefficients
must sum to one, while the intercepts and wealth-squared terms must each sum to
zero. Except for the 65-and-over group in 1977, mean wealth rises with age. The
column labeled "wealth-squared coefficient times twice mean wealth" tells us how
much the first derivative of the mean portfolio position with respect to wealth
departs from the regression coefficient for wealth. The sum of this adjusted
coefficient and the regression coefficient for wealth represents the marginal
                                                                                   19


proportion of mean wealth that allocated to the asset class in question. Although
deviations between the marginal proportion and the wealth coefficient range up to
0.125 in magnitude, the median adjustment is less than 0.05.
      The tables show that, across age groups and dates, portfolio positions in all
four portfolio categories generally increase with household wealth. The major
differences concern life-cycle differences in allocation patterns and the sensitivity
of incremental allocation rates to the level of wealth. For most age groups, what
we may call the marginal propensity to hold retail financial assets and real-estate
equity decreases with wealth. On the other hand, the marginal propensity to hold
wholesale financial assets increases with wealth.
      Estimated differences in the wealth sensitivity of the various marginal
propensities accord broadly with conventional wisdom about the role of trans-
actions costs, minimum denominations, and difficulties in arranging credit as
barriers to investment by low-wealth households in wholesale financial assets and
investment real estate (Kane 1980). As compared to low-wealth households, high-
wealth households should hold retail financial assets more for liquidity and
diversification purposes than as vehicles for maximal accumulation of expected
future wealth.
     For retail financial assets, wholesale financial assets, and (to reduce the
number of computer runs) the sum of the two kinds of equity in real-estate, formal
tests were conducted of differences in coefficient estimates across age classes and
across survey dates. These tests apply one-zero dummy variables for specific dates
and age classes to all three parameters in the model. Because observations on the
regressand are truncated in Tobit estimation, the distribution of the "t-statistics"
developed may not be well-approximated by Student's t when the number of
nonlimit observations is small.
                                                                                    20


      Differences in Engels coefficients across time may be attributed to differ-
ences in the mean vector and covariance matrix of anticipated risk-adjusted after-
tax returns on the component assets at different dates, to differences in the range
of wealth observed, and to sampling error as well. Differences in coefficients
across age groups reflect differences in life—cycle status, effective transactions
costs, and range of wealth observed, as well as sampling error once again.


      Coefficient Differences Across Age Groups
On a cross-section basis, we are interested at each survey date in the significance
of differences in coefficieht estimates across age classes, If significant differ-
ences did not exist, studying age-dass Engels curves for assets would have no
statistical justification.
      Although to save space the detailed results are not reported here, we used
slope and intercept dummy variables to test the significance of differences
between coefficient estimates for every age-class pair. For all equations, in both
1962 and 1977, significant differences prove to be the rule rather than the
exception. On average in these years, two-thirds of the slope coefficients and 40
percent of the intercepts differ significantly from the corresponding estimates for
other classes.     In 1970, only about one—fifth of the coefficient pairs differ
significantly, with significant differences particularly rare in the equation for real—
estate equity. We interpret the similarity of coefficient pairs in 1970 as evidence
that wealth-related constraints on a household's ability to engage in disintermedia-
tion temporarily became a more important force in portfolio allocation than hf e-
cycle considerations.
                                                                                     21


       Coefficient Differences Over Time
 Tables 9-10, 9-11, and 9-14 indicate that, for retail financial assets, wholesale
                              Place Table 9-14 near here
 financial assets and real-estate equity, more than half of the estimated slope
 coefficients differ significantly across survey dates. The significance of coeff i-
 cient differences is somewhat more frequent for the (quaçlratic than for the linear
 term. This is important because an individual's marginal allocation to a given asset
 deviates from the wealth coefficient by the product of the coefficient for the
 quadratic term and twice the individual's level of wealth.
      The pattern of differences observed is consistent with the hypothesis that the
benefits of financial disintermediation increase with household wealth. Although
importantly constrained by the evolving structure of taxes and transactions costs,
households actively reallocated their portfolios to protect themselves against the
interaction of ceilings on explicit nominal rates of interest on deposit assets with
rising market rates of interest.
      Between 1962 and 1970, older households increased their propensity to hold
wholesale assets and decreased their propensity to hold retail assets and home
equity.   Although households in the under-45 group increased their marginal
propensity to hold retail assets, this propensity to hold financial assets of either
kind became more sensitive to increases with wealth. Older and wealthier
households showed a reduced disposition to hold retail financial assets and a higher
propensity to invest in more-volatile wholesale securities. The resulting increase
in the demand for brokerage services drove up transactions costs in wholesale
markets, especially for small trades (Kane 1980).             These transactions-cost
increases reinforced the attractiveness to very-young families of leveraged invest-
ments in homes, bringing about a reverse shift in wealth propensities for younger
households.
                                                                                    22


          Schemes for paying implicit interest on household deposits (e.g., "free"
checking) proliferated in the 1970s and the regulatory strategy shifted to one of
letting the ceiling rate on a deposit account more closely approach its market level
the larger the account's minimum denomination and the longer its stated maturity.
In addition, as shown in Table 9-3, 1970-77 holding-period returns on stocks and
Treasury bills proved negative in real terms. For at least some of these reasons, as
our data show, between 1970 and 1977 retail assets regained their former
attractiveness to older households, while wholesale assets lost some of their luster.
Young and middle-aged families generally increased their propensity to allocate
wealth to real estate, while this propensity declined significantly for (nonmarried)
households in the 65-and-over group.


      ACCUMULATIONS BY AGE COHORTS

Another way to look at patterns of life-cyde saving is to study how the mean net
worth of a particular age cohort behaves as members of the cohort grow older.
Here, the focus falls on transitions through a prolonged preretirement phase of
average wealth accumulation into a hypothesized phase of planned wealth decumu-
lation.
      Table 9-15 pushes forward the age cohorts reported in Table 9-4 and 9-5 for
                              Place Table 9-15 near here
the 1962 and 1970 surveys to develop comparable data for appropriately older
respondents in the 1970 and 1977 surveys. The table deletes the wealth of
household heads that were under 18 in 1962 and 1970 and therefore too young to be
sampled. Following age classes through time provides something akin to a panel
perspective on patterns of life-cycle saving. We see that, in all cohorts, households
managed to increase their mean real net worth from 1962 to 1970. However, the
                                                                                23


second panel shows that, during the 1970s, the per-year rate of real accumulation
increased dramatically for the youngest 1962 cohort, decreased for the fourth
cohort (some of whom were passing into the retirement stage), and turned negative
for the two oldest cohorts.        The third panel, which compares post-sample
accumulation rates for 1962 and 1970 cohorts, shows a similar picture.

      Economic theory treats changes in saving rates as adaptive responses to
changing requirements for consumption smoothing. In the 1970s, the two oldest
cohorts experienced consumption-expanding windfall gains in wealth from two
sources; the double-indexing of social-security benefits and unanticipated appreci-
ation in real housing prices. For these cohorts, the desirability of decumulating
transactable wealth may have been further enhanced by the structure of capital-
gains taxes and dedines in reported mean real incomes of 20 and 30 percent,
respectively. If the two youngest cohorts' sharply higher savings rates represents
consumption smoothing too, it may be due mainly to unanticipated increases in the
capitalized real value of fulfilling their lifetime housing needs. We show in the
next section that families with three or more children (for whom the average
implicit return on housing space is greatest) greatly increased their mean saving
rate in the 1970s, while smaller families drastically reduced theirs. Given the
secularly rising divorce rate, in the 1970s some small-sized families may have been
adapting to a reduction in family size.

      To carry out plans to increase their mean rate of homeownership in the
1970s, many young households may have postponed the consumption of other goods
and services. Although SRC data do not bear on this issue, young households may

also have perceived secular growth in the size of government transfer programs as
increasing the discounted real value of their lifetime tax bills.
     Tables 9-16 and 9-17 provide evidence on the composition of age-cohort
savings across different survey dates. Mean dollar increments in the values of
                                                                                    24


real-estate assets and of three components of net transactable wealth are shown in
Table 9-16. Data on real-estate assets are included to permit the interested reader
to decompose increases in real-estate equity into price-appreciation, portfolio-
rebalancing, and debt-expansion elements. Although component-by-component
                             Place Table 9-16 near here
growth rates vary widely across age classes and asset categories (from -61.2
percent to 5181.5 percent), Table 9-17 darifies that for every age class whose
                             Place Table 9-17 near here
mean nominal wealth increased (i.e., all but the 72-and-older group in 1970-77),
real-estate equity served in both periods as the major vehide for carrying
increased wealth across time.
       Lorenz distributions for age cohorts are displayed in Table 9-18. For each
                             Place Table 9-18 near here
asset category, percentage control ratios are reported in parentheses. These
control percentages show the relative position that a representative household
takes in each type of wealth as it ages. For most assets and dates, the control
percentage follows a humped or inverted-U curve. The typical curve reaches its
maximum in middle age. Compared to financial assets, real-estate equity shows
higher values for young cohorts and generally peaks at an earlier age. The control
percentage for wholesale financial assets rises relative to retail assets as house-
holds move through their 30s and 40s. Households in their 50s and early 60s hold
the maximal percentage of wholesale assets, but this percentage falls off rapidly
when they reach retirement age.        Although for comparable age dasses the
percentage level of control varies across survey dates (presumably with differences
in the economic environment), the qualitative association with the life cycle does
not.
       Table 9-19 focuses on changes in the homeownership rate and use of
                                                                                   25


                             Place Table 9-19 near here

 mortgage debt across time. Allowing for the extent to which the understatement
 of 1977 homeownership rates rises with age, the table provides time-series
 confirmation of cross-section evidence on life-cycle patterns of homeownership
 and mortgage repayment. Both within and across survey dates, homeownership
 rates are seen to rise into late middle age and to fall off thereafter, while the use
of mortgage debt dedines steadily as a household ages.



      DIFFERENCES IN ACCUMULATION RATES FOR
      HOUSEHOLDS OF DIFFERENT SIZES
For many households, family size rises and falls over the life cyde in a humped
pattern that parallels the rise and fall of age-class homeownership rates. This
cyde in the size of the typical nuclear family reflects corresponding cycles in the
market value of its human capital, in marginal in-kind rates of return on given
amounts of housing space and school taxes, and in the household's detailed
expenditure goals.

      One-person households consist of bachelors, divorced and separated indi-
viduals, and widowed persons. The age distribution of this group may have distinct
modes for each component dass. The above-average age and high standard
deviation shown for one-person households in Table 9-20 supports this presumption
of rnultimodality.
                            Place Table 9-20 near here

     Two-person households consist of childless couples, older "empty-nest" cou-

ples, widowed, divorced, and even single parties with one child, and various
combinations of unmarried adults. The high (though falling) average age reported
for heads of two-person households in Table 9-20 is consistent with the hypothesis
that the mean number of children in these households is small.
                                                                                                              26


      Tables 9-21 and 9-22' show a sharp change in effective savings propensities

                        Place Tables 9-21 and 9-22 near here

between the 1960s and the 1970s paralleling the age-class reversals reported
earlier. Households of three or more persons were much more effective savers in
the 1970-77 period than in the 1962-70 era.            Correspondingly, while smaller
households grew wealthier during the 1960s, on average they drew down their real

wealth during the 1970s.

      These patterns may be explained as adaptations to changes observed between

survey dates in tax structure, financial transactions costs, and risk-return oppor-
ti,nitip
•        A     ri     diiite4 rl ftr_tv rtiirrv
                           ••%                                 finnr.i.I fc +Il tk
                                                         Sf1 L*l fl•.4U 15._fl 5a •a1J5.J%.b?S5_,Lfl,   1.1




relatively constant real in-kind return on housing space for large households made
it optimal for them to expand their housing investments more than a smaller
household would. Interacting with the life cycle, the proportion of households
owning their home rises sharply with household size, as does the use of mortgage
leverage. For households with three or more persons, ownership and mortgagor
rates are twice as high as for smaller households. Table 9-23 shows that positions

                                 Place Table 9-23 near here

in real-estate equity and owner-occupied housing also increase with household size.

Although two-person households have higher per-capita wealth than the other
categories at all three survey dates, during the 1970s larger households narrowed
the gap considerably. In contrast, the relative positions of one-person households
change little across dates. Differential savings performance across size classes in
the two eras does not merely reflect the passive interaction of increasing real-
estate prices with the positive association between prior real-estate holdings and
household size.     During the 1970s, large families increased their holdings of
                                                                                  27


 financial assets even more rapidly than their real-estate equity. This increased
 financial saving may have two sources.        First, it may reflect the efforts of
 households still occupying rental housing to accumulate a sufficient downpayment
 to support a planned house purchase. Second, it may reflect the use of mortgage
 credit (which to most households represents the low-cost form of credit available)
 to support financial investments.


      DIFFERENCES IN ACCUMULATION RATES FOR
      DIFFERENT TYPES OF HOUSEHOLDS

Table 9-24 explores the relationship between household size and marital status.
                             Place Table 9-24 near here
During the 1960s, all types of large households were less-effective savers than
smaller ones. Moreover, the 1970-77 increase in savings propensities for large
households was limited to married and other nonsingle .(i.e., widowed, separated,
and divorced) households.      This provides further support for the view that
movements in the expected value and variance of implicit returns on owner-
occupied housing explain a good part of the divergent movements in saving
propensities during the 1970s. These families' future housing requirements may be
presumed to be more stable than those for single households. During the 1970s,
large single households dissaved at a high rate.
     Table 9-25 shows the effect of changing savings propensities on the real rate
                             Place Table 9-25 near here
of accumulation of transactable wealth. In the 1970-77 period, except for large
households in the married and other categories, no household type much improved
the real value of its mean transactable wealth. Table 9-26 shows that, in 1977, the
                             Place Table 9-26 near here
mean age of the heads of accumulating large households in the married and other
categories was in the 40s.      The mean ages of the heads of the four low-
                                                                                  28

 accumulation types of households all prove significantly older or younger than this.
 Particularly remarkable is the downward trend in the age of heads of single
families with two or more members. This reflects growth in the number of couples
living together without benefit of marriage. For these households, unsettled
property rights and uncertainty about the coupl&s commitment to a shared future
may erect substantial disincentives to homeownership and saving.
      Data on portfolio shares (not reported here) show that the turnaround
between 1962-70 and 1970-77 in savings performance by large nonsingle families
was an across-the-board one. During the 1970s, relative to their initial wealth,
these families expanded their holdings of retail assets, wholesale assets and real-
estate equity all at above-average rates. As they cut their savings rate, single
families markedly shifted the composition of their wealth accumulations. One-
person single households, which had concentrated on amassing real-estate equity in
the 1960s, accumulated their wealth in financial assets in the 1970s. Larger single
households (people living with friends and relatives) had reallocated wealth from
real-estate equity into financial assets during the 1960s, but reversed the pattern
in the 1970s, apparently in response to improved implicit returns on owner-
occupied housing.
     Table 9-27 darifies the role of home equity in the saving behavior of
                            Place Table 9-27 near here
households of different type by tracking trends in homeownership and mortgage
financing by household type. The most marked trends are the continued high use of
leverage by large married households, its increasing use by single and other
nonmarried households, and the increased rate of homeownership for one-person
households. For so-called small savers -- households not wealthy enough to invest
directly in wholesale financial assets, these trends may be interpreted as a form of
                                                                                    29

  disintermediation. Small savers with large and stable households found it profit-
  able to shift some of their deposit balances into housing. These investments
  offered untaxed implicit returns, protection against unanticipated inflation, a
  better anticipated real after-tax explicit return than small-denomination accounts,
  and a regularized and partially subsidized arrangement for borrowing against small
  accumulations of wealth. Even for wealthy households, some of these advantages
 apply. In particular, changes in the level and structure of federal capital-gains tax
 rates enacted during the 1970s enhanced the tax advantages of owner-occupied
 housing relative to stock-market investments.


       SUMMARY AND CAUTION

 Our analysis of SRC data supports three broad inferences.          First, life-cycle
 patterns of accumulation and asset holdings shift importantly with such changes in
 the economic environment as inflation risk, tax structure, and transactions costs.
 Perhaps because of such shifts, Consistent evidence of average postretirement
 decumulation emerged only for cohorts of advanced age. Second, between the
 1960s and 1970s, a sharp turnaround occurred in the profiles of household saving
and homeownership. Households whose heads were 55 and older were strong savers
in the 1960s, but younger households proved to be the principal accumulators of the
1970s. A parallel shift in savings propensities occurred between large married or
previously married households and other families, suggesting that movements in the
expected value and variance of the implicit return on owner-occupied housing may
have evoked the adjustment. During the !960s, all age groups increased their
homeownership rates. In the 1970s, large nonsingle households and households
whose heads were under 45 accentuated the trend, while most other households
merely continued it. Third, the compositions of 1962 and 1977 portfolios end up far
                                                                                   30


closer to each other than to 1970 values. This suggests that some of the portfolio
churning observed in SRC data reflects disintermediation that was reversed during
the 1970s as deposit institutions made ceilings on explicit interest less effective by
broadening their product line to develop less-restricted liability instruments and to
expand the ways in which they could pay implicit interest on regulated accounts.
Combined with a capital-gains tax structure that taxed nominal as well as real
price appreciation, these ceilings made the implicit and explicit tax rate on
financial savings rise with the rate of inflation. This lowered the saving rate for
many households and distorted the allocation of transactable wealth between
financial and real-estate assets for everyone.
      Because the hypotheses of differential behavior and portfolio churning are
such straightforward ones, this paper emphasizes statistical description over
statistical testing and interpretation. By conventional Chi-square tests, saving and
asset-holding behaviors reported by respondents differ significantly across demo-
graphic categories. But we must keep in mind two problems in drawing inferences
from SRC data. First, observations taken at only three points in time cannot
discriminate closely among plausible alternative explanations for observed differ-
ences in dass-level behavior. Second, in a survey context the ultimate meaningful-
ness of statistical tests depends on the validity of joint hypotheses about the
appropriateness of the sampling frame and the accuracy of respondent reports.
Validation studies (Ferber et a!. 1969a and 1969b) indicate that noncooperation,
especially among high-income groups, leads to a systematic understatement of
sample variances. Ascertaining the ways in which the three survey observations of
cross-section data on respondent wealth management are each, in fact, representa-
tive of the population of U.S. households is a herculean task. This task can be
accomplished only by carefully examining sampling frames and respondent behavior
                                                                                31


 in alternative data sets and tirelessly endeavoring to reconcile whatever differ-
 ences emerge.



                                  REFERENCES

 Ando, Albert, andFranco Modigliani 1963. "The 'Life-Cycle' Hypothesis of
                                                                          Saving:
      Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Review, 53 (March):
      55-84.

 Barro, Robert 3., and Sahasakul, Chaipat 1983. "Measuring the Average Marginal
      Tax Rate From the Individual Income Tax," 3ournal of Business, 56 (October):
      4 19-452.

Beveridge, Andrew A. 1983. "Reliability of Large-Scale Household Surveys: The
      Case of the Annual Housing Survey," presented at the Annual Meeting of the
      American Association for Public Opinion Research, May.

Carliner, Michael 1982. The Future of Bank Financial Services for Housing,
     Washington, D.C.: American Bankers Association.

DeLeeuw, Frank, and Larry Ozanne 1979. "The Impact of the Federal Income Tax

     on Investment in Housing," Survey of Current Business, 59 (December): 50-61.
Diamond, Douglas B. 1983. "The Impact of Inflation on New House Prices,"
     Washington, D.C.: Department of Housing and Urban Development (unpublish-
     ed).

Durkin, Thomas A., and Gregory E. Elliehausen 1978.       1977 Consumer Credit
     Survey, Washington: Borad of Governors of the Federal Reserve, December.

Estrella, Arturo, and Fuhrer, 3effrey C. 1983. "Average Marginal Tax Rates for
     U.S. Household Interest and Dividend Income, 1954-80," Working Paper No.

     1201, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, September.
                                                                               32


Ferber, Robert; John Forsythe; Harold W. Guthrie; and E. Scott Maynes 1969a.
     "Validation of Consumer Financial Characteristics: Common Stock," Journal
     of the American Statistical Association, 64 (June): 415-432.

_______________ 1969b. "Validation of a National Survey of Consumer Financial
     Characteristics: Savings Accounts," Review of Economics and Statistics, 51
     (November): 435-44.
Friedman, Benjamin 1982. "Effects of Saving Patterns on Interest Rates and
     Economic Activity," Journal of Finance, 37 (March): 37-62.
Friend, Irwin, and Charles Lieberman 1975. "Short-Run Asset Effects on Household
     Saving and Consumption: The Cross-Section Evidence," American Economic
     Review, 65 (September): 624-633.
Goldsmith, Raymond 1982. The National Balance Sheet of the United States, 1953-
     1980, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Hendershott, Patric H., and Sheng Cheng Hu 1981. "Inflation and Extraordinary
     Returns on Owner-Occupied Housing: Some Implications for Capital Alloca-
     tion and Productivity Growth," Journal of Macroeconomics, 3 (Spring): 177-
     203.

______________________ 1983. "The Allocation of Capital Between Residential
     and Nonresidential Uses: Tax, Inflation and Capital Market Restraints,"
     Journal of Finance, 38 (June): 795-8 12.
Ibbotson, Roger G., and Rex A. Sinquefield 1979.        Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and
     Inflation: Historical Returns (1926-1978), Charlottesville, VA: The Financial
     Analysts Research Foundation, second edition.
Jianakoplos, Nancy A. 1983. Household Wealth Accumulation During Periods of
     Inflation: Some Evidence from Longitudinal Data, Doctoral Dissertation, The
     Ohio State University.
                                                                              33

 Kane, Edward 3. 1980. "Accelerating Inflation and the Distribution of Household
      Savings Incentives," in U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee, pecial
      Study on Economic Change, Volume 4, Stagf!ation: The Causes Effects and
      Solutions, Washington, D.C.: 193-224.
 ______________ 1981. "Re-regulation, Savings-and-Loan Diversification and the

      Flow of Housing Finance," in Savings and Loan Asset Management Under
      Deregulation, San Francisco: Federal Home Loan Bank: 80-109.
 Katona, George; Lewis Mandell; and Jay Schmiedeskamp 1971. 1970 Survey of
      Consumer Finances, Ann Arbor: Survey Research Center, Institute for Social
      Research, The University of Michigan.
 Lieberman, Charles, and Paul Wachtel 1980. "Age Structure and Personal Savings
      Behavior," in George von Furstenberg (ed.), Social Security Versus Private
      Saving, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Company: 3 15-357.
Modigliani, Franco, and R. Brumberg 1955. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
     Function," in Kenneth Kurihara (ed.), Post-Keynesian Economics, London;
     Allen and Unwin: 388-436.

Munnel!, Alicia 1981. "Social Security, Private Pensions and Saving," in Phillip
    Cagan (ed.), Saving for Retirement: Report on a Miniconference on Saving
     held for the 1981 White House Conference on Aging, Washington, DC.:
     American Council of Life Insurance: 122-155.
Peek, Joe 1983. "Capital Gains and Personal Saving Behavior," Journal of Money,
     Credit, and Banking, 15 (February): 1-23.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. "Inflation, the Stock Market, and Owner-Occupied
   Housing," American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 71 (May):
     429-434.
                                                                           34


Shumay, Alexander 3., and Edward 3. Kane 1983. "Consumer Finance Research
     Project Documentation," Revised Working Paper, Ohio State Univeristy,
     )une.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 1981. Construction Reports
     C27, Second Quarter 1981, Washington, September.
Wolff, Edward N. 1979, "The Distributional Effects of the 1969-75 Inflation on
     Holdings of Household Wealth in the United States," Review of Income and
     Wealth, 25 (3une): 195-207.
                                                                               35




                                   FOOTNOTES

 *The author is Reese Professor of Banking and Monetary Economics, The Ohio

State University, and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research.
 He wishes to thank Alexander Shumay for four years of painstaking research
 assistance and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and the
American Council of Life Insurance for financial support. Valuable criticism was

received from Patric Hendershott, Paul Wachtel, Douglas Diamond, and members
of the 1983 NBER Summer Institute. Opinions expressed in the paper are those of

the author and should not be construed to represent those of either the NBER or

the project's sponsors.
1.   Peek (1983) explores the link between capital gains and saving as measured by
     the national income and product accounts. Friend and Silberman (1975) use
      1963 Federal Reserve Survey data to estimate the effect of capital gains on
     what they call saving net of depreciation on owned homes.
2.   In equilibrium, some of the benefit would be shifted backwards to specialized
     construction labor and rnatel-ials (Diamond 1983).
3.   Using Canadian data, Dicks-Mireau and King (1982) investigate the effect of
     pension wealth on the composition of household portfolios.
4.   On the grounds that a mortgage is obviously a financial instrument, we might

     have chosen to categorize mortgage debt as a negative financial asset. Our
     approach has the advantage of incorporating the portfolio restriction that
     mortgage loans are limited to owners of real estate. Programming diff i-
     culties persuaded us to defer our efforts to estimate the market value of
     mortgage debt.
                                                                            36


5.   Detailed   analysis of 1977 survey data indicate that a decrease in the
     homeownership rate for older households was recorded only for nonmarried
     households, especially households whose heads were separated, divorced, or
     widowed.
                                                                                         37

                                               Table 9-1
                  Comparison of Survey and Time-Series Estimates of Cumulative
            Growth Rates Between Survey Dates in the Mean Value of Components
                                    of Net Transactable Wealth
                                              (in percent)
                                                      1962-1970                   1970-1977

                                    1961-1969          Survey       1969-1976       Survey

                                   Cumulative        Estimates     Cumulative     Estimates
                                    Growth for of Cumulative Growth for         of Cumulative

                                    F.R. data          Growth       F.R. data      Growth

Deposits andSavingsBonds                80.9               85.9       109.7         100.0

MarketableBonds                       105.2            829.3           73.2          78.7

Corporate Equities                      49.0            97.2            3.5          54.8

Owner-Occupied Real Estate              73.2            65.8          118.2         108.0
Investment Real     Estate             48.9            132.2           67.1          26.9

1-lome Mortgages                       84.7             59.6           95.5          61.2

Other Mortgages                        92.2             57.4           43.3          50.3

NetTransactable Wealth                 63.8             88.4           68.5          79.8

Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and

           Statistics,   Flow of Funds Section, Balance Sheets for the U.S.Economy 1945-8 1,
           Washington, D.C.: 1982; and calculations made from data tapes of the 1977
           Consumer Credit     Survey and of the 1962 and 1970    Surveys of Consumer Finances.
           In the Flow of Funds accounts, the household sector is consolidated with personal

           trusts and nonprofit organizations.

Notes:   Survey data record savings bonds,      marketable bonds, and mortgages at par

         value.   From the Flow of Funds Accounts, the sum of miscellaneous assets
         and mortgage assets is treated as a loose proxy for the SRC concept of
         "investment real estate."
                                                                                         38


                                         Table 9-2
         Comparison of Homeownership Rates for Married Households and One-person
                  Households in the Edited 1977 SRC Sample With Census
                               Estimates for the Same Year

                             One-Person_Households                Married Households
                                                            ____________________________
Age of                   Homeownership Homeownership Homeownership Homeownership
Household Head              Rate in          Rate in                Rate in        Rate in
(in years)
                          c...-
                          JUL JI I1jJ1    r'--...-
                                               1 U. r—+-
                                                    LJQLQ    'fLit—
                                                             tTh,    - ii l_
                                                                   .Jai   I_   '._,_i Iae,
                                                                               C'       '.13cI_fF\ +
                                                                                                 CLLLL


Under 25                      3.0              7.6                   33.3             3.5.3

25-34                        20.4              19.2                  73.2             69.5

35-44                        25.8             27.0                   82.4             82.1

45-54                        51.2             41.4                   80.1             86.9

55-64                        47.6             52.3                   80.0             86.5

65 and   over                53.1              57.1                  76.7             83.1

Subset of
Respondents Classified       38.4             42.2                   74.5             77.1




Source: Census estimates from Carliner (1982).
                                                                   Table9-3
                         Estimates of Cumulative Price Appreciation and Cumulative
                                                                                                Inflation-Adjusted
                              Total Returns on Selected Assets Between
                                                                       Survey Dates (in percent)
                        Cumulative Percentage Price Appreciation Inflation-
                                                                                Inflation-Adjusted Cumulative Total Returns
                                 in        in         in            Adjusted
                              Deflator      Prices      Price of          Cumulative                           on           on       on
                            for Personal      of       Constant-       Price Appreciation          on      Long-Term       U.S.    Savings
                           Consumption Common           Quality          in Constant-          Common Government Treasury Accounts
                           Expenditures Stock           [-louse         Quality Houses           Stock       Bonds         Bills   at S&Ls
Feb., 1962-Mar., 1970           25.7         28.1        27.8                  1.7                32.2        -16.8        12.5     12.3
Mar., 1970-Sept., 1977          52.5          7.7        85.4                 21.6                -6.5         11.4        -1.1     -3.4
Feb., 1962-Sept., 1977          91.7         38.0       137.0                 23.6               23.7          -7.4        11.3      8.5
   Source: Business Cycle Developments for PCE Deflator. Ibbotson and
                                                                      Sinquefield (ii 979) for price appreciation and
           nominal total returns on stocks, bonds, and bills.

             C-27 Construction Reports for Second Quarter 1981 for
                                                                     appreciation in constant-quality houses.
             Savings and Loan Fact Book (Annual) for yields on savings accounts at S&Ls.
Notes: Appreciation in PCE deflator and housing prices are calculated from the first
                                                                                     quarter of 1962 to the first quarter of
        1970 and from the                                                 1977.      Yields                accounts
                              latter quarter to the third quarter of                          on savings              are compounded using
        annual    figures for 1962-69 and 1970-76. During the 1970s, due to
                                                                            growing role of certificate accounts, these yields
       moved increasingly above        ceiling rates   on passbook accounts. Every
                                                                                          inflation-adjusted return is calculated from
       the   ratio of one plus the cumulative nominal return in
                                                                source data to one plus the cumulative rate of
                                                                                                               appreciation
       in   the   PCE   deflator over the    same period.
                                                             Table 9-4

                             Incremental Mean Savings and Per Year Real Saving Rates Between

                                        Survey Dates, for Households in Specific Age Classes
                                      1962 to 1970                                      1970 to 1977
                                               Real Increment                                   Real Increment       Difference
 Age of              Dollar Increment           Per Year As a        Dollar Increment           Per Year As a         in Real
Household                 in Mean            Percentage of Mean            in Mean            Percentage of Mean    Savings Rate
     Head              Transactable             Real Income in           Transactable           Real Income in      Between Eras
(in years)                Wealth            The Two Survey Years           Wealth            the Two Survey Years   (in percent)
Under 25                   -607                      -2.6                    6316                      8.3               10.9
25 to 34                   2074                       1.0                   13414                      8.4               7.4
35   to 44                 9140                       6.9                   23670                       8.8               1.9

45   to 54                  6030                      2.0                   37437                      17.8              15.8
55 to 64                   21566                     24.5                   22717                       2.4             -22.1
65 and older               22250                     44.8                    3068                      -29.2            -74.0
All Respondents            10683                     10.5                   18178                       .5.6            -4.9
         Source: Calculated from data tapes of the 1977 Consumer Credit Survey and of the 1962 and 1970 Surveys of
                  Consumer Finances. Real values are calculated by multiplying base-date wealth and income by one

                  plus the cumulative   rate of change between survey dates in the deflator for personal consumption.
                  expenditures.
                                                                                              41


                                              Table 9-5

                Cumulative Percentage Change in the Real and Nominal Value of
                      Accumulated Mean Savings Between Survey Dates,
                                   by Age of Household Head

                                             (in percent)
                                Cumulative                             Cumulative
                                Percentage                             Percentage
   Age of                   Change in Mean                         Change in Mean
   Household                    Net Wealth                             Net Wealth
   Head                          Between                                Between
   (in years)                1962 and 1970                            1970 and 1977
                    Nominal Wealth      Real Wealth         Nominal Wealth      Real Wealth
   Under25              -28.5                 -43.1           413.8                   237.0
   25to34                41.4                  12.5           189.2                   89.6
   35   to 44            77.4                  41.1           113.0                   39.7

   45 to 54              37.4                   9.1           168.0                   75.7

   55 to   64           131.0                  83.8            59.7                    4.8
   65 and   older       121.5                  76.2             7.6                   -29.5
All Respondents          88.4                  49.9            79.8                   17.9
   Note: Percentage changes in real wealth employ base-date wealth that has been
            inflated by cumulative growth in the implicit deflator f or personal consumption
            expenditures (PCE) figured from either the first quarter of 1962 to the second
            quarter of 1970 or from the latter quarter to the third quarter of 1977, as
            appropriate. Let c represent cumulative growth in the deflator for PCE between
            survey dates and W0 and        represent mean base-date and end-date wealth,
            respectively. The cumulative percentage growth rate in real wealth is calculated

            as'W -(1+c)W
                 (1+c)W0
                                                       Table 9-6
                               Dollar Increments Between Survey Dates in the Mean Values
                         of Real-Estate Assets and Three Componentsof Net Transactable Wealth,

                                               by Age of Household Head
                                                 (all entries in dollars)
                              Between 1962 and 1970                                     Between 1970 and 1977

Age of
Household       Retail         Wholesale     Real-         Real-             Retail      Wholesale     Real-    Real-
Head           Financial       Financial     Estate        Estate           Financial    Financial    Estate    Estate
(in years)      Assets          Assets       Equity        Assets            Assets       Assets      Equity    Assets
Under 25        272              -1098         218          1348              1732         1595        2988      3848

25 to 34        458                -35        1652          3916             2339          2535        8542     14539

35to44         1471                694        6981         11429             4020          2995       16665     21936

45    to 54    1135               -929        5830          8678             5982         10873       20664     24387

55 to 64       3550               7522       10538         12095             5283          4051        13537    15092

65 and older   3664               8176       10409         11167             4182         -6338        5279      5079

All
Respondents    1880               2439        6372          8518             4068          2684       11464     14441
                                                                                           43



                                                Table 9-7
                Distribution of Cumulative Changes in the Nominal Value of Mean
                          Transactable Wealth Between Survey Dates,
                                      by Age of Household Head

                                               (in percent)


                          Percentage of 1962-1970                      Percentage of 1970-77
                          increase Attributable to:                  increase Attributable to:
Age of
Household               Retail        Wholesale Real-               Retail    Wholesale     Real—

 Head                  Financial      Financial     Estate        Financial    Financial    Estate
(in years)              Assets         Assets       Equity         Assets       Assets      Equity
Under 25                  448a          1809a         360a           27.4          25.3         47.3

25-34                     22.1           -1.7         79.6           17.4          18.9         63.7

35-44                     16.1            7.6         76.4           17.0          12.7         70.4

45-54                     18.8         -15.4          96.7           16.0          29.0         55.2

55-64                     16.5          34.9          48.9           23.3          17.8         59.6
65andolder                16.5          36.7          46.8          136.3       -206.6      172.1

All Respondents           17.6          22.8          59.6           22.4          14.8         63.1




aBecause     nominal wealth declined for this age dass during the 1962-1970 period,
the   signs of the percentage    allocations are   the reverse of observed portfolio
movements. In fact, holdings of wholesale assets declined while the other two
portfolio components increased.
                                                                                            44

                                              Table 9-8
                       Distribution of Selected Assets and Respondent Population
                       Across Age Classes at 1962, 1970, and 1977 Survey Dates
                                             (in percent)
        Age of
  Household          Retail.    Whdlesäle Real-       Net       Value                         No.

        Head        Financial   Financial Estate Transactable     of         Respondent       of

  (in years)         Assets      Assets   Equity    Wealth      Horn es      Population   Respondents

                 1962 Survey
  Under 25              1.7         5.1      0.6          1.6                                 192
  25-34                8.5          5.5      8.7          8.1       13.5        19.5          413
  35-44               16.5         25.6    23.9        22.8        29.3         23.4          495

  45—54               21.2         29.3    26.8       26.2         26.6         19.5          413

  55-64               17.6         17.9    18.3        18.1        15.1         13.3          281

  65    and older     34.4
                      ____         16.5    21.8       23. 1        14.9         15.3          323
  All
  Respondents         99.9         99.9   100.1       99.9        100.0        100.1         2117


                 1970 Survey

  Under 25             1.7          0.3     0.5        0.7             1.5      10.0          257

.. 25-34               6.4          2.3     6.6        5.7         12.5         .18.3         471

  35-44               14.0         12.6    20.0       17.4         24.3         18.9          488

  45-54               17.3         10.1    23.3       19.5         24.9         20.0          514

  55-64               26.1         37.5    24.8       27.6         19.6         16.5          426

  65andolder          34.6         37.2    24.8       29.0         17.2         16.3          420

  All
  Respondents 100.1               100.0   100.0       99.9        100.0        100.0         2576
                                                                45



(Table 9-8 Continued)



           1977 Survey

Under 25         2.6       2.1     1.3     1.7    1.5     8.8     225
2 5-34          10.6       9.8    12.3    11.5   17.8    23.0     587
35-44          13.7       13.1    19.4    17.2   22.1    15.8    402
4 5-54         19.9       31.0    24.9    25.0   23.4    17.1    437
5 5-64         24.0       33.4    22.8    24.9   18.8    16.8    429
65 and older   29.1       10.6    19.3    19.7   16.3    18.5    472
Al!
Respondents    99.9      100.0   100.0   100.0   99.9   100.0   2552
                                                      Table 9-9

                        HomeownershipRate, Mortgage Status, and Mean Dollar Value of Net
                                     Transactable Wealth in 1962, 1970 and 1977,

                                             by Age of Household Head
                             1962                                  1970                               1977

                                       Percent of                           Percent of                         Percent of

 Age of      Mean Dollar              Homeowners Mean Dollar                Homeowners Mean Dollar             Homeowhers
Household     Value of      Percent       with        Value of    Percent      with       Value of   Percent      with
  Head       Transactable Owning        Mortgage    Transactable Owning      Mortgage    Transactable Owning    Mortgage
(in years)     Wealth        Home         Debt        Wealth       Home        Debt        Wealth     Home        Debt
Under 25        2133           52         80.0          1526       11.7        90.0          7843     20.0        80.0
               (934)                                    (192)                               (1652)    (20.9)      (80.9)


25-34           5015          43.1        84.3          7090       47.8        90.2         20504     54.3        88.4
               (564)                                    (735)                               (2147)    (56.5)      (88.0)


35-44          11807          63.4        81.2         20948       70.9        86.4         44618     72.9        84.6

               (1913)                                   (2167)                              (3688)    (77.9)      (83.1)
                                                                                                                            C'
                                                                                                                                   2

(Table 9-9 Continued)

45 to 54              16258       68.5        61.1         22288         73.7        64.6          59726    74.6            73.3
                      (1288)                               (1338)                                  (5159)   (81.0)          (70.3)

55 to 64              16459       68.3       40.1          38025         77.0        32.9          60743    71.1            45.9
                      (1551)                               (5352)                                  (5223)   (79.0)          (42.8)


65andolder           18312        63.2       15.2          40563         71.2        16.4          43631    64.4            15.5
                     (1835)                                (5023)                                  (3093)   (79.4)          (13.6)

All Respondents      12083        55.8       58.8          22766        62.4        57.9           40944    62.4            62.3
                     (646)                                 (1334)                                  (1613)   (69.0)          (58.8)

  Source:Calculated from data tapes of the 1977 Consumer Credit
                                                                  Survey and the 1970 Survey of Consumer Finances.
  Note: The U.S. Bureau of the Census estimates that the
                                                         aggregate homeownershiprate was 62.9 percent in 1970 and
           64.8 percent in 1977 (Carliner, 1982). In the mean-wealth
                                                                     columns, the standard error of mean wealth is given
           in parentheses. In the percentage ownershipand
                                                           mortgagor columns for 1977, the figures in parentheses report
           corresponding values for the unedited sample. For age-class                       the standard error    of the
                                                                         homeownershiprates,
           mean rounds to 0.1 percent in all but two instances where   it rounds to 0.2 percent.
                                            Table 9-10
        Tobit Estimates of Wealth-Based Engels Curves for Holdings of Retail Financial
               Assets, for Samples Disaggregated by the Age of Household Head

                                                              Wealth-Squared
                                             Estimated         Coefficient
Age of Household                    Slope Coefficients for:    Times Twice
   Head               Estimated                    Wealth         Mean
(in years)             Intercept     Wealth        Squared       Wealth         R2       d.f.

          1962 Data Set
                          321.0        .06        -.18 D-06       .001
Under 25                  (5.51)     (3.55)         (1.57)                      .24      189


                          440.0       -.00        .33 D-05        .033
25-34                     (4.49)      (.14)        (27.75)                      .86      410


                          624.0       .07         .38 D-07        .001
35-44                     (4.46)     (8.82)         (3.80)                      .74      492


                           -5.0       .19         -.74 D-06       -.024
45-54                     (.02)     (12.41)        (8.67)                       .30      410


                          33.0        .21        -.56 D-06        -.0 18
55-64                     (.08)      (9.25)        (4.54)                       .32      278



                       -932.5         .40        -.10 D-05        -.037
65 and older              (1.61)    (15.32)        (9.98)                       .46      320



                          408.1       .15        -.70 D-07        -.002
Pooled Sample             (3.22)    (25.88)        (6.84)                       .35      2114
                            •
                                                                                 43

 (Table   9-10 Continued)

           1970 Data Set

                                 165.0      48b     -.18 D_O4b    -.055
 Under 25                       (2.30)    (10.75)      (6.45)              .41        254



                                 186.0      20b     -.65 D_O6b   -.009
 25-34                          (1.44)   (15.52)      (10.23)              .37        468



                            _256•0a        21b        39 D.O6b   -.016
35-44                           (.74)    (14.82)      (12.15)             .32      486



                                -154.0     .20      -.53 D-06    -.024
45-54                           (.40)    (10.22)      (4.12)              .31     511



                            1195.0         .18      -.11 D_06a   -.008
55-64                           (1.79)   (13.40)      (11.80)             .30     423



                            2312•0b        20b      -.16 D_O6b   -.013

65 and older                (3.06)       (14.83)     (12.04)              .35     417



                            9710a         .16       -.11 006a    -.005

Pooled Sample               (5.19)       (33.62)     (25.98)'             .31    2573
                                                                                    50

(Table 9-10 Continued)
         1977 Data Set
                           349.0           .27          -.13 D-06   -.002
Under 25                    (.69)        (5.68)           (.42)               .46        222



                           7030a           25b      -.20 D_O6b,c    -.008
25-34                      (1.55)        (15.71)         (8.44)               .40        584



                          _1589•0a         22b      -.13 D_O6b,d    -.012
35-44                      (1.54)        (10.33)         (3.99)               .35        399



                           -707.0          .23      -.22 D_06a      -.026
45-54                      (.69)         (13.05)         (9.93)               .32        432



                                                    -.25 D_O6d      -.030
55-64                      (1.75)        (13.81)         (8.57)               .38        426



                         _48800a,d         47d      -.48 D_O6a,d    -.042
65 and older               (3.97)        (20.67)         (11.75)              .51        469



                         _1865•0b,d       30b,d    -.28 D_O6b,d     -.023
Pooled Sample              (4.5)         (36.18)         (23.02)              .39       2560



Notes: Coefficient t-values are reported in parentheses. A superscript a indicates that
        the t-value of the difference from the corresponding coefficient in 1962 lies
        between 1.96 and 3.0; b that this value exceeds 3.0. A superscript c indicates
        that t-value of difference from corresponding coefficient in 1970 is between
        1.96 and 3.0; ci that this value exceeds 3.0.
                                                                                      51
                                            Table 9-11
     Tobit Estimates of Wealth-Based Engels Curves for Holdings of Wholesale Financial

               Assets, for Samples Disaggregated by the Age of Household Head

                                                              Wealth-Squared
                                             Estimated         Coefficient
 Age of Household                   Slope Coefficients for:    Times Twice
    Head              Estimated                    Wealth         Mean
 (in years)            Intercept     Wealth        Squared       Wealth          R2        d.f.
           1962 Data Set


 Under 25                   (.54)    (4.97)        (28.64)                      .99         189


                            19.0      .05         .22 0-05        .022
25-34                      (.20)     (3.93)        (18.95)                      .80        410


                       -3035.0        .43         .18 D-06        .004
35-44                      (7.76)   (18.88)        (6.53)                       .92        492


                       -549.0         .11         .21 0-05        .068
45-54                      (.94)     (3.28)        (10.90)                      .68        410


                           531.0     -.07        .38 D-05         .125
55-64           •

                       (1.20)       (2.98)        (28.29)                       .90        278


                       1073.0        -.08        .19 0-05         .070
65 and older           (1.86)       (3.00)        (18.27)                       .74        320


                      -2134.0        .33         .34 0-06        .008
Pooled Sample          (10.13)      (33.31)       (19.83)                      .75      2114
                                                                        52


(Table 9-11 Continued)

         1970 Data Set
                          -32.0      .17     -.83 D_OSb    025

Under 25                   (.82)    (6.95)     (5.36)             .17        254


                          -21.0      .07     .23 D_O6b    .003
25-34                     (.21)    (7.24)      (4.59)             .52        468



                         -2672.0     30b     -.18 D_O6b   -.008
35-44                     (3.46)   (9.62)      (2.47)             .40        485



                         -1042.0     .10     .81 D_O6b    .036

45-54                     (1.69)   (3.22)      (3.96)             .32        511



                         53460b      31b     .28 D_O6b    .021

55-64                    (5.42)    (16.15)    (20.30)             .96        423



                         -2888.0     25a     .28 D_O6b    .023

65 and older             (1.16)    (5.44)      (6.42)             .62        417



                         -1577.0    •19b     .34 D-06     .015

Pooled Sample            (3.47)    (16.82)    (33.96)             .78    2573
                                                                                     53
 (Table 9-11 Continued)

          1977 Data Set

                            747.0         -.             33 D_OSa     .052

 Under 25                   (1.64)        (3.70)         (12.32)               .71        222



                            415.0           04d        .10 D_OSa,d    .041

25-34                      (1.15)         (2.81)         (57.51)               .96        584



                          3126•0b,d        12b,d       .11 DO5       .098
35-44                      (3.02)         (5.54)         (32.64)               .89        399



                          -3141.0          .07             D-06      .094

45-54                      (2.06)         (2.79)         (23.70)               .91        432



                          -2017.0          08d         .77 DO6bd     .094

55-64                      (1.25)        (3.08)          (23.15)               .88       426



                          38900b          •20b     -.88 D_O7b,d      -.008
65 and older               (4.16)        (11.34)         (2.82)                .34       469



                          -1034.0         04b,d        .78 D_O6b,d   .064

Pooled Sample              (1.99)        (4.25)          (51.33)              .84       2560



Notes: Coefficient t-values are reported in parentheses. A superscript a indicates that
        the t-value of the difference from the corresponding coefficient in 1962 lies
        between 1.96 and 3.0; b that this value exceeds 3.0. A superscript C indicates

        that t-value of difference from corresponding coefficient in 1970 is between
        1.96 and 3.0; d that this value exceeds 3.0.
                                                                                         54
                                                  Table 9-12
     Tobit Estimates of Wealth-Based Engels Curves for the Equity in Owner-Occupied
                Housing, for Samples Disaggregated by the Age of Household Head
                                                                Wealth-Squared
                                                Estimated        Coefficient
Age of Household                       Slope Coefficients for:
                                      ________________              Times               No. of
     Head              Estimated                     Wealth         Mean               Nonlimit
   (in years)          Intercept        Wealth       Squared       Wealth        R2 Observations
         1962 bata.Set
                         74.0             .12       -.79 0-06       -.003
Under 25                (1.05)           (5.91)       (5.71)                     .16      12



                         155.0            .57       -.38 0-05       -.038
25-34                    (.85)          (23.36)      (17.02)                     .58     175



                        2045.0            .40       -.41 0-06       -.010
35-44                   (6.82)          (22.80)      (19.14)                     .54     315


                        1073.0            .51       -.11 0-05       -.036
45-54                   (2.08)          (16.74)       (6.26)                     .60     284


                        1544.0            .49       -.19 0-05       -.063
55-64                   (3.15)          (18.13)      (13.05)                     .56     192



                        1980.0            .36      -.64 0-06        -.023
65 and older            (3.31)          (13.38)      (5.97)                      .47     208


                                  •
                        1974.0            .34      -.36 0-06        -.009
Pooled Sample           (11.88)         (43.66)      (26.93)                     .49    1186
                                                                           55
 (Table 9-12 Continued)

         1970 Data Set

                           -184.0      .45     .39 D-05     .012
 Under 25                  (1.77)    (6.96)      (.96)               .57        29



                           439.0      .54      -.17 D-05    -.024
 25-34                     (2.01)   (24.76)     (15.80)              .61    218



                           2887.0     .43     -.71 D-06    -.030
35-44                      (5.36)   (20.02)     (14.29)             .50     341



                          4155.0      .34      .30 D-06     .013
45-54                      (5.69)    (9.42)     (1.23)              .52     378



                          9186.0      .13     .11 D-07     .001
55-64                     (9.75)    (6.86)      (.83)               .50     327



                          6125.0      .20     -.79 D-07    -.006
65 and older              (7.11)    (12.75)     (5.26)              .46     299



                          4967.0     .22      -.64 D-07    -.003
Pooled Sample             (18.27)   (31.47)    (10.57)              .44    1592
(Table 9-12 Continued)                                                      56
         1977 Data Set

                           14.0         .47       -.23 D-05   -.036
Under 25                  (.03)        (9.62)       (7.57)            .32        45



                         2301.0         .49       -.60 D-06   -.025

25-34                     (4.26)      (26.00)      (20.93)            .54    319



                         1984.0         .62       -.61 D-06   -.054

35—44                    (1.43)       (22.18)      (13.71)            .61    293



                         9932.0         .38      -.26 D-06    -.031

45-54                    (6.34)       (14.32)      (7.61)             .49    325



                         8216.0         .39      -.39 D-06    -.047

55-64                    (5.21)       (16.26)      (11.95)            .41    303



                         11087.0        .15       .77 D-06    .067

65 and older             (8.83)        (6.29)      (18.27)            .77    303



                         5478.0         .42      -.30 D-06    -.025

Pooled Sample            (9.26)       (34.95)      (17.56)            .43    1593



   Note: Coefficient t-values are reported in parentheses.
                                                                                        57
                                               Table 9-13
          Tobit Estimates of Wealth-Based Engels Curves for the Equity in Investment
               Real-Estate, for Samples Disaggregated by the Age of Household Head

                                                              Wealth-Squared
                                             Estimated         Coefficient
 Age of Household                   Slope Coefficients for:       Times                No. of
        Head           Estimated                  Wealth          Mean                Nonlimit
    (in years)          Intercept    Wealth      Squared         Wealth         R2 Observations
          1962 Data Set
                         -445.0        .70       -.43 D-05        -.018
 Under 25                (3.44)      (19.34)      (16.83)                       .69      9


                         -614.0        .38       -.17 D-05        -.017
25-34                    (3.31)      (15.48)      (7.60)                       .45      .54




                         366.0         .10       .19 D-06         .004
35—44                    (1.48)      (7.21)       (10.73)                      .85      81



                        -519.0        .19       -.29D-06         -.009
45-54                    (1.25)      (7.92)       (2.15)                       .29      89


                        -2108.0       .38       -.13 D-05        -.043
55-64                    (3.94)     (12.88)       (8.03)                       .42      57



                       -2120.0        .32       -.22 D-06        -.008
65 and older            (2.54)       (8.35)      (1.44)                        .37      62



                        -247.0        .18       .94 D-07         .002
Pooled Sample           (1.47)      (23.02)      (6.91)                        .50     352
                                                                       58

(Table 9-13 Continued)
         1970 Data Set

                           52.0     -.10      .22 D-04   .067

Under 25                   (.63)    (2.01)     (7.01)            .37        11



                         -604.0      .18     .21 D-05    .030

25-34                     (2.49)   (7.45)     (17.73)            .83        57


                          41.0       .07     .13 D-05    .054

35-44                     (.40)    (1.61)     (13.56)            .73        86



                         -2959.0     .36     -.58 D-06   -.049
45-54                     (4.20)   (10.11)     (2.48)            .38        125



                         -5035.0    .38      -.18 D-06   -.014
55-64                    (4.89)    (18.74)    (12.56)            .55        100



                         -5549.0    .35      .42 D-07    .003

65 and older             (2.38)    (8.33)     (1.02)             .40        76



                         -4360.0    .43      -.17 D-06   -.008
Pooled Sample            (8.94)    (34.59)    (15.84)            .43    455
 (Table 9-13 Continued)                                                       59

         1977 Data Set

                           -1081.0       .41       -.92D-Q6    -.014
 Under 25                   (1.61)      (6.41)      (2.28)              .37        11




                          -2014.0        .30      -.30 D-06   -.012
 25-34                     (3.71)      (16.04)      (10.48)            .36         78



                          -3521.0       .28       -.34 D-06   -.030
35-44                      (2.98)      (11.68)      (8.98)             .26         97



                          -6085.0       .32       -.31 D-06   -.037
45-54                      (4.15)     (13.10)       (9.55)             .33         98



                          -3758.0       .24       -.14 D-06   -.017
55—64                      (2.61)     (10.94)       (4.54)             .37     106



                          -2317.0       .18       -.20 D-06   -.017
65 and older               (2.69)     (11.21)       (6.80)             .23     61




                          -2578.0       .24      -.20 D-06    -.016
Pooled Sample             (5.99)      (27.86)      (15.89)             .30     452



   Note: Coefficient t-values are reported in parentheses.
                                                                                         60


                                               Table 9-14
                 Pattern   of Significant Coefficient Shifts Across Survey Dates

            in Engels Curves   for Equity in Real Estate, by Age of Household Head
                                         in 1962,   1970, and 1977    *




Age of Household                                              Shift in             Shift in
         Head                  Intercept                     Slope for             Slope for
    (in years)                    Shift                       Wealth          Wealth-Squared
          1. 1970 versus 1962 Data Sets
Under 25                                                 Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
25-34                                                    Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
                                                                             Significant at 1%
45-54                              ,..                          ...          Significant at 1%
55-64                      Significant at 5%             Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
65 and over
All Respondents                    ...                   Significant at 1%
         2. 1977versus 1962 Data Sets
Under 25
25-34                                                    Significant at 5%   Significant at 1%
35-44                      Significant at 1%             Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
45-54                      Significant at 5%                    ...          Significant at 5%
.55-64                     Significant at 5%             Significant at 5%   Significant at 1%
65 and older               Significant at 1%             Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
All Respondents                                          Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
                                                                                  61


(Table 9-14 Continued)
        3. 1977 versus 1970 Data Sets
Under 25

25-34                             ...                      ...          Significant at 1%
35-44                     Significant at 1%         Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
45-54

55-64                                               Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
65 and older              Significant at 5%         Significant at 1%   Significant at 1%
All Respondents          Significant at 1%                 ...          Significant at 1%
   Note: Coefficient shifts that are not significant by conventional dummy-variable
           t-tests are represented by an ellipsis (...).
                                                                                     62

                                         Table 9-15
           Changes in the Real and Nominal Value of Accumulated Mean Savings
                  Between Survey Dates, by Age Cohorts Determined by the
                         Age of a Household Head in 1962 and 1970
                                        (in percent)                    Accum ulated
                       Dollar                                           Mean Real Saving
Age of Household     Increment             Cumulative              Per Year As a Percentage
Head at the Later     in Mean              Percentage                      of Mean

  Survey Date       Transactabie         Change inMean                Survey-Date Real
   (in years           Wealth              Net Wealh                       Incomes
                                   Nominal Wealth Real Wealth
        1962 Age Cohorts in 1970

26-33                 3928              184.1              126.1              9.6

33-42                 12643             252.1              180.1             13.3

43-52                 11478              97.2               56.9              9.6
53-62                19745              121.4               76.2             18.7

63-72                24207              147.1               96.6             33.8

73andolder           20092              109.7               66.8             43.8

All Cohorts          13484              111.6               68.3             14.0

        1962   Age Cohorts   in 1977

33-40                35713             1673.8              825.6             16.7

40-49                43841             874.1               408.2             15.4

50-59                49863             422.3               172.5             15.5
60-69                42679             262.5           '    89.1             13.4

70-79                24989              151.8               31.4              6.8

80 and older         14276              78.0                -7.2             -2.8

All Cohorts          38568             319.2               118.7             12.8
                                                                  63



(Table 9-15 Continued)
           1970 Age Cohorts in 1977

25-31                 15226              997.4   619.9    16.8

32—4 1                32390              456.8   265. 1   22.2

42-51                 31207              149.0    63.3    13.8
52-6 1                41102              184.4    86.5    21.8
62-7 1                16321               42.9    -6.3    -3.9

72    and older       -4287              -10.6   -41 .4   -44.2

All   Cohorts         21378              93.9     27.2     8.2

Note: See notes to Tables 9-4 and 9-5.
                                                                                 64


                                       Table 9-16
               Dollar Increments Between Survey Dates in the Mean Value
    of Real-Estate Assets and Three Components of Net Transactable Wealth, by
        Age Cohorts Determined by the Age of a Household Head in 1962 and 1970
                                (all entries in dollars)
  Age of
Household                    Retail         Wholesale        Real-          Real-
   Head                    Financial         Financial      Estate         Estate
(in years)                  Assets            Assets        Equity         Assets
           1962 Age Cohorts in 1970
26-33                          846              -842         3928           9516
33—42                         1891              2107         8647          13315
43—52                         1744               235         9505          12458

53—62                         3170              5789        10823          11175
63—72                         5546              7298        11362          11326

73 and older                  4298              7890         7902           7952

All Cohorts                  2324               3029         8141          10727

          1962 Age Cohorts in 1977

33-40                        5522              4705         25486          40554

40-49                        6815              6455         30628          38718

50-59                        9940             11189         28937          31953
60-69                        9668              8485         24622          23885

70-79                       11259               826         12902          11715

80 and older                 4079              3665          6531           6392

All Cohorts                  7882              6828         23931          28863
                                                        65

(Table 9-16 Continued)

          1970 Age Cohorts in 1977

25-31                        2212     1989   11031   21325
32-41                        4564     5941   21894   30464
42-51                        5932     6526   18788   19671
52-61                        7954    11958   21387   22410
62-71                        6796    -1965   11560   10428
72 and older                 3140    —6436    -991   -1929
All   Cohorts               4624     3222    13578   17097
                                                         Table 9-17

                     Distribution of Cumulative Percentage Change in the Nominal Value of Mean
                                Transactable Wealth Between Survey Dates, by Age of Cohorts
                                 Determined by the Age of Household Head in 1962 and 1970
                                                         (in percent)

                     Percentage of 1962-1977                                                  Percentage of 1970-77
                     increase Comprised by:                                                   Increase Comprised by:
Age of 1962-                -
                                                                  Age of 1970
Cohorts in       Retail           Wholesale     Real-              Cohorts in          Retail         Wholesale        Real-
      1977      Financial         Financial     Estate                  1977          Financial       Financial        Estate
(in years)       Assets            Assets       Equity              (in years)         Assets          Assets          Equity
33-40            15.5                13.2        71.4                   25-31            14.5            13.1          72.4
40-49            15.5                14.7        69.9                   32-41            14.1            18.3          67.6

50-59            19.9                22.4        58.0                   42-51            19.0            20.9          60.2

60-69            22.7                19.9        57.7                   52-61            19.4            29.1          52.0
70-79            45.1                 3.3        51.6                   62-71            41.6           -12.0          70.8

80 and older     28.6                25.7        45.8             72 and   older        -73.3           150.1          23.1

All   Cohorts    20.4                17.7        62.1              All Cohorts           21.6            15.1          63.5



                                                                                                                                C'
                                                                                                                                C'
                                                                                          67

                                              Table 9-18
            Percentage Distribution of Selected Assets and of Respondent Population
                  Across Age Cohorts of the 1962 and 1970 Ae Classes, at the
                                  1970 and 1977 Survey Dates
   Age of
 Household          Retail       Wholesale                                Net      Percentage
    Head           Financial      Financial       Real-Estate      Transactable     of Cohort
                                   Assets            Equity           Wealth       Respondents
             1962 Age Cohorts in 1970

 25-33              4.2(.28)       1.1(.07)         4.2( .28)        3.5(.23)         14.9
33-42              13.1(.63)      10.9(.52)       15.9 ( .76)      14.4 ( .69)       20.8
43-52              16.9(.73)     11.6(.5o)        25.4(1.09)       21. 1(   .91)     23.2
53-62              24.0(1.22)    34.1(1.74)       26.5(1.35)       27.6(1.41)        19.6
63-72              24.1(1.88) 25.2(1.97)          17.8(1.39)       20.4(1.59)        12.8
73 and older       17.7(2.06) ____
                               17.0(1.98)         10.3(1.20)       13.0(1.51)          8.6
         Totals   100.0         100.0            100.0            100.1              99.9
            1962 Age Cohorts in 1977

33-40              10.4(.59)     11.6(.66)        14.4( .82)       13.1(.75)         17.5
40-49              16.3(.77)     16.6(.79)        22.7(1.08)       20.3(.96)         21 . 1
50-5 9             28.4(1.13)    37.8(1.51)       29.2(1 . 16)     30.6(1.22)        25. 1
60-69              24.1(1.19)    26.4(1.31)       22. 5(1. 11)     23.5(1.16)        20.2
70-79              17.3(1.42)     5.1(.42)         9. 1 ( . 75)    10.0( .82)        12.2
80 and older        3.5(.92)     2.6(.68)
                                ____               2.1( .55)        2.5 ( .66)        3.8
         Totals   100.0         100.1            100.0            100.0              99.9
                                                                                       68



(Table 9-18 Continued)

            1970   Age Cohorts in 1977
25-31                 6.2(.34)     5.0(.27)        7.8(.42)       7.0(.38)           18.4
32-41               13.3(.69)     16.1(.83)       18.8(.97)      17.3(.90)           19.3
42-5 1              17.4(1.03)    20.7(1.22)     20.5(1.21)      20.0(1.18)          16.9
52-61               26.2(1.30)    36.6(1.82)     27.4(1.36)      28.8(1.43)          20.1
62-71               22.9(1.53)    16.3(1.09)      17.8(1.19)     18.5(1.23)          15.0
72andolder          14.0(1.36)     5.4(.52)       7.6(.74)        8.5(.83)           10.3
         Totals    100.0         100.1           99.9           100.1                100.0
Note: The figures recorded in parentheses report the     percentage of outstanding
         balances in each portfolio category   controlled per each one percent of
         respondent   population occupying the cohort.
                                                          Table 9-19

                               HomeownershipRate and Mortgage Status in 1962, 1970, and 1977,
                            by Age Cohorts Reflecting the Age of a Household Head in 1962 and 1970

                                                         (in percent)
                                   1962                                  1970                            1977
   Age of
Household Head                            Homeowners                            Homeowners                      Homeowners
 At Indicated      No. of      Percent       with       No. of     Percent         with      No. of   Percent      with
 Survey Date       House-      Owning      Mortgage     House-     Owning        Mortgage    House-   Owning
 (in years)        holds        Horne
            1962 Age Cohorts

All under 25          192         5.2        80.0         339           30.9        91.0      325     50.4          87.8
25-34                 413        43. 1       84.3         473           70.6       85.9       391     75.7          81.1
35-44                 495        63.4        81.2         526           72.4       71.7       466     71.7         59.6
45-54                 413        68.5        61.1         445          77.5        36.8       374     69.0         31.4
55-64                 281        68.3        40. 1        291          71.1        24.2       227     64.3          11.0
65 and older          323        63.2        15.2         196          71.9         9.2        71     59.2          7.1
All Respondents     2117         55.8        58.8        2270          62.4        57.9      1854     62.4         62.3
(Table 9-19 Continued)

          1970   Age Cohorts
18-25                             257   11.7    90.0     428        52.8   89.8

25-34                             471   47.8    90.:2    449        67.9   86.2

35-44                             488   70.9    86.4     393        74.6   77.8

45_54                             514   73.7    64.6     467        71.9   55.4
                                                                -
55-64                        .    426   77.0    32.9     350_       67.7   27.0

65 and older                      420   71 .2   16.4     240        62.5    8.0

All Respondents Classified       2576   62.4    57.9    2327        66.5   61.8




                                                                                  —4
                                                                                   71



                                          Table 9-20
                     Age of Heads of Households of Different Sizes
                                 in 1962, 1970, and 1977

                                           (in years)
                            1962 Survey                 1970 Survey         1977 Survey
Number of Persons    Mean         Standard       Mean        Standard    Mean   Standard
      in Household   Age         Deviation        Age        Deviation   Age    Deviation


One                  48.9           20.7          51.7         20.7      53.6      21.1
Two                  54.4           16.2         53.8          17.5      51.8     18.1
Three or more        40.0           11.0         40.8          11.7      40.9      12.0

All Respondents      45.5           16.1          46.5         16.5      46.9      17.3
                                                            Table 9-21
                    Accumulated Mean Savings in Dollars and Savings Per Year as a Percentage of Mean

                                 Survey-Date Incomes, for Households in Different Size Classes


                                      1962 to 1970                                      1970 to 1977
                         Dollar              Real Increment                 Dollar            Real Increment          Difference
                       Increment              Per Year As a               Increment            Per Year As a        in Real Savings
Number    of            in Mean                             of
                                              Percentage                   in Mean             Percentage of        Rate Between
 Persons             Transactable         Mean Real Income in            Transactable       Mean Real Income in            Eras
in   Household          Wealth            the Two Survey    Years          Wealth          the Two   Survey Years    (in   percent)



One        -              9202                       19.2                   9354                       0.3                 -18.9

Two                      14858                       14.7                   15786                    -1.4                  -16.1

Three or more             7736                       5.8                    23319                    10.1                   4.3

All Respondents          10681                       10.5                   18155                      5.6                  -4.9

      Note: Same as Table 9-4.



                                                                                                                                      —4
                                                                                                                                      N)
                                                                                          73

                                           Table 9-22

               Cumulative Percentage Change in the Real and Nominal Value of

                 Accumulated Savings Between Survey Dates, for Households

                                    in Different Size Classes

                                          (in percent)


                                   Cumulative                              Cumulative

                                   Percentage                              Percentage
                               Change in Mean                          Change in Mean
 Number of                         Net Wealth                              Net Wealth
  Persons                           Between                                 Between
in Household                   1962 and 1970                            1970 and 1977

                     Nominal Wealth         Real Wealth         Nominal Wealth     Real Wealth


One                        111.2                68.0                53.5                 0.7

Two                        82.3                 45.0                48.0                -3.0
Three or more              70.9                 36.0               125.1                47.6

All Respondents            88.4                 49.9                79.8                17.9

Note: As in Table 9-4,   percentage changes in real wealth are calculated from base-date

      wealth figures that have been inflated by the cumulative growth rate in the

      implicit deflator for personal consumption expenditures figured from survey
      quarter to survey quarter of the years in question.
                                                           Table 9-23

                                  Distribution of Selected Assets and Respondent Population
                            Across Household-Size Classes at 1962, 1970, and 1977 Survey Dates
                                                           (in percent)
Number of                   Retail           Wholesale             Real-            Net               Value

  Persons                  Financial         Financial             Estate       Transactable            of        Respondent
                                     -
in Household                Assets            Assets               Equity          Wealth        -   Homes        Population
            1962 Survey

One                       24.6 (1.12)        15.5 (.70)          12.2 (.55)      15.0 ( .68)         7.9 ( .36)       22.0
Two                       42.5 (1.73)        36.2 (1.48)         35.1 (1.43)     36.6 (1.49)      28.7 (1.17)         24.5
Three or more             32.9 ( .61)        48.3 (.90)          52.7 (.99)     48.3 (.90)        63.4 (1.19)         53.5
All Respondents           100.0             100.0               100.0           99.9             100.0               160.0
            1970 Survey
One                        18.7 (1.14)       11.6 (.71)          11.1   (.68)    12.6 (.77)          8.3 (.51)        16.4
Two                       48.6 (1.61)        55.0 (1.82)         38.6 (1.28)    43.7 (1.45)       30.4 (1.01)         30.2
Three or more             32.6 (.61)         33.4 (.63)          50.3.( .94)    43.7 (.82)       61.3 (1.15)          53.4
All Respondents           99.9              100.0               100.0           100.0            100.0               100.0
(Table 9-23 Continued)

              1977 Survey

One                         21.6(1.04)      14.7(.71)          10.7(.52)         13.6 (.66)              9.0 ( .43)        20.7
Two                         40.3(1.30)      35.9(1.16)        36.2(1.17)        36.9   (1.19)          30.6(.99)           31.0
Three   or   more           38.1 (.79)      49.3   (1.02)     53.1 (1.10)       49.5 (1.03)
                                                                                ____                   60.4     (1.25)     48.2
All Respondents             100.0           99.9             100.0             100.0                  100.0                99.9
Note:
                                                                                                    portfolio   category
        The figures recorded in parentheses report the percentage of outstanding balances in each

         controlled per each one percent of the respondent population occupying the cohort.




                                                                                                                                  -.4
                                                                                                                                  (n
                                                              Table 9-24

                    Dollar Increment in Mean Wealth and Ratio of Accumulated Mean Saving Per Year to

                                     Average Survey-Date Incomes, by Type of Household


                                             1962 to 1970                               1970 to 1977
                                                    Real Increment                            Real Increment
                                   D oilar           Per Year as              Dollar            Per Year as          Difference
                                 Increment           a Percentage           Increment          a Percentage        in Real SaIngs
                                  in Mean           of Mean Real              in Mean          of Mean Real        Rate Between
 Type of                        Transactable        Income in the          Transactable        Income in the            Eras
Household                          Wealth         Two Survey Years
                                                  _________________           Wealth
                                                                           _____________     Two Survey Years       (in percent)
Single, One in Household            7068                    13.1              7429                     0.5             -12.6
Single, Two or More                 5866                    6.5                806                     -9.7    —     --16.2-
Married, Two Only                  17672                    17.3             19495                     0.2            -17.1
Married, Three or More              8376                    6.0              25820                  10.8                4.8
Other, One Only                     9796                 21.6                10372                     -0.2           -21.8
Other, Two or More                  2495                     1.6             11316                     9.4              7.8
All Households Classified          10698                    10.5             18285                     5.7              -4.8
   ote:     Real savings rates are constructed as explained in the note to Table 9-4.
            A few observations (7 in 1962 and 3 in 1970) coded as "married, one only" are

            assumed to be miscoded. They are included in the "married, two only" class.
                                                                                         77


                                              Table 9-25

                Gum ulative   Percentage Change in the Real and Nominal Value of
                        Accumulated Mean Savings Between Survey Dates,
                                    by Type of Household Head

                                              (in percent)


                                        Curiiulative                    Cumulative

                                           Percentage                   Percentage
                                      Change in Mean                  Change in Mean
                                        Net Wealth                      Net Wealth
 Type of                                    Between                        Between
Household                              1962 and 1970                   1970 and 1977
                               Nominal Wealth Real Wealth Nominal Wealth Real Wealth
Single,OneinHousehold              109.2                66.4        54.9                 1.6
Single, Two or More                 58.1                25.8         5.0               -31.1
Married,   TwoOnly                  93.3                53.7        53.2                0.5
Married, Threeor More               72.8                37.4       129.8               50.7
Other, One Only                     95.8                55.8        51.8               -0.4

Other, Two    or More               35.6                 7.9       119.0               43.6

All   Households Classified         88.5                50.0        80.3               18.2

Note:   As in Table 9-5, percentage changes in real wealth are calculated from
         base-date wealth figures that have been inflated by the observed cumulative
         growth rate in the implicit deflator for personal consumption expenditures,
         calculated from survey quarter to survey quarter of the years in question.
                                                                                      78



                                           Table 9-26
                        Age of Heads of Different Types of Households
                                     in 1962, 1970, and 1977
                                           (in    years)




                                  1962 Survey                 1970 Survey       1977 Survey

  Type of                     Mean      Standard           Mean    Standard   Mean Standard

Household                     ge Deviation                 Age    Deviation   Age Deviation


Single, One   in Household    35.5         17.6            33.8      17.6     36.2    18.2

Single,   Two or More         43.8         19.0            40.4      16.8     35.4    17.6

Married,   Two Only           54.6         15.9            54.8      17.5     53.6    17.5
Married, Three or More        40.0         10.9            40.7      11.4     41.0    11.7

Other, One Only               62.3         13.9            62.7      13.6     62.2    16.7
Other, Two or More            46.5         15.0            46.4      15.3     45.4    15.3
All Households Classified     45.5        16.1             46.5      16.5     46.8    17.2



   Note: A few observations (7 in 1962 and 3 in 1970) coded as "married, one only" are
            thrown into the "married, two only" class.
                                                              Table 9-27

                                  HomeownershipRate and Mortgage Status in 1962, 1970,
                                                     and 1977, by Household Type

                                                              (in percent)


                                              1962                               1970          —                 1977

                                                 Percent of                         Percent of                      Percent of
                                                 Homeowners                        Homeowners                     Homeowners
                                Percent                with            Percent          with        Percent             with
  Type of                       Owning               Mortgage          Owning       Mortgage        Owning          Mortgage
Household                        Home                 Debt              Home            Debt         Home               Debt


Single, One in Household          10.2                 17.4              15.6           28.0       18.2 (21.0)     46.9 (43.2)
Single, Twcor More               33.3                  25.0             32.8            40.0       27.6 (33.7)     48.1 (39.4)
                                          -
MaEr.ied, T,o Only               65.7                  37.9             67.7            36.4       70.0 (77.4)     44.6 (42.3)

Married, Three or More           66.2                  76.2             70.9            77.8       77.3 (81.5)     79.9 (78.1)

Other, One Only                  43.7                  19.8             59.8            23.2       48.7 (60.2)     27.9 (24.5)

Other, Two or More               47.1                  49.2             43.7            47.9       44.1 (54.2)     62.9 (56.6)
All Households Classified        55.8                  58.7             62.3            58.1       62.5 (69.0)     62.4 (58.9)
   Notes: Figures in parentheses report the homeownershipand mortgagor rates in the unedited 1977 sample.
            A few observations (7 in 1962 and 3 in 1970) coded as "married, one only" are thrown into   the "married,
            two only" class.
