                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     UNMEASURED INVESTMENT AND THE PUZZLING U.S. BOOM IN THE 1990S

                                         Ellen R. McGrattan
                                         Edward C. Prescott

                                        Working Paper 13499
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13499


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




The authors thank the National Science Foundation for financial support and seminar participants and
referees for comments on earlier drafts of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ellen R. McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling U.S. Boom in the 1990s
Ellen R. McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 13499
October 2007
JEL No. E24,E32,O47

                                                ABSTRACT

The basic neoclassical growth model accounts well for the postwar cyclical behavior of the U.S. economy
prior to the 1990s, provided that variations in population growth, depreciation rates, total factor productivity,
and taxes are incorporated. For the 1990s, the model predicts a depressed economy, when in fact the
U.S. economy boomed. We extend the base model by introducing intangible investment and non-neutral
technology change with respect to producing intangible investment goods and find that the 1990s are
not puzzling in light of this new theory. There is compelling micro and macro evidence for our extension,
and the predictions of the theory are in conformity with U.S. national products, incomes, and capital
gains. We use the theory to compare current accounting measures for labor productivity and investment
with the corresponding measures for the model economy with intangible investment. Our findings
show that standard accounting measures greatly understate the boom in productivity and investment.

Ellen R. McGrattan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER
erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us

Edward C. Prescott
Economics Department
ASU / Main Campus
PO BOX 873806
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
edward.prescott@asu.edu
The basic neoclassical growth model accounts well for the postwar cyclical behavior of the
U.S. economy prior to the 1990s, provided that variations in population growth, deprecia-
tion rates, total factor productivity (TFP), and taxes are incorporated. 1 The behavior of
the 1990s, however, is strikingly at variance with this model, particularly in comparison
with the boom in hours, but also in comparison with the behavior of most aggregate series
that business cycle theorists study. To put it succinctly, the model predicts a depressed
1990s economy, when in fact it boomed.

      In this paper, we extend the base model by introducing intangible investment and
non-neutral technology change with respect to producing intangible investment goods and
find that, in light of this new theory, the 1990s are not puzzling. Intangible investment is
excluded from GDP because it is difficult to measure. Examples include research and de-
velopment (R&D), advertising, and investments in building organizations. Some intangible
investment is financed by owners of capital and is expensed rather than capitalized. Some
is investment in sweat equity financed by worker-owners who allocate effort and time to
their business and receive compensation at less than their market rate. These investments
are made with the expectation of realizing future profits or capital gains when the business
goes public or is sold.

      We have found compelling evidence that both of these types of unmeasured investment
were abnormally high in the 1990s. The National Science Foundation’s report of R&D
investment shows that R&D relative to GDP grew by 30 percent between 1994 and 2000. 2
The Current Population Surveys of the U.S. Department of Labor show a shift of labor into
information technology–related and managerial occupations, with greater opportunities
for business owners to make capital gains on expensed and sweat investment. If we look
at patterns of national incomes, we also find evidence of abnormally high investment at
the macroeconomic level Corporate profits were falling as output was rising, suggesting
that investment in R&D and other intangible capital was abnormally high. Similarly,


  1   See, for example, Chen, İmrohoroǧlu, and İmrohoroǧlu (2007) and our technical appendix (McGrattan
      and Prescott 2007).
  2   Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005, 2006) include other categories of expenditures and conclude that
      over the 1990s, total intangible investment was large and was increasing as a share of business output.

                                                      1
compensation per hour was low during the 1990s, suggesting that sweat investment was
likewise abnormally high.

      The fact that measured factor incomes were low when output and hours were boom-
ing is consistent with a theory that differentiates economic income and measured income,
which need not move together and indeed did not move together in the 1990s. To uncover
what actually happened during the 1990s, we use our extended theory and U.S. national
income and product account (NIPA) data. Specifically, we incorporate intangible invest-
ment into an otherwise basic neoclassical growth model. Two technologies are available
in the business sector: one for producing final goods and services and one for producing
intangible capital. We use the extended model to determine the path for intangible invest-
ment, and show why including this type of investment is critical for understanding the
boom in the U.S. economy in the 1990s.

      We allow the rates of technological change to differ across these two technologies,
thus allowing for a technology boom in the sector producing intangible capital—a boom
like the one that occurred in the United States. During the 1990s, rapid technological
advancements were being made in industries that are relatively intensive in producing
intangible capital, such as those related to information technology. Two notable pieces of
evidence (Doms 2004) are what happened to Intel processor speeds, which increased 4.6
percent per month in the period 1997–2000, and fiber-optic throughput, which rose from
2.5 gigabits to 400 gigabits per second between 1995 and 2000. Given that households
equate wages and rental rates across production activities, we have a way to identify the
TFP paths and to estimate the magnitude of intangible investment. We estimate that net
intangible investment in the business sector was about 3 percent of GDP prior to 1990,
rose to over 8 percent of GDP in the 1990s, and then returned to the level of the early
1990s in 2001.

      We could have modified the basic model by introducing large and variable shocks to
preferences for leisure, which is a common practice in business cycle research.3 However,

  3   See, for example, Hall (1997), Chang and Schorfheide (2003), Galı́ (2005), Comin and Gertler (2006),
      Galı́, Gertler, and López-Salido (2007), Ireland and Schuh (2007), Kahn and Rich (2007), and Smets
      and Wouters (2007) who point out that these shocks proxy for variations in tax rates and other labor

                                                    2
doing so would have violated two criteria that we require to successfully resolve the puzzling
1990s boom—or any other puzzle, for that matter. The first is the input justification
criterion. By this, we mean that we require our exogenous inputs to be consistent with
micro and macro empirical evidence. A large rise in factor productivity in the sector
producing intangible capital is consistent with the U.S. technology boom and the shifts in
employment into high-technology occupations and managerial positions. A large rise in
preferences for leisure, on the other hand, cannot be justified by any observations on tax
rates, tax credits, or welfare benefits.

      The second of our two criteria for successfully resolving of the puzzling 1990s boom
is the prediction criterion. At a minimum, to satisfy this criterion, a theory’s predictions
must not be counterfactual. A stronger requirement—one that is satisfied by our theory—
is to make correct predictions for data that were not used to set parameters or exogenous
inputs. Thus, we do not follow the widely-used practice in the business cycle literature of
including the same number of exogenous inputs as observed time series, which is done to
ensure a perfect fit between data and theory.

      Here, there are two sequences of TFP parameters that are free in the analysis and
many time series that must be in conformity with the theory. We find that the equilibrium
paths of our extended theory are in close conformity with time series of both NIPA products
and incomes and, most importantly, with the increase in capital gains that occurred in the
second half of the 1990s. This increase was large, with the average real gains going from
6 percent of GDP in the period 1953–1994 to 12 percent of GDP in the period 1995–2003.
Data on factor incomes and capital gains are not used to identify the TFP parameters. In
contrast, a theory based on a large shift in preferences for leisure during the 1990s does
not account for the observed changes in factor incomes and capital gains.4

      After demonstrating that the model’s predictions are in conformity with U.S. time
series, we use the model to compare current accounting measures for investment and labor


      market distortions, which are especially important in accounting for changes in hours. In McGrattan
      and Prescott (2007), we show that labor tax rates do account for much of the cyclical variation in
      hours prior to the 1990s but not in the 1990s.
  4   See McGrattan and Prescott (2007) for details.

                                                    3
productivity with corresponding measures that include expensed and sweat investment.
Solow’s (1987) remark that “you can see the computer age everywhere but in the pro-
ductivity statistics” is pertinent for our findings. If expensed and sweat investments are
included, the model predicts an earlier and larger boom in productivity than current ac-
counting measures would indicate. Based on this prediction, we conclude that ignoring
these two types of intangible investment distorts the true picture of the U.S. economy in
the 1990s.

    Our findings show that standard productivity measures greatly understate the actual
rise in labor productivity whether we consider the overall economy or the business sector.
Our analysis is not subject to the criticism of Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000) who point out
that intangible investment is “not well captured by traditional macroeconomic measure-
ment approaches.” Here, we explicitly model the intangible investment. Accounting for
intangible investment, we find that the boom in business productivity began earlier and
was bigger than standard statistics show. Over the period 1993–2000, the difference in
labor productivity growth due to the inclusion of intangible investment is 0.8 percent per
year.

    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we establish that basic theory—
abstracting from unmeasured investment—generates strongly counterfactual predictions.
In particular, the basic growth model does not generate a boom in the 1990s. If we extend
the model to have two sectors, a private business sector and a non-business sector, then
there is some improvement in the model’s predictions given that business TFP boomed
in the late 1990s. However, the rise in TFP is too small and occurs too late to account
for the boom in hours that began in 1992. In Section 2, we summarize the evidence of
increased intangible investment which motivates our extension of the basic theory. The
extended theory includes expensed and sweat investment, and in Section 3, we assess its
predictions. In Section 4, we reevaluate the performance of the U.S. economy in the 1990s
through the lens of the extended theory. Conclusions are found in Section 5.




                                            4
1. Predictions of the Basic Theory without Intangible Investment

Our starting point is the basic growth model used in the study of business cycles. This
model abstracts from intangible investment. We treat TFP, tax rates, and population
exogenously. We then use U.S. data for the 1990s to establish that there are large deviations
from the basic model, indicating that this model must be abstracting from something
important. We show that the nature of the deviations points to unmeasured investments.


1.1. The Basic Growth Model

In the standard one-sector growth model, given initial capital stock k0 , the problem for
the stand-in household is to choose consumption c, investment x, and hours h to maximize
                                           ∞
                                           X
                                       E         β t U (ct , ht )Nt                             (1.1)
                                           t=0

subject to the constraints

         ct + xt = rt kt + wt ht − τct ct − τht wt ht − τkt kt − τpt (rt kt − δkt − τkt kt )

                                    − τdt {rt kt − xt − τkt kt − τpt (rt kt − δkt − τkt kt )}   (1.2)

         kt+1 = [(1 − δ)kt + xt ]/(1 + η),                                                      (1.3)

where variables are written in per capita terms and Nt = N0 (1 + η)t is the population in
t. Capital is paid rent rt , and labor is paid wage wt . Households discount future utility
at rate β, and capital depreciates at rate δ. Taxes are levied on consumption at rate τ c ,
labor income at rate τh , tangible capital (that is, property) at rate τk , profits at rate τp ,
and capital distributions at rate τd . Note that taxable income for the tax on profits is net
of depreciation and property tax, and taxable income for the tax on distributions is net of
property tax and profits tax.

    The aggregate production function is

                                        Yt = At F (Kt , Ht ),                                   (1.4)

where capital letters denote aggregates. The parameter At is TFP that varies over time.
The firm rents capital and labor. If profits are maximized, then the rental rates are equal

                                                     5
to the marginal products. The goods market clears so Nt (ct + xt ) = Yt . Here, c includes
both private and public consumption, and x includes both private and public investment.

       We now show that this basic growth model generates grossly counterfactual predic-
tions during the 1990s. To do so, we compute the model’s equilibrium path with households
having perfect foresight of future changes in tax rates, TFP, and populations. In Appendix
A, we discuss our U.S. data sources and the adjustments we make to construct the em-
pirical counterparts of the model variables. In Appendix B, we describe and motivate the
parameterization we use for the model. The parameter values used to compute the equi-
librium path here are summarized in Table B.1 under “One-Sector Model, No Intangible
Investment.” The paths for TFP and tax rates are reported in Table B.2.5

       Our estimate for TFP is U.S. GDP divided by F (K, H), with K equal to the total
stock of U.S. tangible capital and H equal to total hours. Here, F (K, H) = K θ H 1−θ . The
tax rate changes we consider are variations in the labor tax rates τht and consumption tax
rates τct , as constructed in Prescott (2004) with data from U.S. national accounts. During
the 1990s, there was little change in legislation affecting capital taxation, and therefore we
simply fix the rates τkt , τpt , and τdt .

       The utility flow function is

                                    U (c, h) = log(c) + ψ log(1 − h),

which is standard in the business cycle literature. We choose the level of capital tax rates,
the depreciation rate δ, and the utility parameter ψ so that the model’s consumption share,
investment share, factor inputs, and tax revenues are consistent with U.S. levels in 1990.
(See appendices A and B for details.)

       In Figure 1, we plot the model’s predicted per capita hours of work along with the
U.S. actual per capita hours, indexed so that 1990 equals 100. The difference between the
series is striking. Actual per capita hours rose 8 percent between 1992 and 1999, whereas
the predicted series falls significantly during the same period.
   5   In McGrattan and Prescott (2007), we demonstrate that the perfect foresight assumption is innocuous
       by comparing the results to stochastic simulations. We also demonstrate the robustness of the results
       by varying parameters.

                                                      6
    In Figure 2, we plot the model’s predicted output along with U.S. real GDP. Both
series are adjusted for population and a secular trend of 1.02t . Although the boom in
output was not quite as large as the boom in hours, the model predicts that the economy
should have been depressed. This counterfactual prediction arises from the fact that the
tax rates on labor rose during the 1990s and economy-wide TFP was below trend during
most of the decade.

    The basic model has neutral TFP change with respect to the business and non-business
sectors. In fact, TFP change was non-neutral for these sectors. A question that arises
is whether modeling this non-neutrality of TFP change could significantly narrow the
large deviation from theory. In the two-sector version of the model, households solve the
same problem, although they now have to allocate capital and labor to two technologies,
“business” and “non-business.” (See McGrattan and Prescott (2007) for model details.)

    In Appendix A we describe how we categorize business and non-business activity. In
Appendix B, we describe and motivate the parameterization for this version of the model.
Parameter values used to compute the equilibrium path here are summarized in Table B.1
under “Two-Sector Model, No Intangible Investment.” As before, the paths for TFP and
tax rates are exogenous. These are reported in Table B.2. We assume that households
in the model make exactly the same choices for non-business activity as U.S. households.
We simply set the values of non-business hours, investment, and value added exogenously
to U.S. levels. We treat this sector exogenously because it is quite small compared to the
business sector. Furthermore, if there are any deviations between the model’s predictions
and U.S. data, we can attribute these deviations to our model of the business sector, which
did have a boom in TFP.

    We find that modeling the non-neutrality of TFP in business and non-business activity
does not resolve the puzzling 1990s boom. Model predictions are still far from observations.
In particular, output is still predicted to be below trend throughout the decade, and
per capita hours are still predicted to be low. (Figures of these series and others are in
McGrattan and Prescott 2007.) The boom in business-sector TFP is too small and too
late. Clearly, something else gave rise to the puzzling behavior of the U.S. economy in the


                                             7
1990s.


1.2. Investigating the Deviation

Why are the model’s predictions so far off for the basic neoclassical growth model? The
main reason is the behavior of TFP and tax rates. Given the behavior of these inputs, the
model predicts an after-tax real wage, (1 − τh )w, below its secular trend. Not surprisingly,
then, the model predicts that hours are low and output is below trend.

    We turn next to evidence that using the wrong measure of output and understating
labor productivity and, therefore, the after-tax real wage accounts for the large deviation
between theory and data. The mismeasurement stems from abnormally large unmeasured
intangible investment during this period. Standard measures of output growth are dis-
torted when the importance of intangible investments grows.



2. Evidence of Increased Intangible Investment

We present two types of evidence that unmeasured intangible investment was abnormally
large during the 1990s. One type of evidence is related to the behavior of NIPA com-
pensation and profits, the other type to the technology boom going on during the period.
Because intangible investments are expensed in the NIPA, measurements of factor incomes
are understated to a greater extent in periods when these investments are high. We show
that that was true for the 1990s. We then present evidence that, in fact, during the tech-
nology boom, the level of investment was indeed high and led to large capital gains that
are missed by the NIPA’s income measure.


2.1. Low Compensation and Corporate Profits

If all incomes were included in the national accounts, we would expect to see compensation
per hour and profits to be high during a boom. But an examination of the U.S. national
accounts reveals that compensation per hour and profits were low during the boom period,
suggesting that unmeasured expensed and sweat investment was abnormally high.


                                             8
      In Figure 3, we plot average weekly hours of work for the noninstitutional population,
age 16 to 64, which is the same series plotted in Figures 1 and 2. We also plot the wage rate
corresponding to these hours, which is computed as follows. We take NIPA compensation
and deflate it by the GDP deflator. We then correct for population growth by dividing real
compensation by this population. Finally, because there is technological growth, we divide
the wage rate by the factor 1.02t , where t indexes time.6 For all of the 1990s, NIPA real
compensation per hour detrended in this way is below the 1990 level, despite the boom in
hours.7

      In Figure 4, we compare NIPA GDP and corporate profits, both deflated by the GDP
deflator and adjusted for population and a secular trend of 1.02t . We see that profits fall
in the late 1990s when GDP, R&D, and capital gains are high.


2.2. The Technology Boom

We have found additional direct evidence that unmeasured investment was abnormally
high in the 1990s. The 1990s was a period of rapid technological advances. Companies
were increasing R&D, and the payoffs were evident in increased initial public offerings
(IPOs) and mergers and acquisitions. Further, the rise in hours was particularly large
for the more educated in occupations in which people make large sweat investments on
average.

      One indicator of increased intangible investment is increased funding of R&D, which
is expensed by corporations. The National Science Foundation (NSF) (1953–2003) reports
that industry R&D increased 68 percent between 1994 and 2000, whereas GDP rose only
39 percent. A significant fraction of the company-funded R&D was done by companies
in information technology industries. Using data from the NSF, Doms (2004) estimates
that the information technology share of company-funded R&D averaged 27 percent in the
period 1997–2001.

  6   The particular choice of 1.02 for the secular trend does not affect any results, but makes it easier to
      see the patterns in this and later figures.
  7   In earlier work (McGrattan and Prescott 2005b), we abstract from sweat equity investment and treat
      NIPA compensation as true labor income. Doing so reduces the estimate of intangible investment.

                                                      9
      Another indicator of abnormally large intangible investment is the dramatic increase
in IPOs and mergers and acquisitions. According to data from the Thomson Financial
Securities Data Corporation (SDC) database (also available in Ritter and Welch 2002,
Table 1), gross proceeds from IPOs were significantly higher in the 1990s than in the
1980s. Gross proceeds of IPOs averaged $8.2 billion over the period 1980–89 and $30.9
billion over the period 1990–99. Large increases in the value of existing equity, and therefore
large capital gains, are typically associated with IPOs. Because these gains are not included
in NIPA, NIPA incomes understate true income. Other related evidence available from the
SDC database is the volume of announced mergers and acquisitions. The volume rose from
$0.6 trillion in 1994 to $3.4 trillion by 2000. As in the case of IPOs, the accrued capital
gains are not included in NIPA measures of income.

      We have presented evidence that business owners made abnormally large unmeasured
investments and accrued abnormally large capital gains during the 1990s boom. We now
present evidence that the hours of certain categories of workers that tend to have a dis-
proportionate number of sweat investors increased disproportionately in the 1992–2000
period. These categories include those who have had at least a year of college education
and who work as managers, proprietors, computer analysts, and in certain financial oc-
cupations. We use Current Population Survey (CPS) data to determine hours worked in
these categories.8 These categories of workers accounted for 50 percent of the increase in
hours between 1992 and 2000, even though they accounted for only 10 percent of hours in
1992.

      The fall in hours in 2000 was coincident with a fall in information technology invest-
ment, which occurred partly because of regulatory factors. According to Couper, Hejkal,
and Wolman (2003) and Doms (2004), the telecommunications sector contributed signifi-
cantly to the technology bust. Part of the problem was that the demand for long-haul fiber
capacity was not as great as anticipated. Another problem was what Federal Communica-
tions Commission chairman Michael Powell called “the problem of legal instability in the
  8   Here, we are referring to data compiled from the March supplement of the CPS survey. We split
      workers into two groups: those with variable EDUCREC greater than or equal to 8 and variable
      OCC in the set {4, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22, 34, 37, 64, 65, 229, 23, 24, 25, 225} and the remainder.
      See Ruggles et al. (2004) for more details.

                                                      10
court system” (Powell 2002). The Telecommunications Act of 1996 brought competition to
local telephone service, but it generated many legal battles as well. According to Couper,
Hejkal, and Wolman (2003), the regulatory uncertainty has discouraged telecommunica-
tions companies from undertaking the large-scale investments needed for fiber-optic service
to individual residences.

    In summary, we find compelling evidence that intangible investment was abnormally
high during the 1990s. This motivates an extension of the basic model with both tangible
and intangible investment and technological change that gives rise to an increase in the
importance of intangible investment.



3. Predictions of the Extended Theory with Intangible Investment

We now extend the basic growth model to include intangible investment and non-neutral
technological change with respect to production of final goods and services and production
of new intangible investment goods. Intangible investments are made by businesses, so the
extended model distinguishes business and non-business activity. We start by describing
the technologies available to businesses, the optimal business size, and the aggregate pro-
duction technology. The household problem remains the same as in Section 2 except for
an additional investment choice. We examine the extended model’s predictions and show
that these predictions are in conformity with U.S. observations during the 1990s.


3.1. Extensions

The aggregate production technology is characterized by the two aggregate production
relations:

                             ybt = A1t (kT1 t )θ1 (kI t )φ1 (h1t )1−θ1 −φ1                (3.1)

                             xIt = A2t (kT2 t )θ2 (kI t )φ2 (h2t )1−θ2 −φ2 .              (3.2)

Firms produce business output yb using their intangible capital kI , tangible capital kT1 , and
labor h1 . Firms produce intangible capital xI —such as new brands, new products R&D,
patents, etc.—using intangible capital kI , tangible capital kT2 , and labor h2 .

                                                  11
      Note that kI is an input to both business sectors; it is not split between them as is
the case for tangible capital and labor. A brand name is used both to sell final goods and
services and to develop new brands. Patents are used by the producers and the researchers.
The aggregation theory underlying this technology is developed in Appendix C.

      Given (kT 0 , kI0 ), the stand-in household maximizes
                                           ∞
                                           X
                                       E         β t [log ct + ψ log(1 − ht )]Nt
                                           t=0

subject to

           c t + x T t + q t xI t = r T t k T t + r I t k I t + w t ht + ζ t

                                     − τct ct − τht (wt ht − (1 − χ)qt xI t ) − τkt kT t

                                     − τpt {rT t kT t + rI t kI t − δT kT t − χqt xI t − τkt kT t }

                                     − τdt {rT t kT t + rI t kI t − xT t − χqt xI t − τkt kT t

                                            − τpt (rT t kT t + rI t kI t − δT kT t − χqt xI t − τkt kT t )}

                        kT ,t+1 = [(1 − δT )kT t + xT t ]/(1 + η)                                             (3.3)

                         kI ,t+1 = [(1 − δI )kI t + xI t ]/(1 + η).                                           (3.4)

As before, all variables are in per capita units and there is growth in population at rate η.
Consumption c includes both private and public consumption, and tangible investment xT
includes both private and public investment. The relative price of intangible investment
and consumption is q.9 The rental rates for business tangible and intangible capital are
denoted by rT and rI , respectively, and the wage rate for labor is denoted by w. Inputs
are paid their marginal products. The tax system is the same as in the standard model.
Other income is denoted by ζ and is exogenous in the household’s decision problem. Other
income includes government transfers and non-business capital income net of taxes and
investment. Non-business labor income is included in wh.

      As before, we treat hours, investment, and output in the non-business sector exoge-
nously because this sector is not important for the issues being addressed. To be precise,
  9   For some purposes, modeling the changes in technology that induce changes in the relative price of
      ct and xT t is important. See, for example, Hornstein and Krusell (1996) and Greenwood, Hercowitz,
      and Krusell (1997). For our purposes, it is reasonable to abstract from this change in technology.

                                                             12
we set the levels of non-business hours h̄n , investment x̄n , and output ȳn in the model’s
non-business sector equal to U.S. levels. Measured output, which corresponds to GDP,
is the sum of yb and ȳn . Measured tangible investment is the sum of business tangible
investment xT and non-business tangible investment x̄n . Measured hours h is the sum of
business hours h1 + h2 and non-business hours h̄n .

      Let χ denote the fraction of intangible investment financed by capital owners. The
amount χqxI is expensed investment, financed by the capital owners who have lower ac-
counting profits the greater this type of investment. The amount (1 − χ)qxI is sweat
investment, financed by workers who have lower compensation the greater this type of
investment.10

      Gross domestic product in the economy is the sum of total consumption (public plus
private) and tangible investment (public plus private) for business and non-business; in
per capita terms GDP is c + xT + x̄n . Gross domestic income (GDI) is the sum of all
labor income less sweat investment wh− (1 − χ)qxI , business capital income less expensed
investment, rT kT + rI kI − χqxI , and non-business capital income (which is found residually
as the difference between GDP and the other components of GDI).


3.2. A Resolution of Seemingly Low Wages

We showed earlier that there is a large deviation between predictions of the basic one-
sector and two-sector growth models and U.S. data. The models predict that after-tax
real wages in the 1990s should have been below trend, leading to low per-capita hours and
output below its secular trend. With our extended model, the measure of the real wage is
different and is consistent with the behavior of output and hours.

      The standard model measure of the business real wage is

                                     ŵt = (1 − θ)ybt /(h1t + h2t ),                               (3.5)

where θ is the capital share, ybt is measured business value added, and h1t + h2t is total
 10   In the absence of informational or financial constraints, the choice depends in a knife-edge way on
      the tax treatment of the expensed and sweat investment. This is analogous to the result of Miller
      (1977) for the debt-equity choice.

                                                   13
business hours. The problem with the measure of labor productivity on the right side of
equation (3.5) is that some hours are used to accumulate intangible capital. The hours
used to produce ybt are h1t and, therefore, the real wage measure is

                                     wt = (1 − θ)ybt /h1t ,                               (3.6)

where θ = θ1+φ1 and ybt /h1t is labor productivity in production of final goods and services.
The labor input h2t is used to produce output qt xI t and is not part of the labor input in
producing ybt . If the relative size of h2t relative to ht increases, then wt /ŵt increases and
the percentage understatement of true wages becomes more severe.

     The evidence presented earlier suggests that advances in technology were particularly
large in activities related to intangible production. This would imply an increase in A2t /A1t .
Our hypothesis is that A2t /A1t did indeed increase significantly and that such an increase
leads to an increase in the relative hours allocated to producing intangible investments,
namely h2t /ht .


3.3. Identifying Total Factor Productivities

In order to identify total factor productivities, the magnitude of the inputs and the outputs
to the production functions must be determined. This requires determining the split of
hours and tangible capital between two production activities in the business sector and
the magnitude of intangible investment and capital.

     To determine how much labor is allocated to the two production activities, we use the
fact that the after-tax real wage rate is equal to the marginal rate of substitution between
leisure and consumption, ψ(1 + τct )ct /(1 − ht ). We have observations on consumption
c, total hours h, business value added yb , and tax rates. We use these observations to
determine hours in production of final goods and services as follows:
                                                 
                     1     1 − θ 1 − φ1    1 − τht    ybt
                    ht =                                    (1 − ht ).                    (3.7)
                                ψ          1 + τct     ct

Hours in the accumulation of intangible capital is determined residually, h2t = ht −h1t − h̄nt .
Equation (3.7) is simply a rewriting of the household’s intratemporal condition relating

                                              14
the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption to (1 − τh )w using w
in (3.6).

       Equating the marginal products of labor in the two activities yields an equation that
can be solved for qt xI t as a function of the hours h1 and h2 determined above and business
value added yb which is observed,
                                                                    
                                                      1 − θ 1 − φ1       ybt 2
                                     q t xI t =                             h .                (3.8)
                                                      1 − θ 2 − φ2       h1t t

       The allocation of tangible capital across the two activities in the business sector is
determined in a similar way. The initial stock kT ,1990 and the sequence of business tangible
investments imply the sequence of stocks {kT t } from (3.3). Equating the marginal products
of tangible capital across the two business activities implies
                                                            
                                 1             θ1 ybt
                                kT t =                         kT t ,
                                         θ1 ybt + θ2 qt xI t

where kT2 t = kT t − kT1 t is residually determined.

       If we have a sequence for the price qt of intangible investment, we could use the already
computed sequence of outputs qt xI t to determine a sequence for intangible investment xI t ,
and, with an initial condition for the stock kI,1990 , we could use (3.4) to determine the
sequence of stocks.11 But we do not have qt and, therefore, we use the intertemporal
condition                                                                   
                                          1 + τct          Uc (ct+1 , ht+1 )
                            1=β                                                    Rt,t+1 ,    (3.9)
                                        1 + τc,t+1           Uc (ct , ht )
where Rt,t+1 is the after-tax return realized by the household investing in intangible capital,
                 n
         Rt,t+1 = qt+1 (1−χ)(1−τh,t+1)(1−δI )+(1−τp,t+1 )(1 − τd,t+1 )[qt+1 χ(1−δI )
                                                                  o
                        + (φ1 yb,t+1 +φ2 qt+1 xI ,t+1 )/kI ,t+1 ]
                                        
                                            qt [(1−χ)(1 − τht )+χ(1−τpt )(1−τdt )] ,          (3.10)

along with the capital accumulation equation and the already identified sequence for q t xI t .
This relation implicitly identifies qt+1 as a function of current variables and qt . As a

  11   We use the steady-state stock to initialize intangible capital.

                                                          15
terminal condition, we assume that the price in the year following the end of our sample
is equal to the price in the last year of our sample.

      The final step in identifying the TFP parameters is to use the production functions
(3.1) and (3.2) to determine the {A1t , A2t }. The resulting sequences for these two TFPs
are plotted in Figure 5 along with a more standard measure of business-sector TFP that
abstracts from intangible capital: business value added divided by kT0.33
                                                                      t (ht − h̄nt )
                                                                                     0.67
                                                                                          , where
kT t is tangible capital in the business sector and ht − h̄nt is total business hours. The latter
measure is labeled “U.S. Business Sector.” All series are real and divided by 1.02t .

      The standard measure of business-sector TFP shows some acceleration beginning in
1996. The implied TFPs for the model with intangible investment show larger increases
that begin earlier. For example, in the sector producing final goods and services, predicted
growth in TFP between 1993 and 2000 is 0.7 percent greater per year than is found by
constructing the standard measure. In the sector producing intangible capital, the implied
growth in TFP between 1993 and 2000 is 2.7 percent greater per year than that found
with the standard measure. All three measures show some decline after 2000, which could
well have been due to regulatory and legal factors impinging negatively on efficiency.

      The patterns of the TFP sequences are consistent with the micro and macro evidence
we cite in Section 2. For this reason, we view this theory as one that satisfies our exogenous
input justification criterion. We next show that the theory satisfies our prediction criterion.


3.4. Model Predictions

Treating the TFP sequences as exogenous inputs, we compute the equilibrium path of all
of the variables and compare them to U.S. data. All of the parameters used in computing
the equilibrium are described and motivated in Appendix B and summarized in Table B.1,
under the heading “Extended Model, with Intangible Investment,” and in Table B.2.12

      In Figure 6, we display the implied intangible investment as a share of total output,


 12   Income shares listed in Table B.1 are the same across activities. We do sensitivity checks on these
      shares and other parameters of the model to ensure that the main quantitative results are robust.
      See McGrattan and Prescott (2007).

                                                   16
by which we mean GDP plus intangible investment. This figure displays the bottom line
of our study: the value of this investment is large and increased dramatically in the 1990s.
That is precisely what we see in Figure 6. Our estimate of net intangible investment—
expensed plus sweat—in the business sector is a little over 3 percent of total output—GDP
plus intangible investment—in 1990 and rises to nearly 8 percent of total output before
returning to the level of the early 1990s.13

      We now assess the conformity of two sets of predictions. The first are predictions of
variables used to identify the sequences of TFP in Figure 5. These series are hours and
components of GDP. The second are predictions of variables that are not used to identify
the sequences of TFP. These series are NIPA factor incomes and capital gains reported in
the U.S. Flow of Funds (1945–2005); the latter is especially important given the central
role that capital gains play in our extended theory. We find that the model is in conformity
with both sets of predictions.


Internal Conformity

      We start with a comparison to total hours and to components of GDP. Note that
although we used equilibrium conditions to identify the TFP parameters, the predicted
and actual series may differ because we used only one of the two intertemporal conditions
when determining the TFP paths. Condition (3.9) relates the marginal rate of substitution
in consumption between period t and t+1 to the after-tax return on investing in intangible
capital. The second intertemporal condition, which was not used, relates the marginal rate
of substitution in consumption to the after-tax return on investing in tangible capital. If
the latter condition is not satisfied by the data, the predicted and actual paths will differ.

      Figure 7 shows the results for per capita total hours worked. Unlike the comparable
figure with the standard model’s predictions (Figure 1), here, the predictions and the
actual series track each other closely. The extended model predicts a fall in hours used to
produce final goods and services during the 1990s. However, because hours spent building
intangible capital rise significantly, the model predicts the large overall increase in hours
 13   The estimate of net intangible investment here exceeds earlier estimates in McGrattan and Prescott
      (2005a). In earlier work we did not include sweat investment or noncorporate business activity.

                                                   17
worked h.

    Similarly, the model and data paths for GDP are close. We plot these paths in Figure
8. The model’s prediction for business value added is also close because, in the model,
GDP is the sum of business value added yb and non-business value added ȳn , where ȳn is
preset to be the same as in the United States. In the appendix, we display time series for
consumption, tangible investment, and business labor productivity, which are all close in
comparison to their U.S. analogues.


External Conformity

    Now we consider a more demanding test of the theory: comparing model predictions to
observations not used to determine the TFP paths. In particular, we compare predictions
for business wage compensation as measured in the NIPA and for business capital gains
as measured in the Flow of Funds accounts. We find that the model predicts these series
remarkably well.

    To compare the model’s prediction for NIPA wage compensation in the business sector,
we need to construct wages as a national accountant would. Such an accountant, placed
in the model economy, would report wage compensation in the business sector as wt (h1t +
h2t )−(1−χ)qt xI t , in effect, not including the value of sweat equity investment. In Figure
9, we plot this predicted series along with the actual U.S. series. Both are real series,
detrended by 2 percent annually and set equal to 100 in 1990. The two are close. Relative
to the 1990 trend level, both the model prediction and the actual wages are up nearly 8
percent in 2000. We note that our choice of χ = 0.5 is relevant for this prediction. The
value of χ determines the level of taxation on expensed versus sweat equity, which affects
the equilibrium measured compensation. Higher values of χ increase the predicted value
of compensation. We selected χ = 1/2 given that we do not have independent evidence of
the financing of expensed and sweat equity. In McGrattan and Prescott (2007), we show
that our results are not sensitive to the choice of χ unless χ is far from 1/2.

    Next, we compare the model’s predictions for estimates of the increase in capital gains
from expensed and sweat equity to U.S. household holding gains reported in the Flow of

                                             18
Funds accounts. Those gains are the change in the value of assets outstanding (taken
from Table L.100) less the net purchases during the period (taken from Table F.100). If
Flow of Funds accountants recorded holding gains for our model households, they would
compute differences in the total value of businesses (for which the household is the residual
claimant). The value of all businesses in t, Vt , is composed of two parts:


       Vt = (1 − τdt )KT,t+1 + [χ(1 − τdt )(1 − τpt ) + (1 − χ)(1 − τht )]qt KI,t+1 ,   (3.11)


where capital letters denote aggregates. On the right side of (3.11), the first term is the
value of tangible capital and the second is the value of intangible capital. Notice that the
price of intangible capital depends on χ, since income to capital and income to labor are
taxed differently.

    The change in the value Vt of businesses does not exactly reflect the additional income
in the model economy. The additional income is qt XIt (in units of the final goods and
services). However, during periods with large investments of intangible capital, the increase
in holding gains, as defined in the Flow of Funds accounts, is a good approximation to the
increase in intangible investment.

    So that our estimates are comparable with the U.S. Flow of Funds, we make an
adjustment to our model estimate to add foreign gains because our model includes only
domestic sectors. Since many domestic corporations have foreign subsidiaries, the value
of U.S. corporations includes equity from foreign capital, and the holding gains include
gains from this foreign capital. We estimate these gains by assuming that the ratio of
after-tax foreign corporate profits (excluding gains) to after-tax domestic corporate profits
(excluding gains) is equal to the ratio of foreign to domestic holding gains. With this
assumption, our estimate of foreign gains relative to total gains is approximately 23 percent
on average for the period 1990–2003.

    A significant break in U.S. real holding gains (relative to GDP) occurred in 1995.
Before that year, the series averages around 6 percent of GDP. In 1995 and thereafter,
the average is 12 percent. A difference of 6 percent of GDP is economically large. To
determine whether the difference is statistically significant, we ran the following statistical

                                               19
test. We ran the regression
                                         gi = α + βdi ,

where gi is the real gain in decade i and di is a dummy variable, which is 1 for the 1995–
2004 decade and 0 for the four decades preceding it (which is when data are available).
Our estimate for β is 6.2 percent with a standard error of 2.9 percent, indicating that the
change in the mean is statistically significant.

     In Figure 10, we plot average real holding gains relative to GDP for the United States
along with the extended model’s prediction for them. Both curves rise significantly in the
late 1990s. The rise is coincident with the dramatic rise in hours.

     These results lead us to the conclusion that the model satisfies our prediction criterion.


3.5. Is Success Guaranteed?

A crucial element of the theory is intangible investment, which is directly measurable only
in part. We treat the total as unmeasurable and, therefore, unobserved. Does this imply
that intangible investment is simply making up for whatever is missing in the standard
theory? In this section (and more fully in McGrattan and Prescott 2007), we demonstrate
that intangible capital per se does not resolve the puzzling 1990s. If we extend the basic
neoclassical model to include intangible capital but assume that technological change is
neutral then the theory does not satisfy the two criteria we require to successfully resolve
the puzzling 1990s boom.

     In the alternative version of the model, we introduce a sequence of labor wedges {L wt }
that are chosen so that the household’s intratemporal first-order condition is satisfied,
                                 ψ(1 + τct ct
                                              = Lwt (1 − τht )wt ,
                                   1 − ht
and assume that the TFPs in (3.1) and (3.2) vary proportionally. The wedges are proxies
for labor distortions other than government taxes on labor. If the income shares are
common in the two activities, as assumed above, the relative price of intangible investment
q is constant. We normalize it to one. As above, there are two “free” parameter sequences.
In this case, they are {A1t , Lwt }.

                                                20
    We find the implications of the alternative model are grossly at odds with what is
reasonable behavior for labor distortions and intangible investments. The resulting se-
quences of {Lwt } and {xI t } oscillate wildly. For example, the series for the labor wedge
oscillates between 0.8 and 1.4 and displays little persistence. Given what we know about
labor markets, this pattern is unreasonable. Furthermore, an hours boom is generated
only if TFP and capital tax rates are also oscillatory and offsetting, which is unreasonable
in the case of TFP and counterfactual in the case of capital tax rates.

    In summary, it is not the inclusion of intangible capital per se that resolves the puzzling
U.S. boom in the 1990s. We find that including both intangible capital and non-neutral
technological change resolves the puzzle. We turn now to using our theory as a tool for
uncovering what actually did happen in the 1990s.



4. Reevaluation of the U.S. Economy in the 1990s

What does all of this mean for U.S. labor productivity and investment? If some output
is unmeasured relative to inputs, then GDP and productivity estimates are biased down-
ward. If the mismeasurement is intangible investment, then the investment estimates are
also biased downward. Our extended model’s predictions for variables with and without in-
tangible investment demonstrate how distorted standard data and models are for assessing
the 1990s.

    In Figure 11, we compare two predictions for business labor productivity, both com-
puted from the extended model. One is the model’s prediction for business value added—
without intangible investment included—divided by total business hours. This is what a
national accountant would construct. The other includes intangible investment as part of
business value added. Both series are detrended by 2 percent annually and set equal to
100 in 1990. Notice how different the predictions are. Measured labor productivity, which
is what national accountants would record, shows a significant fall relative to trend up to
1997 and then a sharp increase through 2000. But true productivity, including intangible
investment, fell only until 1993 and then, starting in 1994, grew very quickly. Over the



                                             21
period 1993–2000, the difference in growth rates for these two series is 0.8 percent per year.

    In Figure 12, we compare the model’s two measures of total investment: tangible
investment and tangible plus intangible investment. Again, both are detrended by 2 per-
cent annually and normalized to 100 in 1990. And again, the predictions—with and with-
out intangible investment—are very different. Between 1991 and 1999, tangible investment
rose almost 20 percent. Total investment, however, rose more than 30 percent.

    In summary, our results show that standard accounting measures and predictions of
models without intangible investment do not accurately reflect what was going on in the
U.S. economy during the 1990s.



5. Conclusion
We find that non-neutral technological change in the production of intangible investment
goods was what gave rise to the puzzling behavior of the U.S. economy in the 1990s.
This change resulted in a boom in intangible investment, which is not included in the
national accounts measure of output. Once this feature of reality is introduced into the
basic neoclassical growth model to obtain what we call the extended growth model, we
see that the U.S. economy in the 1990s is in close conformity with theory for both the
income and product sides of the national accounts and for the jump in average accrued
capital gains. Furthermore, microeconomic observations strongly support our theory of
non-neutral technological change.

    The important implication of our analysis is that our extended growth model with
intangible investments should be used in aggregate economic analyses. Indeed, we see it
as a significant improvement on the basic neoclassical growth model.




                                             22
Appendix A.
Data Appendix
    The three main sources for our data are the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
which publishes the national accounts and fixed asset tables; the Federal Reserve Board,
which publishes the Flow of Funds tables; and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which
publishes data on hours and population. In this appendix we provide details on the specific
data we use and the necessary revisions we make so that the data are consistent with growth
theory.


A.1. National Accounts and Fixed Assets

A.1.1. Overview and Sources
Table A contains a summary of the revised national accounts along with averages for the
period 1990–2003. The table numbers and sources of the raw data are listed in parentheses.
The sources are tables from the BEA’s national income and product accounts (NIPA) and
fixed asset (FA) tables, and the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds accounts (FOF). For
example, NIPA 7.5 is Table 7.5 from the BEA NIPA tables. The averages for the period
we study are relative to GDP and are included to help the reader with the magnitudes of
each of the categories.
     We have organized Table A as follows. Tables A1 and A2 are the income side of our
revised accounts. In Table A1, we display the components of our measure of domestic
business value added. This measure is close to, but not exactly the same as, the sum of
the value added of corporate business, sole proprietorships and partnerships, and other
private business as defined in the NIPA tables. In Table A2, we display the components
of our measure of domestic non-business value added. This measure is close to, but not
exactly the same as, the sum of value added of the household business sector, nonprofits,
general government, and government enterprises. Table A3 provides details of the prod-
uct side of the accounts along with totals for the income side (for comparison). We have
categorized tangible investment into business and non-business as in the case of incomes.
That is, investments of corporations and noncorporate business are included with busi-
ness investment, and investments of household business, nonprofits, and government are
included with non-business investment.
     Data on capital stocks are used to impute some services of capital when we revise the
accounts. They are also used to set certain model parameters and to initialize stocks when
computing model equilibria. We use BEA reproducible stocks (FA Table 1.1 for totals and
FA Table 6.1 by owner). To that we add land values based on Federal Reserve market
values of real estate from balance sheets of households (FOF B100), nonfarm nonfinancial
corporations (FOF B102), and nonfarm noncorporate (FOF B103). For farmland, we
follow Hansen and Prescott (2002) and assume it is roughly 0.08 times GDP.

                                            23
A.1.2. Revisions
We now describe how we revise the national accounts to make them consistent with our
model. Three adjustments are necessary in the models with or without intangible invest-
ment. A fourth adjustment is necessary when we include intangible investment.
     Consumption Taxes. Unlike the NIPA, our model output does not include consump-
tion taxes as part of consumption and as part of value added. We thus subtract sales and
excise taxes from the NIPA data on taxes on production and imports (line 26, Table A1 and
line 24, Table A2) and from personal consumption expenditures (line 10, Table A3) since
these taxes primarily affect consumption expenditures. As a result of this adjustment, we
use producer prices rather than a mixture of producer and consumer prices.
     Financial Services. We treat some of the NIPA’s financial services as intermediate
rather than as final and, therefore, need to subtract them from GDP and from consumption
services. Specifically, we subtract personal business expenses for handling life insurance
and pension plans from net interest (line 21, Table A1) and from personal consumption
expenditures (line 9, Table A3).
     Fixed Asset Expenditures. We treat expenditures on all fixed assets as investment.
Thus, spending on consumer durables is treated as an investment rather than as a consump-
tion expenditure and moved from private consumption (line 8, Table A3) to non-business
tangible investment (line 22, Table A3). We introduce a consumer durables services sector
in much the same way as the NIPA introduces owner-occupied housing services. Households
rent the consumer durables to themselves. Specifically, we add depreciation of consumer
durables to consumption of fixed capital of households (line 5, Table A2) and to private
consumption (line 11, Table A3). We add imputed additional capital services for consumer
durables to capital income (line 26, Table A2) and to private consumption (line 12, Table
A3). We assume a rate of return equal to 4.1 percent, which is an estimate of the return on
other types of capital. A related adjustment is made for government capital. Specifically,
we add imputed additional capital services for government capital to capital income (line
27, Table A3) and to public consumption (line 15, Table A3).
     Intangible Investment. We introduce intangible investment in the growth model in
Section 3. Our output measure includes intangible investment. Thus, total product in
the model is the sum of intangible investment and gross domestic product (which we
define to be NIPA gross domestic product after adjustments are made for consumption
taxes, intermediate financial services, and consumer durables). On the income side of our
extended model accounts, we add capital gains qt xI t . Fraction χ of these gains is “sweat
investment,” which is allocated to labor income (line 12, Table A1). Fraction 1 − χ of
these gains is “expensed investment,” which is allocated to capital income (line 27, Table
A1). On the product side, we add “business intangible investment” (line 27, Table A3).
In Section 3, we describe our calculations.


A.1.3. Tax Rates on Consumption and Labor
We use data from the U.S. national accounts to construct estimates for the tax rates on


                                            24
consumption and labor.
     The tax rate on consumption is found by taking the ratio of sales taxes in NIPA to
consumption expenditures in NIPA (which include sales taxes). In our measure of sales
taxes, we include federal excise taxes and customs, state and local sales taxes, and other
non-property licenses and fees. Our measure of NIPA consumption expenditures includes
adjustments for consumer durables. Denoting sales tax by τc c and NIPA consumption
expenditures by c + τc c, the ratio yields τc /(1 + τc ). It is easy to determine τc from this
ratio.
     For the marginal tax rate on labor, we apply essentially the same methodology as in
Prescott (2004). Specifically, we take the effective labor tax to be the sum of a marginal
income tax rate and a marginal tax rate for social security. The income tax rate is computed
as follows. Take personal current taxes in NIPA (which are direct taxes paid by households)
and divide them by GDP plus net gain from sale of assets less depreciation and taxes on
production and imports. We include gains from asset sales because personal current taxes
include taxes on these gains. Prescott (2004) multiplies the income tax rate by 1.6 in
order to get estimates of the marginal rate comparable to Feenberg and Coutts (1993).
The marginal tax rate on social security is computed as follows. Take contributions for
government social insurance in NIPA and divide them by labor income. For labor income,
we sum compensation and 70 percent of proprietors’ income.


A.2. Hours and Population
The primary source of our hours and population data is the U.S. Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment and Earnings. They are based on the Current
Population Survey (CPS). We briefly describe these data here. Full details are given in
Prescott, Ueberfeldt, and Cociuba (2005).
      The population covered by our series is the total noninstitutional population, ages 16
to 64, for the United States. Prior to 1982, military hours are estimated and added to
civilian hours from the CPS. After 1982, they are included in the CPS estimate of total
hours.
     For versions of the growth model with business and non-business sectors, we also
categorize CPS hours as business and non-business. Using the March supplement (through
www.ipums.org), we construct business hours as the sum of hours for the self-employed—
both incorporated and unincorporated—and hours for private wage and salary workers
less hours for employees in nonprofits. Because private wage and salary workers include
employees at nonprofits, we use BEA data on compensation in nonprofits, and assuming
an average wage rate equal to the economy-wide average, we can infer hours for nonprofits.
Hours in the non-business sector are found by subtracting business hours from the total.
We use the hours from the March supplement sample to compute the fractions of hours in
business and non-business. For our final series, we multiply these fractions by total hours
in the monthly CPS sample.



                                             25
  !  #        &''  &'#  $#       '& 
                             !  &#"$#   %$& #' '$#%#( ')' '  
            &#"$#   %$& #' '$#%#( ')'%  ' 
     1                                                                                                .748
     2        Consumption of fixed capital                                                            .082
     3           Corporate business (NIPA 7.5)                                                        .067
     4           Sole proprietorships and partnerships (NIPA 7.5)                                     .013
     5           Other private business (NIPA 7.5)                                                    .003
     6        Labor income                                                                            .483
     7          Compensation of employees                                                             .421
     8              Corporate business (NIPA 1.13)                                                    .382
     9              Sole proprietorships and partnerships (NIPA 1.13)                                 .036
     10            Other private business (NIPA 1.13)                                                 .002
     11          70% proprietors’ income with IVA and CCadj (NIPA 1.13)                               .049
     12         Sweat investment (authors’ calculations)                                              .024
     13       Capital income                                                                          .163
     14         Corporate profits with IVA and CCadj (NIPA 1.13)                                      .073
     15          30% proprietors’ income with IVA and CCadj (NIPA 1.13)                               .021
     16          Rental income of persons with CCadj (NIPA 1.13)                                      .006
     17          Net interest and miscellaneous payments                                              .022
     18            Corporate business (NIPA 1.13)                                                     .014
     19             Sole proprietorships and partnerships (NIPA 1.13)                                 .012
     20             Other private business (NIPA 1.13)                                                .005
     21            Less: Intermediate financial servicesa (NIPA 2.5.5)                                .009
     22          Taxes on production and importsb                                                     .026
     23            Corporate business (NIPA 1.13)                                                     .056
     24             Sole proprietorships and partnerships (NIPA 1.13)                                 .008
     25             Other private business (NIPA 1.13)                                                .002
     26            Less: Sales tax (NIPA 3.5)                                                         .040
     27          Expensed investment (authors’ calculations)                                          .024

  See footnotes at the end of the table.




                                                        26
                            # #        &''  &'#  &'
                                                                                         



                           &" $#          &'  #' '$#%# ( ')'%  ' 
                                                    



        &#"$#       &  !#  '$#%# ( ')   '  
                              
  1                                                                                            .337
  2      Consumption of fixed capital                                                          .099
  3          Households                                                                        .084
  4            Excluding consumer durables (NIPA 7.5)                                          .012
  5            Consumer durable depreciation (FOF F10)                                         .062
  6          Nonprofits (NIPA 7.5)                                                             .004
  7        General government (NIPA 7.5)                                                       .018
  8        Government enterprises (NIPA 7.5)                                                   .003
  9      Labor income                                                                          .154
  10         Compensation of employees                                                         .154
  11           Households (NIPA 1.13)                                                          .001
  12            Nonprofits (NIPA 1.13)                                                         .042
  13            General government (NIPA 1.13)                                                 .099
  14         Government enterprises (NIPA 1.13)                                                .012
  15     Capital income                                                                        .083
  16         Current surplus of government enterprises (NIPA 1.13)                             .001
  17         Rental income of persons with CCadj (NIPA 1.13)                                   .008
  18         Net interest and miscellaneous payments                                           .033
  19            Households (NIPA 1.13)                                                         .031
  20            Nonprofits (NIPA 1.13)                                                         .002
  21         Taxes on production and importsb                                                  .004
  22           Households (NIPA 1.13)                                                          .011
  23           Nonprofits (NIPA 1.13)                                                          .001
  24           Less: Sales tax (NIPA 3.5)                                                      .007
  25         Imputed additional capital servicesc                                              .038
  26            Household, consumer durables                                                   .013
  27            Government capital                                                             .025

See footnotes at the end of the table.




                                                         27
                              # #           &''  &'#  &'
                                                                                             



                         &#"$#                ( ')   '   ''"& ! 

         &' '    #    &" $#    !&#"
1
            #  & "$#   %$& #' '$#%#( ')' '                                       1.091
                                                                                                    .748
2
             #  & "$#   &  !#  '$#%# ( ')  '' 
                                
                                                                                                    .337
3

4            
                 #   $'   #%                                                  .006

5
          &' '   #    & " $#   "& !                                            1.091
6        Private consumption                                                                        .618
7          Personal consumption expenditures (NIPA 1.1.5)                                           .678
8          Less: Consumer durables (NIPA 1.1.5)                                                     .083
9           Less: Intermediate financial servicesa (NIPA 2.5.5)                                     .009
10          Less: Sales tax, nondurables and services (NIPA 3.5)                                    .042
11          Consumer durable depreciation (FOF F10)                                                 .062
12          Imputed additional capital servicesc                                                    .013
13       Public consumption (NIPA 3.1)                                                              .179
14         Government consumption expenditures (NIPA 3.1)                                           .154
15         Imputed additional capital servicesc                                                     .025
16       Business tangible investmentd                                                              .112
17         Corporate gross private domestic investment (FOF F6)                                     .092
18        Noncorporate gross private domestic investment (FOF F6)                                   .020
19       Non-business tangible investment                                                           .134
20          Household                                                                               .114
21            Excluding consumer durables (FOF F6)                                                  .036
22            Consumer durables (NIPA 1.1.5)                                                        .083
23            Less: Sales tax, durables (NIPA 3.5)                                                  .005
24          Nonprofits (FOF F6)                                                                     .007
25          Government investment (NIPA 3.1)                                                        .033
26          Net exports of goods and services (NIPA 1.1.5)                                         −.021
27       Business intangible investment (authors’ calculations)                                     .048


     Note: IVA, inventory valuation adjustment; CCadj, capital consumption adjustment.
a
  Expense is for handling life insurance and pension plans.
b
  This category includes business transfers and excludes subsidies.
c
  Imputed additional capital services are equal to 4.1 percent times the current-cost net stock of
  government fixed assets and consumer durables goods (FA 1.1).
d
  10 percent of farm business is in corporate, with the remainder in noncorporate.


                                                             28
Appendix B.
Parameters


     In this appendix, we report and motivate the parameters and exogenous technology
and tax series used as inputs for the three models described in the main text. The param-
eter values are summarized in Table B.1. The exogenous technology and tax rate series
are summarized in Table B.2. In a separate technical appendix (McGrattan and Prescott
2007), we also demonstrate, by doing sensitivity analysis, that our main results are robust.
     For interest and growth rates, we use estimates based on U.S. trends. In particular,
we set the interest rate at 4.1 percent (as in McGrattan and Prescott 2005a) and the
annual growth in population η at 1 percent. We also assume that per capita GDP and
its components grow at 2 percent annually (γ = .02). These choices imply that β = .98.
These parameters are used in all versions of our model and ensure that the marginal rate
of substitution is the same across experiments.
     In all three models, we use constant tax rates on capital. In both versions of the growth
model in which we distinguish business and non-business activity, we set the profits tax rate
to τp = 0.35. because most of the taxes on profits are corporate income taxes. In both cases,
we set the distribution tax τd = 0.15, which is slightly less than our estimate in earlier work
(McGrattan and Prescott 2005a) for corporate distributions; this is appropriate because
noncorporate taxes are not taxed twice. In the one-sector version of the growth model, we
set the rates lower because most of the capital is not in the business sector and not affected
by τp or τd . In fact we set these rates equal to 0.42 times the rates used in the business
sector, since business tangible capital is 42 percent of total tangible capital. For property
tax rates, we use NIPA property tax revenues (in “taxes on imports and production”) to
infer values for τk in the one-sector and two-sector versions of the model. Details of our
labor and consumption tax rates are provided in Appendix A.
     For the remaining parameters, we use 1990 levels of U.S. data to obtain estimates.
(See Appendix A for a full description of the data.) Specifically, we use the consumption
share of GDP, the tangible investment share of GDP, the total and business tangible capital
stocks (including land) as shares of GDP, and hours as a fraction of discretionary time.
We use 52 weeks times 100 hours per week as an estimate of discretionary time.
     The ratio of tangible investment to the stock is used to infer the rate of depreciation
of tangible capital in total or, if there are two sectors, in business. In Table B.1, we report
estimates of depreciation for each of the three models. These rates are slightly lower than
is typical in the literature because we include land and inventories in our estimates of the
capital stock. If we do not include them, the estimates for annual depreciation are on the
order of 5 or 6 percent. There is no way to determine δI . For this rate, we chose 0 and
experimented with other values to make sure our main results did not change.
    Given an interest rate, tax rates on capital, and the ratio of tangible capital to output,
we can infer the share of tangible capital in producing final goods and services in the models

                                              29
without intangible investment.14 For the one-sector version of the model, we find a capital
share of 0.34. For the two-sector version, the capital share in business is 0.28. This is lower
because the non-business sector is more capital intensive.
     In the extended model, we need more information because we do not know the split of
tangible capital in final goods production and intangible capital production. Here we use
reported NIPA compensation for 1990, which, in theory, is equal to total compensation less
sweat investment. For our baseline results, the input elasticities for producing both final
goods and intangible capital are assumed to be the same (that is, θ1 = θ2 and φ1 = φ2 ).
This restriction along with information on NIPA compensation allows us to determine all
capital shares. In Table B.1, we report that the shares for tangible capital in production
are 0.26, slightly lower than that for the two-sector model with no intangible investment.
The intangible shares are 0.076.
     The household’s intratemporal condition, along with U.S. observables and estimates
of the capital shares and tax rates, implies a value for the utility parameter ψ. In Table
B.1, we report the values for each of the models. They are in the range of estimates used
in the business cycle literature.
     The final parameter to be set is χ, the fraction of intangible investment that is fi-
nanced by capital owners. This parameter is used only in our extended growth model with
intangible investment. As noted earlier, the only real ramification of this choice is for tax
payments. But the evidence in Figures 2 and 3 indicates that some investment is being
done by both shareholders and workers. We chose χ = 0.5 and then experimented with
other values. The main effect of varying χ is a change in the effective tax rates on labor
and capital.




 14   An alternative procedure uses information on factor incomes to infer cost shares. However, this
      procedure is invalid when there are intangible investments because the NIPA accounts do not report
      the total compensation or profits.

                                                   30
                                   $       $      &         #" #
!"                                                                  $#%#  &'   ( ')'
 &#" " & !" #
  Growth in population                                                                     η              0.01
  Growth in technology                                                                     γ              0.02
  Discount factor                                                                          β              0.98
 '  $$'&' & '   &  #     $#  "
      


  Utility parameter                                                                        ψ              1.48
  Depreciation rate                                                                        δ             0.031
  Capital share                                                                            θ              0.34
  Tax rate on property                                                                    τk           0.0073
  Tax rate on profits                                                                     τp             0.15
  Tax rate on distributions                                                               τd             0.064
   &  $$'&' & '  &   '#     $#  "
     


  Utility parameter                                                                        ψ              1.38
  Depreciation rate, business                                                              δ             0.033
  Capital share, business                                                                  θ              0.28
  Tax rate on business property                                                           τk             0.014
  Tax rate on business profits                                                            τp              0.35
  Tax rate on business distributions                                                      τd              0.15
  '  &    '    ' #     $#  " 
  Utility parameter                                                                        ψ              1.32
  Tangible depreciation rate, business                                                    δT             0.033
  Intangible depreciation rate, business                                                  δI                 0
  Tangible capital share, final goods & services, business                                θ1              0.26
  Tangible capital share, intangible investment, business                                 θ2              0.26
  Intangible capital share, final goods & services, business                              φ1             0.076
  Intangible capital share, intangible investment, business                               φ2             0.076
  Tax rate on business property                                                           τk             0.014
  Tax rate on business profits                                                            τp              0.35
  Tax rate on business distributions                                                      τd              0.15
  Fraction of intangible financed by workers                                               χ                0.5




                                                        31
        $     $      "
                                 
                                      $# &'
                                              
                                                             $#'   $  &  &  
                                                                Technology Parameters
Year               Tax Rates               One-Sector Two-Sector                 Extended Model
 t           τct             τht             Model      Model                     A1t              A2t
1990         6.6             31.1                 1.49             1.75          1.66              1.53
1991         6.8             30.7                 1.47             1.71          1.60              1.48
1992         6.8             30.3                 1.48             1.73          1.60              1.44
1993         6.8             30.3                 1.46             1.71          1.60              1.49
1994         7.0             30.7                 1.45             1.71          1.63              1.59
1995         6.9             31.2                 1.44             1.71          1.64              1.63
1996         6.7             31.9                 1.44             1.71          1.67              1.69
1997         6.7             32.5                 1.44             1.73          1.69              1.74
1998         6.7             33.3                 1.45             1.76          1.73              1.77
1999         6.6             33.4                 1.46             1.78          1.76              1.79
2000         6.5             34.3                 1.46             1.80          1.76              1.79
2001         6.3             34.7                 1.45             1.76          1.73              1.78
2002         6.2             30.8                 1.45             1.73          1.60              1.59
2003         6.2             28.9                 1.43             1.71          1.56              1.53




                                                     32
Appendix C.
Aggregation in the Extended Model
    In this appendix, we develop the aggregation theory underlying the technology of our
extended growth model with intangible investment. (See Section 3.)
    A business is characterized by the stock of its (unmeasured) intangible capital, KI .
This capital can be used for two activities. One activity produces the composite output of
the business Yb , and the other produces intangible investment goods XI .
     Inputs of (measured) tangible capital KTi and hours H i along with KI produce an
intermediate good Z i via a standard constant returns to scale neoclassical production
function f i for i ∈ {1, 2}. In particular, the production functions are

                         Z i = (KTi )θi KIφi (H i )1−θi −φi ,   i ∈ {1, 2}.

The quantity of Yb produced is g 1 (Z 1 ), and the quantity of XI produced is g 2 (Z 2 ). The
functions g i are increasing, initially strictly convex, then strictly concave, and they satisfy
g i (0) = 0. The slope of the maximal tangent ray from the origin is Ai . The point of
tangency is Ẑ i . The margin of adjustment is the number of units operated, which is
variable. The capital stock KI can be split over businesses through mergers, acquisitions,
and spin-offs. All production units that are operated will have the same KI . This KI will
depend upon the relative prices of the three inputs. Production units of type i will be
operated at level Ẑ i and produce g i (Ẑ i ).




                                                 33
References

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1945–2005), Flow of Funds Accounts of
   the United States, Statistical Release Z.1 (Washington, DC: Federal Reserve System).
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt (2000), “Beyond Computation: Information Technol-
   ogy, Organizational Transformation and Business Performance,” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 14(4): 23–48.
Chang, Yongsung, and Frank Schorfheide (2003), “Labor-Supply Shifts and Economic
  Fluctuations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(8): 1751–68.
Chen, Kaiji, Ayşe İmrohoroǧlu, and Selahattin İmrohoroǧlu (2007), “A Quantitative As-
   sessment of the Decline in the U.S. Saving Rate,” Working Paper, USC.
Comin, Diego, and Mark Gertler (2006), “Medium-Term Business Cycles,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96(3): 523–51.
Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel (2005), “Measuring Capital and
   Technology: An Expanded Framework”, in C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel
   (eds.), Measuring Capital in the New Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel (2006), “Intangible Capital
   and Economic Growth,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2006–24.
Couper, Elise A., John P. Hejkal, and Alexander L. Wolman (2003), “Boom and Bust in
   Telecommunications,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 89(4):
   1–24.
Doms, Mark (2004), “The Boom and Bust in Information Technology Investment,” FRBSF
  Economic Review 2004, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (http://www.frbsf.org).
Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts (1993), “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,”
   Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189–94.
Galı́, Jordi (2005), “Trends in Hours, Balanced Growth and the Role of Technology in the
   Business Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87(4): 459–86.
Galı́, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido (2007), “Markups, Gaps and the
   Welfare Costs of Business Cycles,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 44–59.
Greenwood Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (1997), “Long-Run Implications of
   Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3): 342–
   62.
Hall, Robert E. (1997), “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,” Journal
   of Labor Economics, 15(1): S223–50.
Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott (2002), “Malthus to Solow,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 92(4): 1205–17.
Hornstein, Andreas and Per Krusell (1996), “Can Technology Improvements Cause Pro-
   ductivity Slowdowns?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 11, 209–59. (Cambridge,

                                           34
   MA: MIT Press).
Ireland, Peter N., and Scott Schuh (2007), “Productivity and U.S. Macroeconomic Per-
    formance: Interpreting the Past and Predicting the Future with a Two-Sector Real
    Business Cycle Model,” Working Paper 642, Boston College.
Kahn, James A., and Robert W. Rich (2007), “Tracking the New Economy: Using Growth
  Theory to Detect Changes in Trend Productivity, Journal of Monetary Economics,
  54(6): 1670–1701.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott (2005a), “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value
  of U.S. and U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(3): 767–96.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott (2005b), “Productivity and the Post-1990
  U.S. Economy,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87(4): 537–49.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott (2007), “Technical Appendix: Unmeasured
  Investment and the Puzzling U.S. Boom in the 1990s,” Staff Report 395, Federal Re-
  serve Bank of Minneapolis.
Miller, Merton H. (1977), “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance, 32(2): 261–75.
National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics (1953–2003), Na-
   tional Patterns of Research and Development Resources (Arlington, VA).
Powell, Michael K. (2002), “Remarks at the Thomas Weisel Partners, Growth Forum 4.0,”
   June 17 (Santa Barbara, CA: www.fcc.gov/Speeches).
Prescott, Edward C. (2004), “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?”
   Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28(1): 2–12.
Prescott, Edward C., Alexander Ueberfeldt, and Simona Cociuba (2005), “U.S. Hours and
   Productivity Behavior Using CPS Hours Worked Data: 1959-I to 2005-II,” Manuscript,
   Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Ritter, Jay R., and Ivo Welch (2002), “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,”
   Journal of Finance, 57(4): 1795–1828.
Ruggles, Steven, et al. (2004), Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-
  readable database] (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center) (http://www.
  ipums.org).
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
  A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3): 586–606.
Solow, Robert M. (1987), “We’d Better Watch Out,” New York Times Book Review, July
   12, p. 36.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1929–2005), National In-
   come and Product Accounts, Survey of Current Business (Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
   ernment Printing Office).



                                            35
                                    
         "!#$&%'($*)+,-/.0 1$
                      Annual, 1990=100, 1990–2003
Index
 106
                                                               U.S. Data
104

102

100

 98

 96

 94

                                 One-Sector Model,
 92                              No Intangible Investment

 90

 88
  1990         1992       1994       1996        1998       2000         2002



                                     32
         45 &67$8!'$9%'($:);&<=$?>/@-!
        Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100, 1990–2003
Index
 102
                                                               U.S. Data
100

 98

 96

 94

 92
                                 One-Sector Model,
                                 No Intangible Investment
 90

 88

 86
  1990         1992       1994       1996        1998       2000         2002




                                       36
                                          
   $  . $$1 ,--.0 1$  -* ) *) ) *  !'(  $ ) 
              7  !  < ?% '( $ $ ) 9!'$9, 
          Annual, Compensation Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100, 1990–2003
          Index
           110




                                                                         Average Hours
          105




          100




            95

                                                 Compensation Per Hour


            90
             1990         1992      1994        1996        1998         2000       2002



                                             
             !     < "!'$&%'($*)+ >/@-!   %  (  $)
                       =                                                        !#  *) 
                        Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990–2003
          Index                                                                                 Index
           110                                                                                   160



                                                          Profits
                                                         (right scale)
          105
                                                                                                140




          100
                      GDP                                                                       120
                     (left scale)



            95

                                                                                                100


            90
             1990         1992      1994        1996       1998          2000      2002




                                                  37
                                     
45 ) $$&7$8< =)+?$ )  7!#  )   *)
          Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100, 1990–2003

   120

                          Intangible Capital
   115                    Sector, Extended Model



   110
                                             Final Goods & Services
                                             Sector, Extended Model
   105


   100

                                       U.S. Business Sector
     95


     90
      1990       1992        1994       1996        1998         2000       2002



                                      
     ) $ &7$  );  ;3            ); /) ($)
                                                            =
                                Annual, 1990–2003
     %
      9

      8

      7

      6

      5

      4

      3

      2

      1

      0
      1990       1992        1994       1996        1998         2000       2002




                                          38
                                 
  ) $$&7$ !#$%'($*)+&,-/.0 1 $
                     Annual, 1990=100, 1990–2003
Index
 106
                                                         Actual

104



102                                         Predicted



100



 98



 96
  1990        1992       1994       1996         1998     2000       2002



                                   
      45 ) $$&7$"!#  %'($:);&<=$?>/@-!
        Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100, 1990–2003
Index
 102


101


100

                                   Actual
 99


 98
                                           Predicted
 97


 96


 95
  1990        1992       1994       1996         1998     2000       2002




                                      39
                                        
  ) $$&7$ < 8  :  4
                                                        %  '($   $ )   $$)
                Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100, 1990–2003
        Index
         108




         104




         100


                                                     Actual

          96

                                Predicted


          92
           1990        1992        1994       1996        1998         2000      2002



                                            7
                5 ) $ &7$8<=   ,  +: > *
           Annual, % of Real GDP, Excluding Real Estate, 1990–2003
           %
          16

          14                    U.S. Average, 1995-2003

          12

          10
                                                     Predicted Gains
           8

           6

           4
                   U.S. Average, 1953-1994
           2

           0
           1990        1992        1994       1996        1998         2000      2002




                                                40
                                  7
         ) $ &7$8<= 8*   !#  )   *)   
        Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100, 1990–2003
Index
 112



108                                Includes intangible investment



104



100



 96                                     Excludes intangible investment


 92
  1990           1992       1994         1996       1998       2000           2002



                                      7+2
        )   $$&7$?<= "!'$&%'($*)+              $)
                                                                    ) 
        Annual, Series Divided by 1.02t , 1990=100 1990–2003
Index
 120

                        Includes intangible investment
110



100



 90                            Excludes intangible investment



 80



 70
  1990           1992       1994         1996       1998       2000           2002




                                           41
