                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOUSING PRICE VOLATILITY AND DOWNSIZING IN LATER LIFE

                                             James Banks
                                           Richard Blundell
                                             Zoë Oldfield
                                            James P. Smith

                                        Working Paper 13496
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13496


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of a grant from the National Institute on
Aging. Blundell and Banks also acknowledge co-funding from the ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic
Analysis of Public Policy at IFS. Smith benefited from the expert programming assistance of David
Rumpel. The usual disclaimer applies. This paper was prepared for presentation at the Boulders Economics
of Aging Conference in Carefree, Arizona in May 2007. We very much appreciate the useful and constructive
comments of our discussant Steve Venti as well as the other participants at the conference. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zoë Oldfield, and James P. Smith. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Price Volatility and Downsizing in Later Life
James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zoë Oldfield, and James P. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 13496
October 2007
JEL No. D12,D91

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we modeled several types of housing transitions of the elderly in two countries -- Britain
and the United States. One important form of these transitions involves downsizing of housing consumption,
the importance of which among older households is still debated. This downsizing takes multiple forms,
including reductions in the number of rooms per dwelling and the value of the home. There is also
evidence that this downsizing is greater when house price volatility is greater and that American households
try to escape housing price volatility by moving to places that are experience significantly less housing
price volatility. Our comparative evidence in suggests that there is less evidence of downsizing in
Britain. Our results indicate that housing consumption appears to decline with age in the US, even
after controlling for the other demographic and work transitions associated with age that would normally
produce such a decline. No such fall in housing consumption is found in Britain, largely because British
households are much more likely to stay in their original residence.


James Banks                                          Zoë Oldfield
Institute for Fiscal Studies                         Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgemount                                         7 Ridgemount
London, WC1 7AE U.K.                                 London, WC1 7AE U.K.
j.banks@ifs.org.uk                                   zoe_o@ifs.org.uk

Richard Blundell                                     James P. Smith
University College London                            Labor and Pop Studies Program
Department of Economics                              The RAND Corporation
Gower Street                                         1776 Main Street
London, ENGLAND                                      Santa Monica, CA 90406
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk                                 smith@rand.org
      In this paper we will document and model the housing transitions of the elderly in two

countries—England and the United States. One important form of these transitions involves

downsizing, but there remains considerable controversy even about what the facts are about

downsizing at older ages. This controversy stems partly from the absence until recently of long

panel data on the housing wealth and circumstances of elderly households. It may also flow from

a relatively narrow view of what downsizing is for the purposes of empirical modeling—selling a

home and becoming a renter. Other dimensions that are now possible to analyze include selling a

home to move into a smaller place either as a renter or owner, or moving in with family or

friends, renting out rooms, or simply reducing maintenance and repairs (see Davidoff (2004)).

      Thus, in addition to the transition into renting, we will document and model the factors

associated with downsizing across several of these relevant dimensions.1 We will examine the

extent to which these transitions are co-incident or near other salient events such as retirement or

widowhood by estimating models for the empirically important types of housing transitions over

multiple waves of our panel data. While other literature has looked at some of these transitions in

the US, the contribution of our analysis, in addition to broadening the empirical analysis to

include multiple downsizing measures, is to exploit the longer sample periods now available to

look at transitions over a longer horizon where we are more likely to see evidence of downsizing

if it does exist in the data. We also provide, to our knowledge the first systematic comparison of

downsizing behavior between the US and Britain, where there has been much less empirical

evidence on downsizing to date.2

      A second contribution of this paper is to discuss and model the potential role of house price

volatility, which we have previously studied by us for younger households’ home ownership and

housing consumption decisions (Banks et al. (2003, 2005)), in the housing decisions of the


1
  Less immediately transparent forms of downsizing - reducing additions and repairs or renting
out rooms - will be dealt with, to the extent that data allow, in subsequent research.
2
 For an exception, see Disney et al (2002) which looked at housing wealth and savings trajectories for
older households in the UK between 1988 and 1994.


                                                    3
elderly. In addition to any type of downsizing in housing consumption that may occur, some

housing transitions at older ages may reflect an attempt to escape from the risk associated with a

highly price volatile asset given the relatively short remaining life span. For example, housing

price risk at older ages may encourage moving to less price volatile areas but leave intact

ownership status as well as the level of real housing consumption. Among those who do sell their

homes to buy another, we will therefore also document the transitions between housing-price safe

and volatile areas even if home size does not change.

      Since it places the future flow of non-housing consumption at risk, greater housing price

risk provides an incentive to reduce housing consumption more quickly (at an earlier age) or

equivalently to downsize in all forms. Greater (mean preserving) price risk increases the

probability that individuals will want to increase their savings in safe assets. Since holding a

house in a volatile area is not a safe asset, this implies that the desire to downsize is greater when

house price risks are higher. These effects will be mitigated to the extent households have

annuitized incomes.

      Because housing price volatility is temporally and spatially variable, our empirical analysis

will document the importance of the role of house price volatility using comparable panel data

analysis for the US and Britain. One reason motivating our choice of comparison countries is the

significant differences in housing price variability between these two countries—Britain has

considerably higher house price volatility, with the relatively safe regions having comparable

volatility to the most risky regions of the US (see Banks et al. (2005) for example). Consequently,

if volatility matters one might expect differences in downsizing behavior across countries.

      Of course there may be many other differences between the two countries and hence, in

contrast to the descriptive evidence comparing the two countries, our empirical analysis will

exploit within country regional and time-series variation in volatility to identify the effects of

volatility on downsizing behavior. This distinction between these two approaches turns out to be



                                                  4
important. At the broadest level, our descriptive comparison of the two countries reveals less

downsizing behavior in Britain than in the US—a result at odds with the idea that higher volatility

should lead to greater downsizing. Once we look within country and also control for other

covariates, however, we find a positive correlation between downsizing and volatility in the US,

and a qualitatively similar although statistically weaker effect within Britain. This suggests that

other differences between the two countries are driving the international differences and some

potential factors are discussed briefly in the spirit of topics for future research.

      A third contribution of our paper is to examine more generally the long contested issue of

whether households in both countries at sufficiently old age reduce their consumption. In

particular the question we ask is whether consumption of housing declines in addition to any

changes induced by a set of demographic changes producing smaller households and the decision

to retire from the labor force. Since housing is an important component of total consumption and

if anything is believed to one of the resistant to any downward changes, we believe that evidence

showing a downward path of housing consumption adds important evidence to the more general

debate on the nature of consumption trajectories at older ages.

        This paper is divided into six sections. Section 1 outlines and discusses implications from

a simple theoretical model of the impact of housing price variability on life-cycle choices

regarding housing decisions with an emphasis on its implications for downsizing during late life.

Section 2 describes the data sources used in both Britain and US. Section 3 documents the

principal facts about the extent of different forms of late life downsizing in both countries and

their possible relation to housing price variability within and between Britain and US. In Section

4 we summarize the predictions to be tested and provide the results of the empirical tests of our

model. Section 5 uses the results of previous sections to present and discuss age-trajectories of

housing consumption at older ages in the two countries. In the final section we present our

conclusions.



                                                   5
1. Theoretical Model

       Economic theory has implications about the possibility of downsizing at older ages for

a number of reasons. As families progress through the life cycle, the demand for the

consumption of housing services is likely to fall. For example, it is a standard implication of life

cycle models that at sufficiently older ages as mortality risks rise, total household consumption

(of which housing is an important part) will fall with age. While the extent of the actual fall in

total household consumption remains a matter of active debate, it appears to be the case that

at sufficiently older ages household consumption does indeed fall with age, most likely

reflecting the combined influences of time preferences and mortality risk. When total

consumption falls, housing consumption should also fall since if it did not, all reductions in

total consumption would have to take place in non-housing consumption alone.

1.1 The Demographic Ladder

       The second and perhaps more immediately apparent reason that one might expect

reductions in housing consumption at older ages are demographic. One useful description of the

demographic forces is the housing ladder, which we see as demographically driven as individuals

marry, form families with children aging and growing in their housing needs. Eventually people

complete their family building with older children starting to leave home to go off on their own.

Figure 1.A depicts this demographic process by plotting by age for the United States three

dimensions of the demographic ladder—the fraction of families who had completed their family,

the fraction of families who ever have had a child at least five years old, and the fraction of

families who currently have a child at least five years old in the household.3 A parallel set of

graphs are provided for Britain in Figure 1.B.




3
  This figure plots the cumulative fraction of individuals who completed their family size by age. This was obtained
from data on individuals aged 50 and over by taking the age at which they had their last child as being the age they
completed their family.


                                                         6
      The demographic housing life-cycle can be divided into five broad stages: In the first

stage, an individual is living with their parents; in the second, they form partnerships; and in

the third goes on to have children and complete their family size. In the remainder of the life

cycle, in stage four, children leave home; and the final stage is widowhood. At each stage,

there is a decision to buy or rent and a decision about a minimum level of housing

consumption necessary to meet needs. The demography depicted in Figures 1.A and 1.B,

which are remarkably similar in both countries, indicates that housing demand will grow

during the early and middle parts of life, but may then reverse as children leave home and go

off on their own.

      Since the fraction of families with a child over age 5 in the household peaks around age

forty in both countries, the fraction of families with children under age 18 will peak in the

mid fifties and the demographically driven demand for housing should peak at this age or before.

Multiple children should matter as well in housing demand. Further reductions in housing

demand at older ages will flow from divorce and/or widowhood as people enter the final stage of

life without a partner.

1.2 Housing Price Risk

      The third factor that may influence decisions to downsize concerns the influence of housing

price risk. In an earlier paper (Banks, Blundell, Oldfield, and Smith (2005)), we investigated the

influence of housing price risk on the decision to own a home during rising upward part of the

demographic housing ladder. To summarize, one possible solution to the changing housing

demand over the life cycle is to simply purchase the amount of housing one requires at each

stage, but high transactions costs serve as an effective barrier to that strategy.

      Another solution would be to rent in the early stages and then purchase the ‘right’

presumably larger home when family size is complete. The difficulty with that strategy is that

housing price volatility may means that you are priced out of this market at the time when you


                                                   7
need to purchase your family home. Since there are no market insurance devices that can insure

against this risk, one can only self-insure against the future housing price volatility. To provide

this insurance, a household wishes to hold an asset with a value correlated with house prices they

will face in the future. Holding housing equity essentially provides some insurance against high

house prices later. Since, in the absence of a formal market, the only way to obtain housing equity

is to buy a house, to insure themselves, individuals must purchase a house earlier than they may

have wanted based on housing consumption demographic needs alone. Thus, the more volatile

house prices are, the greater the insurance motive of owning a house in the early phrases of the

demographic ladder depicted in Figure 1.

      This paper is motivated by an extension of our model into the older stages of the life

cycle—the stage that involves children leaving home and widowhood. Are people willing to

downsize in order to fund their retirement consumption, and how is this decision affected by the

presence of volatile house prices?

      The integration of housing price risk into a single theoretical framework is complex and

even algebraic closed form solutions will only be possible under certain forms of preferences.

Ideally, however, we want such a framework to use relatively flexible preferences (such as

CRRA) that also have some minimum housing needs or requirement that must be met in each

period and as such analytical solutions can be hard to come by. We have confirmed the

predictions that follow in a numerical simulation of a simple three period model of the latter

stages of life to capture the stages of the demographic ladder identified in the previous section,

with CRRA utility, house price risk, a minimum housing requirement that rises and then falls

with the housing ladder, and a simplified form of mortality risk. For the purposes of this paper,

and in the absence of analytical results, we focus instead on intuitive descriptions of the

mechanisms in play.




                                                  8
          The first thing to note is that the model is not symmetric with regard to the role of

volatility in early as opposed to late life. In the rising phrase of the housing ladder, individuals

wants to self-insure so that they will not be forced to live in a house that is too small when their

housing demand is high in mid-life. In volatile areas, expected price volatility induces one to

move into home ownership at a younger age and hence to reduce consumption of other goods.

      On the later rungs of the household ladder however housing is no longer required in order

to meet an insurance need. Instead, when household size is no longer expected to rise, housing

reverts to a more straightforward risky asset which individuals (if they are risk averse) may wish

to avoid Put simply, in the later stages of life or the downsize of the housing ladder, one may

want to release some housing consumption to consume other goods. Greater housing price risk

(whether in the form of greater house equity for a given level of risk, or greater risk for a given

level of equity) puts that decision at risk, thereby encouraging homeowners in more price volatile

areas to either downsize more rapidly than they might have wanted, to rent, or to move to areas

with less house price volatility. Another option is equity withdrawal or reverse mortgages, which

not only provide some insurance against mortality risk but also slowly reduces uncertainty about

the equity. But like many annuities this market is quite thin, perhaps due to standard adverse

selection issues.

      Downsizing essentially involves cashing in housing equity. You want to do this because

you want to use housing wealth to finance future non-housing consumption, but as with any

approaching asset realization, an optimal path would be to gradually reduce risk and move into

safe assets to avoid exposure to shocks at the time of realization that will have permanent effects.

(This is a mechanism directly analogous to the prediction in the pensions literature that as

retirement approaches the optimal pension portfolio is to gradually switch out of stocks and into

bonds).




                                                   9
      There are, of course, many good reasons why individuals may not want to downsize. One is

that they may have build up a ‘habitual’ demand for this house as they may over time have fitted

it to their tastes, or they may want children to return to the home in which they were raised. The

cost of not downsizing is that all other consumption may have to absorb more of the fall.

      If you do decide to downsize, the specific timing may be coordinated with other salient

events—indeed our description of the housing ladder is event-specific as opposed to age or time-

specific. One event may be retirement since one’s work is location-specific even in there is

housing price risk. The other is widowhood or other forms of marital dissolution where, at a

minimum, the old house may be too big. Thus, any downsizing that does take place may be

correlated with retirement, widowhood, or divorce and our empirical analysis will need to allow

for these transitions.

      In the discussion above we have not addressed the issue that, conditional on location, house

price volatility may not be avoidable by switching to the rental sector, since rental prices may be

more volatile as well in such areas, which may indeed generate a demand for owner-occupation to

avoid rent risk (see Sinai and Souleles (2005)). Several things are worth mentioning here. Firstly,

the mechanisms discussed above relate to stock of housing wealth as opposed to the flows of

period by period housing costs associated with ownership or rental respectively. Although once

mortgages are paid off, the risk associated with house price fluctuations for home-owners is all

related to the value of assets and not post-housing cost incomes so the relative comparison of

ownership to rental is changed in favor of owner-occupation the fact that horizons are shorter

would weaken the importance of such an effect.

      Second, in our framework, switching from an owner to a renter is just one way that an

individual can choose to downsize. This means that our framework is compatible with that of

Sinai and Souleles because individuals who wish to avoid both rental risk and house price risk

can do so by downsizing in ways which they can remain an owner occupier. Finally, even when it

comes to home-ownership itself, in contrast to the up stage of the ladder the prediction here is that


                                                 10
more volatility would lead to lower ownership rates—a mechanism that would work against that

described above so if anything. To the extent that the above two considerations do not totally

remove the relevance of rental price risk (relative to ownership) in volatile areas, we may be

underestimating the effect of volatility in our empirical models.

1.3 Other Risks

      Of course, other risks that may or may not be correlated with house price risk, may also

matter for households’ housing and downsizing decisions. Perhaps the two most natural to think

of are income risk and mortality or morbidity risk. On the assumption that most downsizing takes

place at or after retirement, income risk is most likely of only second order importance since there

is no earnings risk and large fractions of the incomes of retired households may well have some

degree of inflation protection.

      More important is likely to be health risks, and there are several ways in which additional

health risk may also affect housing wealth and non-housing wealth accumulation and

decumulation decisions at older ages. Especially when health insurance is not complete, it

increases the risks of additional out-of-pocket expenditures, particularly at the tails, which should

encourage additional precautionary savings.

      Before retirement, morbidity risk also shows up as one of the determinants of income risk

and thus will have effects similar to those described in the previous section. Holding a risky asset

such as housing when prices are highly volatile may be a dubious strategy when one faces

additional health risk. A spread in pure mortality risk (making it more likely you will live longer

as well as shorter) will make risk-averse agents engage in more precautionary savings in all forms

in face of an added risk of living too long. This effect will depend both on the extent to which

retirement incomes have been annuitized (which varies a great deal across our countries) and the

importance of any bequest motive that might exist. We will not incorporate health risk into this




                                                 11
draft but note that it is an important topic, on which we are gradually gaining a better empirical

understanding, for inclusion in future drafts.

2. Sources of Data

      This research will rely on micro-data from the US and Britain. For the US, we will use the

Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and primarily the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics

(PSID). For Britain, we will use the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS). Besides the

standard set of demographics on age, schooling, family income, marriage and other aspects of

family building, outcomes information available in all these surveys include several aspects of

housing choice—ownership, size of house, and value of house.

HRS

      This research uses a set of surveys of the over-age 50 population: the original Health and

Retirement Study (HRS-original) and the Assets and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old

(AHEAD. HRS-original is a national sample of about 7,600 households (12,654 individuals) with

at least one person in the birth cohorts of 1931-1941 (about 51-61 years old at baseline). AHEAD

includes 6,052 households (8,222 individuals) with at least one person born in 1923 or earlier (70

or over in 1993). Follow-ups have taken place at two-year intervals.

      HRS housing section includes wave-by-wave data about tenure (renter or owner), value and

purchase price of the home, outstanding mortgages (and hence home equity) and monthly

mortgage payments, whether the household refinanced since the last interview, other fixed

payments (e.g., property taxes, fuels, etc), rents (if a renter), and number of rooms. Information is

also available on second homes. In this draft of the paper, HRS is used simply to confirm the

principal patterns of changing housing demand obtained from the PSID during later life.

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics

      The PSID has gathered almost 30 years of extensive economic and demographic data on a

nationally representative sample of approximately 5,000 (original) families and 35,000



                                                 12
individuals who live in those families. Details on family income and its components have been

gathered in each wave since the inception of PSID in 1967. Starting in 1984 and in five-year

intervals until 1999, PSID asked questions to measure household wealth. Starting in 1997, the

PSID switched to a two-year periodicity, and wealth modules are now part of the core interview.

         In each wave, the PSID asks detailed questions on family size and composition, schooling,

education, age, and marital status. State of residence is available in every year and individuals are

followed to new locations if they move. Unlike other American wealth surveys, PSID is

representative of the complete age distribution. Yearly housing tenure questions determine

whether individuals own, rent or live with others. Questions on value and mortgage were asked in

each wave of the PSID. Renters are asked the rent they pay and both owners and renters are asked

the number of rooms in the residence. Health conditions and timing of onset were added in 1999.

British Household Panel Survey—BHPS

         The BHPS has been running annually since 1991 and, like the PSID, is also representative

of the complete age distribution. The wave 1 sample consisted of some 5,500 households and

10,300 individuals. The BHPS contains annual information on individual and household income

and employment as well as a complete set of demographic variables and has several other

features to recommend it. There is an extensive amount of information on mortgages and housing

(including number of rooms) that enables us to measure housing wealth in each wave of the data4.

Regional variation in ownership and housing wealth accumulation will be essential in our tests

and the data will provide us with sufficient observations per year in each region to carry out our

tests.

Housing Price Volatility

         For the US, housing price data to measure housing price risk were obtained form the Office

of Federal Housing Enterprise (OFHEO) House Price Index. This data contain quarterly and


4
    With the exception of 1992 when house value was only collected for those living at new addresses.


                                                      13
yearly price indexes for the value of single-family homes in the US in the individual states and

the District of Columbia.5 This data use repeat transactions for the same houses to obtain a quality

constant index and is available for all years starting in 1974. All yearly housing prices by state are

reported relative to those that prevailed in 1980. By 1995 there were almost 7 million repeat

transactions in the data so that the number of observations for each state is reasonably large. No

demographic data are available with this index.

       For Britain, regional house price data to measure housing price risk will be obtained from

the Nationwide Building Society House Price series, which is a quarterly regional house price

series going back to 1974. Rather than use a repeat sales index, the prices are adjusted for

changes in the mix of sales to approximate a composition constant index, and are also seasonally

adjusted.

         As with our previous paper (Banks et al 2006), housing volatility is defined using a

moving five-year window. That is, our measure of volatility is the standard deviation of the house

price around its trend in the five-years prior to the observation. What should matter for individual

decisions of course is the conditional variance of expected house prices over the individuals

horizon and in this respect our measure is only crude, intending simply to capture that the recent

past might be used as a prediction of the future. Nevertheless, sensitivity analysis in previous

papers revealed the empirical conclusions to be broadly unaffected by choice of window-length

within reasonable ranges, and subject to the constraints of, and subsequent impacts on, the

amount of time-series variation available. Finally, with regard to picking out regional as opposed

to time-series variation in volatility, we are confident that the measure picks out the risky from

the safe regions both within and across countries.

3. Establishing the Facts




5
 For details on this data see “OFHEO House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description,” by Charles A. Calhoun,
March 1996.


                                                       14
      Even the basic question of whether housing is downsized as people age is not well

answered in the literature. For example, Venti and Wise (2001) concluded, based on the AHEAD

data in the United States, that, after controlling for transitions into widow hood and nursing

homes, the elderly do not generally reduce housing equity as they age. Yet, Sheiner and Weil

(1992) estimated that among households entering old age owning a home, just 41% still own

when the surviving spouse dies.

      One source of the differences that emerge in the current literature is that moving out of

home ownership is only but one form downsizing may take. Individuals may sell the original

family home to move into a smaller one whilst remaining owners either in the same or a different

general location. They can also remain home owners even if the size of the home is the same but

move to a less expensive and less volatile place. They may also invest less in upkeep of their

home, an implicit form of downsizing, or rent a room out. Or, they may move into the home of

another relative (especially children) or have them move into their own home, perhaps with

shared ownership. The years around labor market retirement and the death of a spouse may be

especially important ones for these transitions. Very little is currently known about the magnitude

and reasons for these broader cumulative transitions or about any international differences that

might exist. In this section, we document the principal empirical facts around these issues in both

the United States and the United Kingdom.

3.a Home Ownership Rates at Older Ages

      Especially at older ages most Americans are homeowners. Based on multiple waves of the

PSID, Table 1.a presents tenure status for individuals by age of the household head for ten year

age groups starting at age 50, concluding with a residual category of those 80 plus years old.

Using the same format, Table 1.b lists parallel data derived from the BHPS for individuals in

Britain. For both countries, the data are also stratified by whether or not the household lives in an

area characterized by volatile housing prices.




                                                 15
      Table 1.a shows that slightly more than eighty percent of all American individuals over age

50 are homeowners. Approximately one in every six Americans in this age group are renters,

while a relatively small fraction are in the catch all ‘other categories’ that largely consist of living

with relatives or in a nursing home. Among older Americans, there is a gradual decline in the

fraction who are home owners across age groups post age 70. Below age 70, home ownership

rates are about 83%—above age 80 the rate is 66%. Most of the decline in the probability of

owning a home appears as an increase in renting but some of it, particularly among those over age

70, reflects an increase in the likelihood of living with others or in a nursing home.

      For British individuals over age 50 (summarized in Table 1.b), the probability of being a

homeowner is about thirteen percentage points lower than that of American individuals, a deficit

mostly offset by a higher probability of renting. There is a much sharper negative age pattern in

Britain compared to the US across the age groups depicted in Table 1. Among those in their

fifties for example, there is less than a seven percentage point difference in home ownership rates

between the two countries—by ages 80+ the likelihood of owning a home is seventeen

percentage points lower in Britain compared to the US. As documented in Banks, Blundell, and

Smith (2003), this sharp negative age gradient in home owning rates in Britain largely reflects

cohort effects and the sale at subsidized rates of government owned council housing.

      In the United States, homeownership rates are much higher in non-risky housing price

locales than in the risky ones. One might be tempted to attribute this difference to the fact that

housing prices are also considerably higher in the risky places, but that temptation is deterred by

the fact that the reverse pattern appears in to be the case in Britain even though housing prices in

Britain are also higher in the more volatile housing price places.

3.b Changes in Housing Tenure with Age

      Our principal concern in this paper involves not homeownership status per se but rather the

transitions in tenure that takes place at older ages. The very pronounced cohort effects in housing

status in Britain documented in the previous section indicate that it would be perilous to attempt


                                                  16
to read housing transitions from cross-sectional age housing tenure patterns, especially in Britain.

Instead, in this section we will highlight the salient transitions using the panel nature of the data

in the US and Britain.

      Since much of the existing research on downsizing at older ages focuses on the decision to

sell one’s original home and become a renter, we begin with the transitions conditional or

originally being a homeowner. Table 2 examines these tenure transitions in the United States

(using the PSID) and Britain (using the BHPS) for a sub population who are at least fifty years

old and who were originally home owners in the initial period. Because the extent of the

transitions that place will depend on the length of the window during which we allow households

to adjust their status, the data are presented for three different durations between the waves of the

panel—two years apart, five years apart, and ten years apart. All tenure transitions are presented

separately for risky and non-risky price areas. Finally, Table 3 organizes the data in precisely the

same way for those who were initially renters.

      These two year transitions may illustrate why there is some skepticism about downsizing

being an important dimension of behavior at older ages. Across a two year period, only eleven

percent of American homeowners move and only one in twenty relocate during a single year.

Such mobility is even less in Britain where only about six percent of British home owning

households relocate over a two year horizon. However, as we allow the number of years between

the survey waves to expand, the extent of mobility taking place increases significantly. To

illustrate, over a decade, almost one in every three American home owners who were at least fifty

years old moved out of an originally owned home. Among those Americans who did move,

however, 71% of them remained homeowners by purchasing another home. Another 22% of them

became renters while the rest do a collection of things, including moving in with family members

or into group dwellings.

      Mobility among homeowners is clearly less in Britain for older households. Across the

same ten year span between survey waves, about one in every four British homeowners relocated


                                                  17
compared to about one in three American households. In these simple tabulations, in neither

Britain nor the US does an owner’s propensity to sell a home appear to depend on whether one

lives in a housing price risky or non-risky locale.

      Table 3 demonstrates that—not surprisingly—renters in both countries are far more mobile

than owners. Across the ten year survey interval, 72% of American renters moved at least once

compared to 40% of British renters so that once again British households are less mobile than

their American counterparts. Most of these originally renting households remain so and simply

settle into another apartment or flat. But a little more than one in every four American renters

who do relocate over age fifty subsequently become homeowners—the comparable British

number is one third. While these transitions rates were similar between risky and non-risky areas

for home owners, it appears that renters in non-risky areas are more likely to move in the US.

      Table 4 displays patterns of housing tenure transitions by ten year age groups for those

owners who are at least age 50 and Table 5 does the same for those who were originally renters.

In the United States, until after 80, roughly two-thirds of home owners do not move to another

place over a ten year window. However, among those who do move, a growing fraction of them

do not purchase another home. Rather they increasingly move into rental properties and to a less

extent into either assisted living or to stay with family members. The probability of a homeowner

moving into a rental property is far less in Britain than in the US and it is a good deal less likely

at older ages for an home owner in Britain to subsequently become a renter.

      In the United States and in Britain, renters become increasingly less mobile with age, once

again with an important exception noted during the 80s in the US. Forty-one percent of American

renters in their seventies stay in the same place over a ten year horizon compared to twenty-two

percent of American renters in the fifties. Across all age groups, many more American renters

relocate in the non-risky areas compared to the risky ones.

      Table 5 demonstrates that a good deal of the additional mobility among renters in the US in

non-risky areas involves larger movements from renter to owner status (compared to the risky


                                                  18
areas). To this point, we have emphasized the incentives involved in these housing decisions from

the point of view of owners. However, the arguments are completely symmetric. From the

perspective of those who were originally renters, changing from being a renter to an owner of

housing in a house price risky area would make little sense indeed. That transition is less

problematic in places where housing price risk is less problematic. Thus our model predicts that

mobility of owners should be higher in housing price risky areas but mobility of renters should be

the reverse- that is mobility will be higher among renters in the non-risky areas.



3.c Changes in the Number of Rooms

      In addition to changing ownership status—the most commonly used measure of

downsizing—another form may involve selling an existing home and buying a new one that is

spatially smaller or constitute less housing consumption in other ways. One definition of

objective home size available in all our data sets is the number of rooms. Using the PSID for

those ages fifty or more, Table 6 examines changes in the number of rooms of the primary

dwelling among those who changed residences between the waves of the data. These patterns are

presented by type of area (whether a risky price area or not), initial type of housing tenure (owner

or renter), and three time durations between the PSID waves—two, five, and ten years.

      These data indicate convincingly that among older Americans once they decide to relocate

that they do tend to move into a smaller dwelling. On average, the new house is around 0.7 of a

room smaller than the prior one, a scaling down of about 16% using rooms as the metric. This

tendency to downsize is almost entirely due to a movement to smaller places among those who

were initially homeowners. Moreover, most of that reduction in size is due to those who change

in housing tenure from owner to renter—a new rental dwelling that is on average two and a third

rooms smaller than the prior owned one. But—especially as the duration between the waves of

the PSID increases—even those who remain homeowners purchase a new home that is on

average about one third of a room smaller.


                                                 19
    At least in these univariate descriptive statistics, this tendency of Americans home owners to

downsize their house at older ages appears to be somewhat stronger if they originally lived in a

risky housing price area. This is especially the case amongst those home owners who sell and

then buy another home. Using the ten year interval horizon, the change in the number of rooms is

twice as high in the risky areas when homeowners buy another home. In non-risky areas, there is

little difference in size of dwelling among renters but renters do appear to downsize in the risky

area.

        One limitation of the PSID is that sample sizes become thin once one stratifies by age.

Tables 7 and 8 list similar data on the changing number of rooms associated with housing

mobility for two HRS cohorts where relatively long horizons are possible to track housing

changes. Table 7 provides data from the original HRS cohort (those 51-61 years old in 1992)

while Table 8 does the same for the AHEAD cohort (those 70+ years old in 1993.) These two

cohorts are of particular interest since the first captures transitions associated with the pre

retirement years while the second focuses on the nature of post-retirement mobility.

        During the pre-retirement years, we do find a tendency of Americans to downsize, but this

is concentrated completely on home owners and appears to be more pronounced in the price risky

places. Over a ten year ten horizon, homeowners who lived in price risky areas when they moved

reduced the size of their dwelling by 1.6 rooms if they became a renter and half a room on

average if they remained a home owner. The comparable figures for those in less housing price

risky areas were about a one room reduction if they became a renter and a .8 reduction if they

remained a homeowner—about half as large as the amount of downsizing taking place among

those living in the price risky areas.

        If anything these size reductions appear to be even larger in the post retirement AHEAD

cohort who are examined in Table 8. Conditional on relocation, there is a tendency to move to a

smaller place even if one remains a homeowner. This tendency is much stronger among those

who initially resided in a place with a lot of housing price risk.


                                                  20
         The comparable data on number of rooms for the sample ages fifty plus in Britain are

contained in Table 9 based on data from the BHPS. Downsizing at older ages characterizes

households in both countries although it is a less pervasive phenomenon in Britain than in the US.

The term less pervasive applies not only to a smaller probability of changing residences at all at

older ages in Britain, but also to a smaller change in the size of dwelling given that a move takes

place. If we compare Tables 6 and 9, the changes in number of rooms are almost half as large in

Britain compared to the US. The principal difference lies in the switch from owner to renter status

where the reduction in number of rooms in Britain is 1.4 compared to 2.2 in the US. As was the

case in America, the magnitude of the downsizing that takes place is somewhat larger in the

housing price risky areas of Britain compared to places with more stable housing prices.

3.d Escaping Housing Price Volatility

         Even when older householders remain home owners and stay in a home of approximately

the same size, they can avoid some of the costs of housing price risk by moving to places where

housing prices are less volatile. The data contained in tables 10.a (for the US) and 10.b (for

Britain) indicate that this is precisely what takes place. For those who moved, these tables

measure the difference in our measure of housing price risk (the standard deviation in housing

prices) between the area where they originally lived and the area to which they moved. Thus, a

positive negative number indicates that the area that they left was characterized by more housing

price volatility than the area to which they moved—that is the household was reducing their

exposure to housing price risk. In addition to age stratification, the data in Table 9 (based on the

PSID) and Table 10 (based on the BHPS) are stratified by whether one was originally an owner

or a renter and within each housing tenure type by the housing tenure type to which one moved.

Additional data for the American sample based on the two HRS cohorts are provided in Appendix

Table 1. In these tables, the American units of volatility were defined as ten times the British

units.




                                                 21
      There are a number of salient patterns, foremost of which is that after age 50 when they do

move people move on average to a place with less housing price volatility. The tendency of

Americans to move to less price volatile areas peaks during the dominant retirement years (ages

60-69) and actually reverses after age 80. This may not be surprising since housing decisions at

very old age may have more to do with attempts to provide care for the elderly when they become

frailer. This would include moving to assisted living communities and to live with relatives.

      Second, as predicted by the theory, the tendency to move to areas with less price volatility

is far more prevalent among homeowners than among renters. The difference for Americans in

the pre and post standard deviation of housing prices is six times larger among homeowners

compared to renters. Among homeowners, there is almost no change in volatility if the one

changes status from being an owner to a renter but a very large one if one remains a homeowner.

      These data on the change in housing price volatility associated with a move are also arrayed

by the length of the time transition between the surveys. The longer the time duration between the

surveys the greater the difference in location specific price volatility associated with the move.

This effect is particularly large among those who were originally in their fifties. In this age group,

the longer the time duration examined the more likely the move is associated with the retirement

decision, where other factors are less likely to play a major role.

      With this consideration in mind, Appendix Table 1 presents a similar array of data for two

important cohorts in the HRS data. The first is the original HRS cohort, those who were 51-61

years old in 1992. This cohort was largely in the immediate pre-retirement phrase of the life cycle

when the survey began. The second is the AHEAD cohort, a random sample of individuals who

were at least 70 years old in 1970. Most of these individuals were in the post-retirement phrase of

life. Individuals in both cohorts tend to move to less price volatile locations when they do move,

especially if they were originally homeowners and especially if they remain home owners after

the move. However, the escaping of price volatility is much larger in the pre-retirement cohort

especially as the duration of time between the survey snapshots increases. One reason that this


                                                  22
effect is smaller in the post retirement AHEAD cohort is that many of them have already moved

after retirement to a less price volatile place.

      Table 10.b lists parallel numbers for Britain. Just as in the States, British citizens also tend

to move to less volatile housing areas if they do decide to move, but on average the escape from

volatility is less dramatic there than in the US. In spite of this similarity, there are some

important differences between the two countries as well. For example, the escape from volatility

in Britain appears not to vary substantially by age and also appears to be as large among renters

as among owners.

4. Model Estimates

      We will estimate a number of empirical models that relate to the downsizing decisions at

older ages. These models include the following for those who did change residences across the

waves of the data (i.e., movers); the change in the number of rooms, the change in the price

volatility of the location in which one lives, and the change in the value of the house (for those

who remained home owners). Since these models condition on the decision to move, we also use

the full sample to estimate a probit model of the decision to change residence (where our

dependent variable takes a value of one if the individual moves) and the change in the number of

rooms. Having these two models side by side allows us to distinguish between the effects of

variables on the probability of moving and then conditional on that probability the probability that

one downsizes housing. These models are also combined into a single model of downsizing at

older ages.

      We include in all models the following sets of demographic variables—a set of five year

age dummies beginning at ages 50-54 with those ages 80 and over the reference group, the

change in the number of people living in the house, three marital status transitions (married-

single, single-married, single-single with married-married as the omitted group), and children

living at home transitions (kids-no kids, no kids-kids, no kids-no kids with kids-kids as the




                                                   23
omitted group). The marital and child transition variables tell us, conditional on the changes in

the number of residents, whether the type of resident matters. For example, one might suspect that

children would matter more than spouses in these transitions since they might have a bigger

impact on the number of rooms. Because not all transitions from married to single are the same,

we also include a dummy variable for whether or not one became widowed across the waves.

      The probability of moving and hence the possibility of downsizing may be related to work

transitions including retirement that take place at these ages. Therefore, a set of work transitions

are included in these models (work-no work, no work-work, no work-no work with work-work as

the omitted category). Unlike the demographic variables above which are common to the family

unit, the work variables are individual level variables.

      The economic variables include the ln of real annual income and education, measured by

years of schooling. In the United States education is separated into three groups—13-16 years of

schooling, 16 or more years of schooling with 12 or fewer years the reference group. In Britain

we construct broadly comparable groups based on educational qualifications—the lowest

education (reference) group are those with compulsory schooling only, the middle group has

some post-compulsory schooling or vocational qualifications but less than a college degree, and

the final group has college degrees or higher.

      We also include a measure of baseline house value (for home owners only) and home

equity and baseline housing price volatility. A linear time trend is part of all models. The data

used for estimation are based a sample of individuals ages fifty and more using the PSID for the

United States (for all years 1968-1999) and the BHPS for Britain (years 1993-20046).

4.1 The Probability of Moving

      Tables 11.a (for the United States) and 11.b (for the United Kingdom) lists estimated

derivatives and the associated z statistics obtained from probit models of the probability of

6
  Although the BHPS sample began in 1991, data on house value was only collected for those who were
interviewed at a new address in 1992. Since our models are based on differences, we effectively have data
starting in 1993.


                                                    24
changing residence (leaving aside the issue of changing areas or locations for the time being). For

each country, models are estimated across three time horizons—one, five, and ten years.

      If we examine first the set of transition variables included in the model (marriage, kids, and

work), the reference group (married-married, kids-kids, and work-work) is generally the one least

associated with residential mobility. Next in line tends to be the other category which also does

not involve a transition between states over the time period under consideration (single-single, no

kids-no kids, and no work-no work). The higher effect compared to the reference group may

reflect lagged effects of transitions into the single, no kids, or no work states. If a marriage

transition did take place, the demographic one most likely to lead to higher residential mobility

are from single to married. Compared to the transition from married to single of which it is a part,

becoming widowed is less likely to result in mobility presumably since it is not necessary that

somewhat move in this case. The impact of kids leaving home on mobility appears to be larger in

the US than it is in Britain. The estimated magnitude of these demographic transitions effects do

not change significantly with the time horizon over which the effects are estimated. The two work

transitions are about equally likely to induce additional mobility in both countries. The results are

generally remarkably similar in the two countries with the principal transitional difference taking

place in the dimension of the kids at home variables.

      We next describe the estimated impacts of the economic variables included in the models.

Several dimensions of economic resources are measured, including ln household income,

education, whether or not one is initially a home owner, house value and home equity among

home owners. Statistically significant positive education and income effects are estimated for

both countries, effects that increase in size with the duration of the horizon. Given the stage of the

life-cycle that we are examining, income is not a proxy for job market opportunities in alternative

labor markets. These are more likely income effects that capture the ability to finance moves and

the ability to purchase amenities associated with localities that are no longer tied to jobs.




                                                  25
      Consistent with the descriptive tables above, home owners in both countries are less mobile

than renters even after controlling for this set of economic and demographic variables . However,

conditional on being a home owner in both countries, mobility rises with the value of the house

but declines with home equity when both variables are in the model. One interpretation of the

home value effect (in addition to the normal income effect mentioned above) is that as the value

of home goes up people are consuming a lot of housing relative to their income inducing them to

want to downsize their house. Conditional of the value of the house, and increase in home equity

is equivalent to a reduction in the stock and flow of mortgage payments which makes it less likely

that people move to reduce those payments.

      We estimate positive but statistically weak impacts of price volatility on mobility in

Britain. One reason for not being able to estimate volatility effects in Britain may be that there

are much fewer years over which to estimate the volatility effect in Britain, a point which will

become a theme in what follows. Particularly for the longer differences the time-series variation

is extremely limited in the British sample—with 12 years of data we have t=2 for a ten-year

difference—and since our identification of the volatility effects depends on time-series as well as

regional variation there is only a very limited extent to which we could detect volatility effects.

      We estimate a negative effect of price volatility in the US, that is higher price volatility is

associated with a lower probability of moving. As explained above, there is no unambiguous

prediction of the effect of price volatility on the geographic mobility. On the one hand, higher

price volatility should encourage owners to move in order to either downsize or escape the

volatility. On the other hand, higher price volatility makes renters more constrained in their

moves since they should not be eager to change their tenure status by buying a house. To test this

idea, we ran separate models in the US for the ten year horizon for owners and renters. The

estimated effect (derivative) of volatility on mobility was 0.001 (z= 3.26) for owners and -0.003

(z= 5.92) for renters. These results also suggest that it more be more appropriate to estimate the




                                                  26
models on alternative forms of transitions (owners-owners, owners-renters, renters-owners, or

renters- renters) for the predictions differ.

       Conditional on the attributes included in the model (which include incomes which will be

growing with time), negative mobility time trends are estimated in the United States and no time

trends in Britain. Finally, especially as the horizon expands to the ten year interval, we find that in

the United States those ages 80 and over are the most mobile. This no doubt reflects the

increasing necessity of moving into assisted living arrangements or moving in with relatives as

individuals’ health deteriorates at very old age. However, amongst the other age groups, those in

their fifties are the most mobile with mobility falling until people are in their early seventies. In

contrast, mobility in Britain is lowest amongst those eighty or more years old and peaks amongst

those in their late fifties.

4.2 The Change in the Number of Rooms—Movers

       The decision to move at older ages does not necessarily imply that downsizing of housing

is occurring. For that to be true, those who do move would have to reduce their housing

consumption in some form. The most direct quantitative measure of housing consumption

available in both countries is the number of rooms per dwelling. Tables 12.a (for the United

States) and 12.b (for Britain) list estimated coefficients and the associated t statistics obtained

from OLS models of the change in the number of rooms per dwelling estimated across a sample

of movers. Once again, models are estimated across three time horizons—one, five, and ten years.

       Demographic attributes of the household are not surprisingly strong predictors of the

magnitude of housing demand. Reductions in the size of household (the dominant direction of

change during this phrase of the life-cycle) are strongly associated with reductions in the number

of rooms. The impact of people moving out also depends on the types of people who are leaving.

In the United States, having no remaining children at home or having a spouse leave the home

reduces the size of the house while entry does the opposite. In the United States, the difference




                                                  27
between spouses and no children are not all that large suggesting that this is not simply a

bedroom effect. Lag effects of prior exit are no doubt operating as well since the no spouse-no

spouse and no kid-no kid are both associated with reductions in the size of the dwelling.

Conditional on changes in the number of household members, these demographic composition

effects associated with children are much smaller and less consistent in Britain compared to the

US. Marriage effects are more similar in the two countries.

       However, while work transitions were strongly correlated with mobility in both countries,

they have little impact on the size of dwelling unless they are also accompanied by demographic

changes in the household structure. The extent of downsizing, at least as measured in this

dimension, appears to increase with age in both countries. This age pattern becomes particularly

steep after age 70 when the evidence appears to support reductions in housing consumption with

age.

       Moreover, the age patterns of downsizing in housing consumption that occur are by and

large independent of the other demographic and work transitions (marital status, work status, and

kids at home status) in the sense that these estimated age patterns are about the same when all the

demographic and work transitions are excluded from the model. Thus, these age patterns lend

support to the most basic prediction of the life-cycle model that at sufficiently old ages total

consumption, of which housing is a very important part, will tend to decline. We return to this

point again in section 5 below.

       Not only is higher household income associated with higher mobility at older ages it also is

associated, particularly in Britain, with a reduced likelihood of reducing the size of the dwelling

once one does move. Given the general desire to downsize at older ages, families in their present

houses have more housing that they really need at this stage of their lives. Not downsizing puts

the load on other forms of non- housing consumption to fall. Essentially the amenities of a ‘too

large’ house (family memories, associations with old neighbors etc) can be thought of as a luxury

good, which the more well- to- do are more able to afford.


                                                  28
      In the US, there is limited evidence of a net impact of education on the size of the house

with some tendency for less educated British households to downsize more, even conditional on

their lower incomes. Increases in the value of the initial owned home tends to lead to a larger

decrease in the size of the dwelling suggesting that when a lot of resources are tied up in the

house, there is a greater tendency to downsize at older ages. The same is true when one has a lot

of equity in the home although this effect is only found in Britain at the ten year horizon.

      In the United States, consistent with the theory outlined above, living in a more price

volatile area does encourage additional downsizing among those who do move. There appears to

be little effect in Britain although one obtains the expected negative point estimate of the effect at

the ten year horizon, albeit only with a t-value of 1.5.

4.3 The Change in the Number of Rooms—Full Sample

      In the previous two sections, we estimated separate models for the probability of changing

residences at older ages and the change in the number of moves conditioned on being a mover.

The advantage of the two part model is that we can more easily detect whether variables have

differential effects on mobility and the consequences of that mobility for housing consumption.

We have already seen that in a number of cases the estimated effects are even of different sign. In

this section, we ignore that separation by estimating the effect of co-variates on the changing

number of rooms over the full sample of respondents. Since most people in fact do not move at

all at older ages, these estimated effects will of course be necessarily smaller.

      Not surprisingly, the estimated impacts of demographic variables resemble those estimated

over the mover sample but at much diminished magnitude. The size of these demographic

associated with family related transitions tends to increase with the time duration of the window

in which a move can take place. In both countries, the transition from married to single is

associated with a smaller dwelling, while the reverse is true when people change from the single

life to a married one. Two differences between the two countries in the impact of the




                                                  29
demographic transitions are first that widowhood has no impact on the size of the house in Britain

while it tends to reduce the number of rooms in the US. Second, the transitions associated with

children appear to have no effect in Britain but kids leaving home do promote some downsizing

in the US. The only consistent impact of work transitions on the size of the dwelling in either

country is that the transition from work to no work (presumably during these ages mostly

retirement) leads to a smaller house.

      Higher incomes strongly discourage downsizing in both countries with somewhat larger

estimated impacts in Britain. This implies that the increase in probability of moving is offset the

fact the move is less likely to reduce the size of the dwelling. Across the full sample, higher home

values encourage downsizing in the US but there is no effect in Britain. Home equity appears to

have little impact in either country. Once again the estimated patterns with age indicate that

housing consumption does decline with age, a decline that cannot be explained by the other

demographic and work transitions included in these models. These adjusted age patterns of

downsizing appear to be larger in the US than they are in Britain. On net, higher housing price

volatility encourages downsizing in US with statistically significant effects in Britain.



4.4 Changes in House Price

        In addition to the number of rooms, the other dimension of housing consumption that we

can measure in both countries is the change in the value of the house among those who move.

By necessity, the sample over which these models are estimated are homeowners who moved but

who remained home owners. These models are presented in Tables 14.a (for the US) and 14.b

(for Britain). In order to control for any state or region wide capital gains in housing, these

models include two additional variables that are not in the change in rooms equation. The first is

the percent change in the real price of housing in the state of origin over the horizon used in the

regression (measured as the delta in the geometric means) and the second is whether or not one

changed state of residence when a move took place. Not surprisingly, individual level changes in


                                                  30
house values when people move are positively correlated with area wide real housing price

changes.

        A useful comparison is to compare the results for the two dimensions of downsizing-

change in number of rooms amongst movers (Table 12) and change in home price (Table 14).

Taking into account that sample sizes are much smaller in the model for the change in ln home

value specification the results for the US are generally similar but statistically weaker than for the

change in number of rooms. In particular, becoming single or having the final child leave home,

and more generally reductions in the number of people living in the household, are all associated

with a move to a less expensive home. There is little association of the value of the home with

any of the work transitions. Most important, volatility at baseline has the expected negative

coefficient in both the change in rooms and change in ln home value models but it is less

statistically significant in the home value specification. Perhaps, the biggest difference is that

income effects are much weaker in the change in home value model in the US. If anything the

results in Britain are weaker still where we encounter a lack of precision on our estimates of the

volatility terms and weaker income effects than in the model for the change in rooms.



4.5 Reducing price volatility


        We have argued that, from an exposure to house price risk point of view, one alternative

to downsizing is to protect your assets in housing by moving to a less price volatile housing area.

Tables 15.a and 15.b model the change in housing price volatility among movers for the US and

Britain respectively. The outcome variable is measured as current housing price volatility minus

volatility in the new location, so that positive values imply a movement to a less housing price

volatile area. The same set of variables that entered the room downsizing model are included in

this model for escaping housing price volatility. Examining first table 15.b, we can see

immediately why it is so difficult to obtain an effect for housing price volatility in Britain. Given



                                                  31
the short time span over which models are estimated there, there is a very strong time trend in

volatility that dominates everything else included in the model. Conditional on this trend, (where

price volatility is increasing over time), there are little remaining systematic associations with

price volatility in Britain.

         Given the longer number of years available for analysis coupled with more systematic

and larger differences between the volatile and less volatile areas, more interesting results were

obtained for the US model summarized in Table 15.a. A positive coefficient in these models

indicates that a variable is associated with moving to an even less price volatile area. To begin

with we see that many of the demographic transition variables associated with other forms of

downsizing are also important here. Most importantly, the transition of the last child leaving

home is associated with a greater tendency to move to a less housing price volatile area, and those

families whose children have already left home (the kids-no kids group) are also more likely to

search out a less price volatile area than those whose children remain in the home Once again, we

interpret this as a lagged effect of children leaving home prior to the baseline year since the

subsequent decision to relocate may not be instantaneous. Second, those households who either

are retired or who become retired are also likely to reduce the housing volatility associated with

the place where they decide to reside by more.

         In contrast to some of the other measures, however, we do not find significant effects of

changes in marital status or widowhood, even over the longest time-period horizons. Finally, we

find contrasting education and income effects that are somewhat hard to interpret—conditional on

income, the more educated are less likely to reduce their house price volatility which is somewhat

of a puzzle, although the effect of income would be to offset this unconditionally, since those

with higher incomes tend to reduce their house price volatility by more. Since the age coefficients

tend to become less positive after age groups 55-59 and 60-64, the tendency to seek out places in

less volatile areas peaks in that age group.




                                                  32
5. Consumption Trajectories at Older Ages

      One of the more hotly debated issues regarding life-cycle patterns of consumption with age

concerns whether households reduce their consumption at older ages. The importance of the

debate stems in part from the fact that it is a basic implication of the life-cycle model that such

consumption declines should occur in part due to rising rates of age specific mortality at older

ages. There are of course other reasons for consumption to fall with age particularly related to the

shrinking of households as children leave home and widowhood becomes more common. Thus,

the question is ask is whether consumption declines in addition to any changes induced by a set of

demographic changes producing smaller households and the decision to retire from the labor

force. Housing is an important component of total consumption and is believed to one of the

resistant to any downward changes. Thus, we argue that evidence showing a downward path of

housing consumption adds important evidence to this debate.

      To provide such evidence, Figure 2.a plots the change in the number of rooms across age

bands that is estimated in the models for movers in Table 12.a and Table 12.b. Figure 2.b

provides similar plots except in this case the sample consists of all households whether or not

they change residence (i.e. the models estimated in Table 13.a and Table 13.b).For the purposes

of these plots, we used the models estimated over the five year horizon. The declines in housing

consumption documented in this section would be even larger if we used instead estimates

obtained from the ten year horizon. For both Figures 2.a and 2.b, we plot the estimated age

trajectories obtained whilst controlling for other transitions between waves (i.e. the models in

Tables 12 and 13 respectively), and also the trajectories estimated from a more restricted model

with the demographic and employment status transition variables excluded. In each country the

changes are normalized around the value for the 50-54 age group in the models without any

controls for demographic and work transitions.




                                                  33
      Figure 2.a demonstrates that there exists in both countries a clear decline in housing

consumption (as measured by the change in the number of rooms) for movers, a decline that

appears to accelerate after age 65. Except for very old ages (ages 75 and older) this decrease in

housing consumption appears to be roughly similar in both countries. After age 75, the decrease

in the number of rooms is clearly larger in the United States presumably reflecting the decline in

the number of rooms associated with widowhood in the US and the absence of any such

association in Britain. These declines in housing consumption are not trivial- about one room in

the US and a half a room in Britain.

      If we control for the other demographic and work transitions and all other covariates

included in the models in Tables 12.a and 12.b, the age patterns are very much the same

indicating declining housing consumption with age in both countries of about the same order of

magnitude. This indicates that the age patterns of declining housing consumption that we

document are not the result of either work or family transitions that are associated with aging.

      The age patterns that are plotted in Figure 2.b for all households (independent of whether

they move or not over the five year horizon) dramatize a much larger difference between the two

countries. In particular, the decline in housing consumption with age across this more relevant

sample of all households is clearly much larger in the US than it is in Britain. The decline in

number of rooms with age is a little less than half a room in the US and about one twentieth of a

room in Britain. The principal reason for the differences between Figures 2.a and 2.b is that

households are much less mobile in Britain than in the US.

      Our results indicate that housing consumption appears to decline with age in the US, even

after controlling for the other demographic and work transitions associated with age that would

normally produce such a decline. No such fall in housing consumption is found in Britain, largely

because British households are much more likely to stay in their original residence. The important

question that cannot be answered with data on housing alone is whether these results indicate a

more general tendency of less reduction in total household consumption in Britain compared to


                                                 34
the US at older ages. The alternative possibility is that the British adjust their non-housing

consumption downward more than American households do so that the patterns of total

household consumption with age are similar.

      There may of course be other transitions, not controlled for in our analysis, driving the

downwards trajectories observed . The principal candidates for transitions that are correlated with

age and not accounted for in our models would be health related. Health conditions are not

measured well in either the PSID or the BHPS and we will consider them instead in future work

that uses the HRS and ELSA panels. Declines in health in old age are of course closely related to

the principal factor (rising mortality risk) emphasized in life-cycle models that produces the

decline in consumption so that it may be difficult to disentangle these effects in practice.



Conclusions

        In this paper, we examined and modeled several types of housing transitions of the

elderly in two countries—Britain and the United States. One important form of these transitions

involves downsizing of housing consumption, the importance of which among older households

is still debated. We find that on balance—looking over a number of dimensions over a number of

transition intervals - downsizing is an important part of life for many older households in both

countries. For example over a decade, almost one in every three American home owners who

were at least fifty years old moved out of an their originally owned home. And mobility is much

higher in both countries (and in particular in the US) amongst renters. Moreover when they do

move we find that on average, households in both countries tend to downsize their housing

consumption. This downsizing takes multiple forms, including reductions in the number of rooms

per dwelling and the value of the home. There is also evidence that this downsizing is greater

when house price volatility is greater and in addition, that American households also try to escape




                                                 35
housing price volatility by moving to places that are experience significantly less housing price

volatility.

         Our comparative evidence in the descriptive tables in Section 3 also suggests that there is

less evidence of downsizing in Britain than in the US, although a note of caution is appropriate

here because we have a considerably smaller samples and a different (and shorter) time period in

Britain. Nevertheless, given differences in house price volatility across the countries this is a

result that is, on the surface, contrary to the predictions of our simple theoretical discussion.

Looking within country, however, we find the expected positive correlation between volatility

and downsizing (although this correlation is weaker in Britain where we have less variation in

volatility to exploit). This in turn suggests that other factors must account for the differences in

the average levels of downsizing across the two countries. Possible candidates would include the

role of lower mobility in general in Britain. Whilst this is only an incomplete explanation since

mobility is itself an outcome measure and one indicator of downsizing, if households are moving

less often (and their children and grandchildren are also less likely to move) then there will be

less downsizing to the extent that the number of rooms and a reduction in house value only

change on moving.

         Hence, other explanations might lie in transactions costs associated with moving in

Britain (where stamp duties are levied on house sales and the fixed costs associated with house

sales are both high and somewhat uncertain), the nature of bequests and inheritance tax bases and

the role of housing wealth in other economic institutions such as the means test for long-term

care. However, such mechanisms are unlikely to be the full explanation since mobility in Britain

is particularly low amongst renters. In addition, to the extent that retirement related mobility

yields movements outside Britain—to Spain and France, as opposed to Florida and Arizona, for

example - such transitions are not captured in our data although the empirical importance of such

transitions in Britain is still likely to be relatively limited. Finally, it is certainly the case that even




                                                    36
in the least volatile regions of Britain there is still considerable volatility so the possibility of

avoiding house price volatility altogether is somewhat limited. Such explanations should be

considered as topics for future research.




                                                    37
References

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and James P. Smith. 2003. “Wealth portfolios in the US and

      the UK” in D.Wise (ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of Ageing, Chicago University

      Press, 205-246.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and James P. Smith. 2003. “Financial Wealth Inequality in the

    United States and Great Britain,” Journal of Human Resources 38 (2), 241-279.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, Zoe Oldfield and James P. Smith 2006. “Housing Price

    Volatility and Housing Ownership over the Life-Cycle,” December.

Calhoun, Charles A. 1996. “OFHEO House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description,” Web

    address: http://www.ofheo.gov/media/archive/house/hpi_tech.pdf

Campbell, John and Joao Cocco. 2005 “How do House Prices Affect Consumption? Evidence

    from Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper 11534.

Cocco, Joao. 2005 “Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Housing,” Review of Financial Studies

    18, 535-567.

Davidoff, Thomas, 2004, Maintenance and the Home Equity of the Elderly, Fisher Center for

      Real Estate and Urban Economics Paper No. 03-288, University of California, Berkeley -

      Haas School of Business,

Disney, R., Henley, A. and Stears, G. (2002) ‘Housing costs, house price shocks and savings

    behaviour among older households in Britain’, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 32,

    September, pp.607-625.

Engelhardt, Gary. 1996 . “House Prices and Home Owner Saving Behavior,” Regional Science

    and Urban Economics 26, 313-336.

Ortalo-Magne, Francois, and Sven Rady. 2002. “Tenure Choice and the Riskiness of Non-

      Housing Consumption,” Journal of Housing Economics 11:266-79.


                                              38
Ortalo-Magne, Francois, and Sven Rady. 2005. “Housing market Dynamics: on the Contribution

     of Income Shocks and Credit Constraints,” Review of Economic Studies forthcoming.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2005. “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge against Rent

     Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics120(2), 763-789.

Sheiner, Louise, and David Weil. 1992. “The Housing Wealth of the Aged,” National Bureau of

    Economic Research Working Paper No. 4115.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. 2001. “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look,” in D.

     Wise (ed), Perspectives on the Economics of Ageing, Chicago University Press, 127-180.




                                             39
                                                    Figure 1a: The demographic ladder, US


                          1.0


                          0.8
             Proportion




                          0.6


                          0.4


                          0.2


                          0.0
                                20        25           30          35            40          45           50            55             60
                                                                                 Age

                                       Ever had child over age 5          Own child over 5 in household            Completed family size



                                                    Figure 1b: The demographic ladder, UK

                1.2


                1.0


                0.8
Proportion




                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                0.0
                           20                        30                        40                       50                        60
                                                                               Age

                                     Ever had child over age 5          Own child over 5 in household          Completed family size




                                                                          40
                                       Figure 2a

               Normalised change in number of rooms by age, movers only

                                                                US without covariates
  0
                                                                US with covariates

                                                                UK without covariates
-0.2
                                                                UK with covariates


-0.4



-0.6



-0.8



 -1



-1.2



-1.4



-1.6



-1.8
       50-54      55-59       60-64        65-69       70-74        75-79               80+



                                          39
                                         Figure 2b

                Normalised change in number of rooms by age, all households
                                                                   US without covariates
  0.1
                                                                   US with covariates

                                                                   UK without covariates
0.05
                                                                   UK with covariates
   0


-0.05


 -0.1


-0.15


 -0.2


-0.25


 -0.3


-0.35


 -0.4


-0.45
        50-54        55-59       60-64        65-69       70-74        75-79            80+


                                            40
                                          Table 1a
                     Tenure Status for Individuals by Age of Head, US

                     50-59          60-69          70-79          80+        Total
Owner                 83.0           83.1           77.5          65.5       80.5
Renter                15.0           14.6           19.2          28.8       16.7
Other                  1.9            2.3           2.5           6.7         2.8
Risky Areas
Owner                 77.2           74.9           68.4          57.4       73.7
Renter                21.2           22.9           29.9          36.1       24.4
Other                  1.6            2.2           1.7           4.6         2.0
Non- Risky Areas
Owner                 85.1           85.8           79.9          68.3       81.8
Renter                11.8           12.8           16.2          26.2       14.2
Other                  2.2            2.4           3.9           7.4         3.0
 Source: PSID—(1968-1999), weighted individual level data.

                                          Table 1b
                Tenure Status for Individuals by Age of Head of Family, UK

                     50-59          60-69          70-79          80+        Total
Owner                 76.5           71.0           63.2          48.2       67.6
Renter                19.7           25.3           31.8          42.5       27.5
Other                  3.8            3.7           5.1           9.3         4.9
Risky Areas
Owner                 78.7           74.7           66.2          50.6       70.5
Renter                17.4           21.9           29.2          39.4       24.7
Other                  3.9            3.4           4.7           10.1        4.8
Non- Risky Areas
Owner                 72.3           64.0           57.8          43.5       62.2
Renter                24.2           31.7           36.5          48.6       32.8
Other                  3.5            4.3           5.8           7.9         4.9
 Source: BHPS—(1991-2004), weighted individual level data.


                                            43
                                        Table 2
      Housing Transition among Owners in the United States and in the United Kingdom
                                 Two-Year Transitions
United States
                                           All                Risky             Non-Risky
Owner, Owner, No move                      88.9               89.4               88.7
Owner, Owner, Moved                         8.0                7.7                8.1
Owner, Renter                               2.2                2.3                2.1
Owner, Other                                0.9                0.6                1.0
United Kingdom
Owner, Owner, No move                     94.0                93.7               94.8
Owner, Owner, Moved                         4.2                4.5                3.5
Owner, Renter                               1.2                1.2                1.2
Owner, Other                                0.6                0.6                0.5
                                   Five-Year Transitions
United States
Owner, Owner, No move                      80.0               79.8               80.1
Owner, Owner, Moved                        14.3               14.7               14.1
Owner, Renter                               4.2                4.4                4.2
Owner, Other                                1.5                1.1                1.6

United Kingdom
Owner, Owner, No move                    86.5                 86.1               87.3
Owner, Owner, Moved                      10.7                 11.2                9.6
Owner, Renter                              2.1                 2.0                2.3
Owner, Other                               0.7                 0.7                0.8
                                  Ten-Year Transitions
United States
Owner, Owner, No move                      68.2               65.6               69.0
Owner, Owner, Moved                        22.7               26.0               21.7
Owner, Renter                               6.8                6.5                6.9
Owner, Other                                2.3                1.8                2.5
United Kingdom
Owner, Owner, No move                       76.1                  75.6           77.3
Owner, Owner, Moved                         20.2                  20.8           19.0
Owner, Renter                                 2.8                   2.6           3.0
Owner, Other                                  0.9                   1.0           0.7
  Source: US data based on PSID for all years 1968-1999⎯Population ages 50+. UK data are
based on BHPS. All data are weighted and are individual level data.




                                            44
                                          Table 3
      Housing Transitions among Renters in the United States and in the United Kingdom


                                          All                 Risky            Non-Risky
                                   Two-Year Transitions
United States
Renter, Renter, No move                    61.1                68.5               56.8
Renter, Renter, Moved                      27.0                22.7               29.4
Renter, Owner                               9.8                 6.8               10.2
Renter, Other                               3.0                 2.0                3.6
United Kingdom
Renter, Renter, No move                   88.2                 87.9               90.1
Renter, Renter, Moved                       6.6                 7.5                5.4
Renter, Owner                               4.0                 4.0                3.9
Renter, Other                               0.6                 0.7                0.6
                                   Five-Year Transitions
United States
Renter, Renter, No move                    59.0                64.6               56.3
Renter, Renter, Moved                      28.5                26.8               29.3
Renter, Owner                               8.4                 6.7                9.2
Renter, Other                               4.1                 1.9                5.2
United Kingdom
Renter, Renter, No move                   76.6                 75.3               78.5
Renter, Renter, Moved                     14.3                 15.7               12.3
Renter, Owner                               8.0                 7.8                8.3
Renter, Other                               1.1                 1.2                0.9
                                   Ten-Year Transitions
United States
Renter, Renter, No move                    28.2                37.1               22.5
Renter, Renter, Moved                      43.5                39.5               46.0
Renter, Owner                              24.2                20.9               26.2
Renter, Other                               4.2                 2.5                5.2
United Kingdom
Renter, Renter, No move                     59.8                  58.7           61.4
Renter, Renter, Moved                       24.1                  24.7           23.4
Renter, Owner                               14.6                  14.8           14.2
Renter, Other                                 1.4                   1.8           1.0
  Source: US data based on PSID for all years 1968-1999⎯Population ages 50+. UK data are
based on BHPS. All data are weighted and are individual level data.




                                            45
                                       Table 4
    Housing Transition among Owners by Age of Head (of family)—Ten Year Transitions

                                       50-59         60-69         70-79        80 plus
United States
Owner, Owner, No move                   70.8          70.2         62.9          42.8
Owner, Owner, Moved                     24.5          20.6         15.5          12.9
Owner, Renter                             3.6          6.3         12.2          38.0
Owner, Other                              1.1          2.9          5.8           6.3
                                       Risky Areas
Owner, Owner, No move                   64.5         65.7          74.9          46.9
Owner, Owner, Moved                     29.2         25.4          10.9          18.6
Owner, Renter                            4.8          7.5          10.9          25.5
Owner, Other                             1.6          1.5           3.4           9.0
                                     Non-Risky Areas
Owner, Owner, No move                    70.8         70.2         62.9          42.8
Owner, Owner, Moved                      24.5         20.6         15.2          12.9
Owner, Renter                             3.6          6.3         16.2          38.0
Owner, Other                              1.1          2.9          5.8           6.3
United Kingdom
Owner, Owner, No move                    73.5         74.0         81.1          79.0
Owner, Owner, Moved                      24.2         22.9         15.2          11.8
Owner, Renter                             1.7          1.9          3.2           7.1
Owner, Other                              0.6          1.1          0.6           2.1

                                       Risky Areas
Owner, Owner, No move                   73.2         73.5          81.1          76.1
Owner, Owner, Moved                     24.7         23.2          15.3          13.9
Owner, Renter                            1.4          2.0           2.9           7.9
Owner, Other                             0.7          1.3           0.8           2.2
                                     Non-Risky Areas
Owner, Owner, No move                    74.1         75.3         80.8          84.5
Owner, Owner, Moved                      23.0         22.2         14.9           7.8
Owner, Renter                             2.5          1.7          3.9           5.7
Owner, Other                              0.4          0.7          0.3           2.1


  Source: US data based on PSID for all years 1968-1999⎯Population ages 50+. UK data are
based on BHPS 1991-2004. All data are weighted are individual level data.
.




                                            46
                                         Table 5
          Housing Transition among Renters by Age of Head—Ten Year Transitions

                                        50-59         60-69        70-79         80 plus
United States
Renter, Renter, No move                  21.6          31.1         41.4          26.9
Renter, Renter, Moved                    40.6          47.0         41.8          56.4
Renter, Owner                            33.3          17.1         12.0           8.2
Renter, Other                              4.6          2.9          4.9           8.4
                                        Risky Areas
Renter, Renter, No move                 30.7         39.4           51.7          37.3
Renter, Renter, Moved                   38.8         41.1           37.3          44.5
Renter, Owner                           27.5         18.5            8.0           8.4
Renter, Other                            3.0          1.1            3.0           9.8
                                     Non Risky Areas
Renter, Renter, No move            15.3        25.7       35.3        22.6
Renter, Renter, Moved              41.9        50.7       44.4        61.1
Renter, Owner                       37.2       19.5       14.4         8.2
Renter, Other                        5.7        4.0        5.9         7.8
________________________________________________________________________

United Kingdom
Renter, Renter, No move                  45.5          61.2         61.5          71.0
Renter, Renter, Moved                    27.0          23.6         25.5          20.3
Renter, Owner                            26.1          13.8         11.3           7.6
Renter, Other                              1.4          1.5          1.7           1.1
                                        Risky Areas
Renter, Renter, No move                 43.4         54.3           64.3          72.5
Renter, Renter, Moved                   26.0         24.6           27.7          19.5
Renter, Owner                           28.3         18.3            6.4           7.5
Renter, Other                            2.3          2.9            1.6           0.5
                                     Non Risky Areas
Renter, Renter, No move                  48.9          69.1         57.5          69.0
Renter, Renter, Moved                    28.5          22.4         22.2          21.3
Renter, Owner                            22.6           8.6         18.6           7.7
Renter, Other                             0.0           0.0          1.8           1.9

  Source: US data based on PSID for all years 1968-1999Population ages 50+. UK data are
based on BHPS. All data are weighted are individual level data.




                                            47
                                      Table 6
Change in Number of Rooms among movers—PSID ages 50+ by number of years
___________________________________________________________________
                              2 years           5 years   10 years
___________________________________________________________________
                              Delta # of      Delta # of Delta # of
                               rooms           rooms      rooms

Owners                             -0.574            -0.739       -0.817
 Owners-renters                    -2.016            -2.102       -2.149
 Owners-new owners                 -0.191            -0.319       -0.395

Renters                        -0.004       -0.084        -0.176
 Renters-owners                 0.692        0.639         0.631
 Renters-new renters           -0.151       -0.311        -0.527
_____________________________________________________________________

Risky Areas
                                  Delta # of        Delta # of   Delta # of
                                   rooms              rooms        rooms
Owners                             -0.776            -0.970       -0.992
 Owners-renters                    -2.219            -2.358       -2.670
 Owners-new owners                 -0.383            -0.558       -0.641

Renters                             -0.094           -0.211       -0.357
Renters-owners                       0.336            0.413        0.348
Renters-new renters                 -0.158           -0.339       -0.629

__________________________________________________________________
Non- Risky Areas
                              Delta # of   Delta # of    Delta # of
                               rooms         rooms         rooms
Owners                         -0.517       -0.668        -0.756
 Owners-renters                -1.943       -2.023        -2.114
 Owners-new owners             -0.137       -0.242        -0.308

Renters                           0.034        -0.025            -0.078
 Renters-owners                   0.818         0.727             0.764
 Renters-new renters             -0.158        -0.297            -0.470
____________________________________________________________________
  Source: PSID ages 50+—(1968-1999)—rooms limited to eight. All data are weighted are
individual level data.




                                               48
                                      Table 7
Change in Number of Rooms among movers- Original HRS Cohort by number of years
___________________________________________________________________
                                2 years         6 years     10 years
___________________________________________________________________
                              Delta # of      Delta # of  Delta # of
                               rooms           rooms        rooms

Owners                             -0.298            -0.214       -0.796
 Owners-renters                    -1.276            -0.779       -1.191
 Owners-new owners                 -0.152            -0.134       -0.758

Renters                         0.310        0.149         0.323
 Renters-owners                 1.180        0.633         0.919
 Renters-new renters           -0.120       -0.206        -0.319
_____________________________________________________________________

Risky Areas
                                  Delta # of        Delta # of   Delta # of
                                   rooms             rooms        rooms
Owners                             -0.352            -0.234       -0.805
 Owners-renters                    -1.008            -0.659       -1.632
 Owners-new owners                 -0.268            -0.169       -0.668

Renters                             0.123             0.025       -0.054
Renters-owners                      1.411             0.753        0.477
Renters-new renters                -0.360            -0.442       -0.498

__________________________________________________________________
Non- Risky Areas
                              Delta # of   Delta # of    Delta # of
                               rooms         rooms        rooms
Owners                         -0.250        -0.210       -0.793
 Owners-renters                -1.348        -0.821       -0.996
 Owners-new owners             -0.078        -0.124       -0.787

Renters                             0.381             0.204        0.537
Renters-owners                      1.085             0.599        1.126
Renters-new renters                -0.132            -0.084       -0.191

____________________________________________________________________
Source: HRS—original cohort ages 51-61—rooms unlimited. All data are weighted are
individual level data.




                                               49
                                      Table 8
Change in Number of Rooms among movers- HRS Ahead Cohort by number of years
___________________________________________________________________
                                2 years         4 years     8 years
___________________________________________________________________
                              Delta # of      Delta # of Delta # of
                               rooms           rooms       rooms

Owners                          -0.509            -0.578       -0.646
 Owners-renters                 -2.039            -1.829       -1.619
 Owners-new owners              -0.231            -0.389       -0.507

Renters                         0.126       -0.073        -0.002
 Renters-owners                 0.748        0.636         0.951
 Renters-new renters           -0.297       -0.046        -0.300
_____________________________________________________________________

Risky Areas
                               Delta # of        Delta # of   Delta # of
                                 rooms             rooms        rooms
Owners                          -0.789            -0.800       -0.807
 Owners-renters                 -2.695            -2.001       -2.362
 Owners-new owners              -0.242            -0.489       -0.387

Renters                          0.178             0.174        0.166
Renters-owners                   1.054             1.352        1.041
Renters-new renters             -0.261            -0.405       -0.540

__________________________________________________________________
Non- Risky Areas
                              Delta # of   Delta # of    Delta # of
                                rooms        rooms         rooms
Owners                         -0.424       -0.508        -0.592
 Owners-renters                -1.848       -1.731        -1.434
 Owners-new owners             -0.228       -0.355        -0.554

Renters                          0.105            -0.171       -0.091
Renters-owners                   0.586             0.361        0.872
Renters-new renters             -0.311            -0.485       -0.167

____________________________________________________________________
Source: HRS—Ahead Cohort—rooms unlimited. All data are weighted and are
individual level data.




                                            50
                                     Table 9
     Change in Number of Rooms among Movers—UK (BHPS) by Number of Years
___________________________________________________________________
                             2 years        5 years      10 years
___________________________________________________________________
                              Delta # of     Delta # of  Delta # of
                                rooms          rooms       rooms

Owners                             -0.629            -0.586          -0.449
 Owners-renters                    -0.558            -1.176          -1.442
 Owners-owners                     -0.876            -0.472          -0.314

Renters                       -0.396       -0.486         -0.442
 Renters-owners               -0.036       -0.103         -0.019
 Renters-renters              -0.615       -0.704         -0.699
_____________________________________________________________________

Risky Areas
                                   Delta # of        Delta # of    Delta # of
                                     rooms             rooms        rooms
Owners                              -0.683           -0.613         -0.466
 Owners-renters                     -0.861           -1.286         -1.593
 Owners-owners                      -0.636           -0.493         -0.322

Renters                             -0.433           -0.502          -0.456
Renters-owners                       0.048            0.079           0.105
Renters-renters                     -0.695           -0.792          -0.795

__________________________________________________________________
Non- Risky Areas
                              Delta # of   Delta # of    Delta # of
                                rooms        rooms        rooms
Owners                         -0.484      -0.521          -0.293
 Owners-renters                -0.906      -0.964          -1.140
 Owners-owners                 -0.335      -0.416          -0.409

Renters                             -0.333           -0.461          -0.421
Renters-owners                      -0.158           -0.345          -0.195
Renters-renters                     -0.460           -0.541          -0.560

____________________________________________________________________
Source: BHPS—rooms unlimited. All data are weighted and are individual level data.




                                                51
                                         Table 10.a
Differences in Housing Price Volatility by State in USA among Movers by Age Group
                                   Two year transitions
       ________________________________________________________________
                                50-59          60-69       70-79        80+     Total

All owners who move            0.055              0.065            -0.007         -0.008           0.044
 Owner to renter               0.074              0.062             0.003          0.005           0.017
 Owner to owner                0.064              0.070            -0.017          0.003           0.053

All renters who move           0.020              0.062             0.032         -0.002           0.033
 Renter to renter              0.009              0.055             0.017          0.002           0.023
 Renter to owner               0.054              0.097             .0145              0           0.074

All movers                     0.042              0.062             0.008         -0.005           0.038

                                   Five year transitions

                               50-59              60-69            70-79             80+           Total

All owners who move               0.090            0.072            0.014           -0.010         0.066
 Owner to renter                  0.047           -0.025            0.006           -0.014         0.011
 Owner to owner                   0.096            0.095            0.009           -0.075         0.081

All renters who move              0.033            0.104            0.048           -0.000         0.055
 Renter to renter                 0.011            0.072            0.025           -0.014         0.032
 Renter to owner                  0.073            0.199            0.163           -0.008         0.116

All movers                        0.070            0.078            0.027           -0.004         0.060

                                   Ten year transitions

                          50-59           60-69            70-79            80+            Total

All owners who move        0.152           0.067            0.011          -0.023          0.102
 Owner to renter           0.118          -0.029            0.029          -0.041          0.030
 Owner to owner            0.160           0.094            0.013           0.193          0.127

All renters who move       0.058           0.103            0.108          -0.097          0.074
 Renter to renter          0.027           0.048            0.111          -0.103          0.043
 Renter to owner           0.102           0.252            0.084          -0.187          0.138

All movers               0.121       0.075      0.038    -0.016   0.091
PSID Ages 50+ 1968-1999
________________________________________________________________________



                                            52
                                       Table 10b
        Differences in Housing Price Volatility by State among Movers by Age group, UK
                                         (BHPS)

                               Two year transitions
      ________________________________________________________________
                            50-59      60-69        70-79   80+    Total

All owners who move            0.015       0.020         0.014   0.018     0.016
 Owner to renter               0.020       0.018         0.015   0.023     0.019
 Owner to owner                0.014       0.021         0.013   0.011     0.016

All renters who move           0.014       0.020         0.025   0.020     0.019
 Renter to renter              0.014       0.022         0.028   0.022     0.021
 Renter to owner               0.015       0.016         0.019   0.017     0.016

All movers                     0.015       0.020         0.019   0.019     0.017

                                 Five year transitions

                               50-59       60-69         70-79     80+     Total

All owners who move            0.036       0.038         0.035   0.041     0.037
 Owner to renter               0.056       0.039         0.028   0.056     0.045
 Owner to owner                0.034       0.038         0.037   0.026     0.035

All renters who move           0.028       0.037         0.045   0.028     0.035
 Renter to renter              0.030       0.042         0.044   0.039     0.038
 Renter to owner               0.027       0.026         0.046   0.006     0.029

All movers                     0.033       0.038         0.040   0.035     0.036

                                 Ten year transitions
                             50-59       60-69        70-79        80+     Total

All owners who move          0.076        0.079          0.076    0.086    0.078
 Owner to renter             0.087        0.087          0.068    0.096    0.085
 Owner to owner              0.075        0.079          0.078    0.080    0.077

All renters who move         0.077        0.069          0.069    0.069    0.072
 Renter to renter            0.078        0.073          0.070    0.071    0.073
 Renter to owner             0.075        0.063          0.066    0.066    0.069

All movers                 0.076      0.077      0.073     0.078   0.076
________________________________________________________________________




                                          53
                                        Table 11.a
        Probit Models of the Probability of Moving Between Waves—Unites States
                                         Horizon

                                    One year           Five years         Ten years
                                df/dx      t        df/dx      t       df/dx     t

Education 13-15 baseline        .027    6.81        .035    5.31        .042      4.37
Education > 16 baseline         .021    5.16        .044    6.41        .043      4.45
Year at baseline               -.001    7.69       -.004   12.98       -.007     13.00
Age 50-54                       .036    6.16        .010    0.91       -.090      3.65
Age 55-59                       .020    3.54       -.019    1.69       -.118      4.86
Age 60-64                       .004    0.81       -.036    3.30       -.129      5.38
Age 65-69                      -.006    1.03       -.062    5.79       -.157      6.68
Age 70-74                      -.013    2.37       -.055    4.95       -.158      6.59
Age 75-79                      -.013    2.10       -.073    6.10       -.150      5.85
ln income at baseline           .007    5.04        .011    3.81        .018      4.08
Volatility at baseline         -.001    5.38       -.001    3.43       -.000      0.98
Married/single                  .149   13.54        .164   16.55        .144     12.21
Single/married                   354   16.63        .343   17.88        .331     13.59
Single/single                   .025    7.44        .060    9.21        .065      6.63
Became widowed                 -.007    2.13       -.016    2.45        .001      0.06
Kids/no kids                    .085   11.02        .085   11.69        .106     11.72
No kids/kids                    .110    9.82        .144   10.49        .125      6.91
No kids/no kids                 .038   14.97        .087   17.39        .113     13.95
Change in household size       -.002    0.84       -.004    1.55        .004      1.54
Work/not work                   .063   10.65        .075   12.03        .057      7.72
Not work/work                   .057    7.21        .072    5.55        .102      4.79
Not work/not work               .028    9.67        .047    9.11        .067      8.47
Owner                          -.396   20.81       -.506   21.82       -.548     20.12
ln house value (baseline)       .033   11.11        .042    8.56        .047      6.88
ln home equity (baseline)      -.051   20.89       -.061   14.71       -.055      9.47
(Have negative home equity)    -.149   16.33       -.208   12.82       -.197      8.44




                                          54
                                        Table 11.b
      Probit Models of the Probability of Moving Between Waves—United Kingdom
                                         Horizon

                                   One year          Five years         Ten years
                               df/dx      t       df/dx      t       df/dx     t

Education—com sch leaver       .012    3.46       .048    5.48       .085       4.41
Education—A levels             .001    0.43       .027    3.46       .046       2.60
Year at baseline               .001    2.01       .001    0.87       .004       0.69
Age 50-54                      .013    2.97       .064    5.18       .075       2.68
Age 55-59                      .012    2.81       .058    4.94       .092       3.51
Age 60-64                      .003    0.69       .034    3.03       .042       1.73
Age 65-69                     -.005    1.38       .026    2.38       .019       0.80
Age 70-74                     -.007    1.99       .002    0.22       .025       1.13
Age 75-79                     -.003    0.89      -.002    0.20       .022       0.97
ln income at baseline          .000    0.09       .010    2.16       .020       1.92
Volatility at baseline         .035    1.17       .084    1.03       .242       1.53
Married/single                 .175    7.69       .294   11.01       .241       5.56
Single/married                 .262   10.66       .342   12.12       .232       5.43
Single/single                  .005    2.08       .020    3.27      -.001       0.04
Became widowed                -.029    4.65      -.099    5.84      -.144       3.81
Kids/no kids                   .015    1.55      -.020    1.52      -.072       2.54
No kids/kids                   .023    1.16       .012    0.29       .060       0.81
No kids/no kids                .005    1.19      -.010    0.86      -.063       2.03
Change in household size       .003    1.42       .005    1.31       .012       1.71
Work/not work                  .039    6.83       .052    5.79       .077       4.35
Not work/work                  .025    3.47       .054    3.46       .061       1.87
Not work/not work              .008    3.16       .020    2.64       .030       1.66
Owner                         -.036    3.32      -.081    3.15      -.077       1.47
ln house value (baseline)      .015    3.73       .050    5.54       .039       2.14
ln home equity (baseline)     -.013    3.96      -.051    7.27      -.051       3.24
(Have negative home equity)   -.027    2.58      -.076    2.48      -.095       1.37




                                         55
                                     Table 12.a
    Models of Changes in Number of Rooms Between Waves—United States—Movers
                                      Horizon

                                  One year         Five years        Ten years
                               Coeff     t       Coeff     t      Coeff     t

Education 13-15 baseline       .048    0.95      .065    1.39     .069    1.38
Education > 16 baseline        .055    0.97      .097    1.98     .115    2.21
Year at baseline              -.001    0.41     -.008    3.65    -.008    2.80
Age 50-54                      .521    6.95     1.023   13.40    1.413   12.82
Age 55-59                      .455    6.15     1.039   13.84    1.399   12.80
Age 60-64                      .526    7.59     1.018   13.66    1.247   11.44
Age 65-69                      .486    6.47      .842   11.08    1.059    9.58
Age 70-74                      .373    4.69      .672    8.47     .675    5.85
Age 75-79                      .347    3.98      .328    3.68     .291    2.30
ln income at baseline          .079    4.34      .124    6.47     .121    5.56
Volatility at baseline        -.006    2.89     -.011    6.23    -.016    8.40
Married/single                -.649    7.06     -.478    8.72    -.565   10.60
Single/married                 .248    2.22      .483    5.90     .479    5.51
Single/single                 -.210    4.84     -.319    7.76    -.445    9.68
Became widowed                -.050    1.10     -.032    0.81     .019    0.47
Kids/no kids                  -.592    7.14     -.588   11.48    -.718   14.28
No kids/kids                   .352    3.22      .348    4.18     .600    6.61
No kids/no kids               -.119    3.13     -.324    8.61    -.529   11.84
Change in household size       .310   12.74      .304   21.03     .267   19.83
Work/not work                  .068    1.02     -.031    0.76     .025    0.62
Not work/work                 -.026    0.28      .070    0.83     .014    0.13
Not work/not work              .067    1.76      .094    2.59     .048    1.16
Owner                         -.026    0.19      .131    1.00     .565    3.93
ln house value (baseline)     -.150    4.59     -.204    6.50    -.298    8.68
ln home equity (baseline)     -.068    2.48     -.070    2.57    -.008    0.27
(Have negative home equity)   -.294    2.62     -.202    1.82     .032    0.26
Constant                      -.538    2.38    -1.178    5.06   -1.483    5.49




                                      56
                                    Table 12.b
  Models of Changes in Number of Rooms Between Waves—United Kingdom—Movers
                                     Horizon

                                  One year       Five years       Ten years
                               Coeff     t     Coeff     t     Coeff     t

Education—com sch leaver       -.292   1.72    -.130   1.32    -.171   1.30
Education—A levels             -.046   0.27     .180   1.90     .098   0.76
Year at baseline                .039   1.89     .019   0.91    -.063   1.19
Age 50-54                       .460   1.84     .559   3.58    1.332   6.50
Age 55-59                       .388   1.63     .649   4.32     .879   4.55
Age 60-64                      -.117   0.48     .322   2.16     .912   4.83
Age 65-69                      -.170   0.69     .439   2.96     .708   3.71
Age 70-74                      -.043   0.17     .154   1.02     .573   3.19
Age 75-79                      -.036   0.14     .032   0.21     .654   3.56
ln income at baseline           .434   4.83     .230   4.05     .296   3.76
Volatility at baseline          .954   0.53     .406   0.37   -1.882   1.52
Married/single                 -.250   0.63    -.281   1.51    -.495   2.04
Single/married                  .381   1.25     .640   3.82     .856   4.01
Single/single                   .062   0.50    -.055   0.69     .048   0.43
Became widowed                  .460   0.71     .860   3.17    1.415   4.29
Kids/no kids                   -.164   0.37    -.164   0.98     .112   0.53
No kids/kids                   -.326   0.47    -.361   0.85    -.057   0.14
No kids/no kids                -.212   0.84    -.530   3.76    -.420   2.08
Change in household size        .643   8.12     .380   9.32     .498   9.94
Work/not work                  -.252   1.19    -.231   2.24     .002   0.02
Not work/work                   .560   1.93    -.029   0.17     .266   1.23
Not work/not work              -.079   0.51    -.002   0.02     .113   0.83
Owner                           1.53   2.82     1.35   4.37     .875   2.41
ln house value (baseline)      -.497   2.09    -.256   2.21     .071   0.59
ln home equity (baseline)       .071   0.38    -.074   0.86    -.267   2.55
(Have negative home equity)     .979   0.85    -.608   1.39     .081   0.16
Constant                      -4.644   4.89   -2.664   4.20   -2.652   2.44




                                        57
                                     Table 13.a
      Models of Changes in Number of Rooms Between Waves—United States—All
                                      Horizon

                                 One year         Five years       Ten years
                              Coeff     t       Coeff     t       Coeff      t

Education 13-15 baseline       .012    1.04      .024    1.38      .006    0.25
Education > 16 baseline        .017    1.41      .045    2.54      .096    3.74
Year at baseline              -.000    0.23     -.001    1.55      .002    1.21
Age 50-54                      .085    4.93      .433   13.96      .914   14.05
Age 55-59                      .076    4.49      .414   13.60      .890   13.76
Age 60-64                      .075    4.50      .404   13.40      .843   13.08
Age 65-69                      .073    4.39      .376   12.38      .761   11.73
Age 70-74                      .063    3.64      .305    9.66      .619    9.25
Age 75-79                      .050    2.67      .227    6.60      .430    5.98
ln income at baseline          .010    2.34      .040    5.30      .048    4.17
Volatility at baseline        -.001    1.35     -.003    4.34     -.006    6.01
Married/single                -.212    7.34     -.273   11.02     -.377   12.25
Single/married                 .292    6.06      .286    6.35      .346    5.87
Single/single                 -.055    4.87     -.165    9.36     -.252    9.70
Became widowed                 .016    1.33      .058    3.25      .073    2.94
Kids/no kids                  -.131    6.32     -.220   11.76     -.388   16.18
No kids/kids                   .055    1.83      .083    2.43      .268    5.54
No kids/no kids               -.029    3.65     -.136   10.13     -.277   12.70
Change in household size       .128   17.78      .175   28.15      .176   24.21
Work/not work                 -.015    0.90     -.053    3.33     -.053    2.68
Not work/work                 -.010    0.43     -.002    0.05     -.032    0.56
Not work/not work              .004    0.44      .002    0.15     -.037    1.79
Owner                          .062    2.04      .169    3.37      .408    5.60
ln house value (baseline)     -.033    4.49     -.089    7.42     -.150    8.59
ln home equity (baseline       .005    0.67      .004    0.35      .011    0.74
(Have negative home equity)    .011    0.40     -.021    0.49      .036    0.58
Constant                      -.097    1.85     -.463    5.09     -.876    6.07




                                        58
                                     Table 13.b
     Models of Changes in Number of Rooms Between Waves—United Kingdom—All
                                      Horizon
                                   One year         Five years        Ten years
                               Coeff      t       Coeff     t      Coeff     t

Education—com sch leaver      -.016   1.08      -.059    2.51      -.103    2.10
Education—A levels            -.011   0.80       .035    1.62       .101    2.25
Year at baseline               .003   1.72       .008    1.74      -.022    1.27
Age 50-54                     -.007   0.38       .078    2.39       .373    5.22
Age 55-59                      .004   0.24       .070    2.29       .193    2.93
Age 60-64                     -.014   0.80       .027    0.93       .225    3.64
Age 65-69                      .001   0.05       .032    1.11       .174    2.88
Age 70-74                     -.007   0.41      -.016    0.58       .081    1.44
Age 75-79                     -.005   0.29      -.009    0.30       .074    1.31
ln income at baseline          .025   3.21       .063    4.74       .120    4.36
Volatility at baseline         .227   1.75       .294    1.28      -.480    1.16
Married/single                -.095   1.31      -.405    6.16      -.555    5.12
Single/married                -.027   0.38       .333    5.02       .446    4.28
Single/single                  .001   0.11      -.006    0.32       .025    0.67
Became widowed                 .203   2.44       .548    6.95       .897    6.99
Kids/no kids                   .046   1.11      -.013    0.33       .024    0.30
No kids/kids                  -.140   1.60      -.055    0.44       .229    1.16
No kids/no kids               -.017   0.84      -.072    2.07      -.215    2.64
Change in household size       .111   9.64       .152   13.35       .227   11.91
Work/not work                 -.045   2.14      -.079    3.31      -.106    2.33
Not work/work                  .016   0.57       .009    0.22       .051    0.60
Not work/not work             -.012   1.02      -.009    0.43      -.005    0.10
Owner                          .108   2.86       .272    4.20       .483    3.60
ln house value (baseline)     -.019   1.00      -.034    1.27      -.016    0.32
ln home equity (baseline)     -.003   0.17      -.016    0.75      -.066    1.51
(Have negative home equity)    .015   0.15      -.244    2.01      -.204    0.92
Constant                      -.256   3.16      -.696    4.87      -.844    2.27




                                       59
                                     Table 14.a
 Models of Change in Ln Value of House Between Waves—United States—Home owners
                                  who are Movers
                                      Horizon
                                   One year         Five years        Ten years
                               Coeff      t      Coeff      t      Coeff     t

Education 13-15 baseline     -.018   0.51        .004    0.12      .063    1.77
Education > 16 baseline      -.008   0.21       -.046    1.48      .039    1.16
Trend                        -.001   0.46       -.001    0.91     -.013    5.69
Age 50-54                     .070   1.03        .097    1.27      .124    0.98
Age 55-59                     .011   0.17       -.027    0.36      .056    0.44
Age 60-64                     .050   0.76        .039    0.52      .103    0.82
Age 65-69                     .026   0.38        .033    0.43      .143    1.13
Age 70-74                     .017   0.24       -.003    0.03      .013    0.10
Age 75-79                     .045   0.57       -.109    1.24     -.075    0.53
ln income at baseline         .029   1.98       -.014    0.92     -.016    0.92
Volatility at baseline       -.004   2.42       -.004    2.89     -.002    1.51
Married/single               -.143   1.62       -.217    4.48     -.229    4.74
Single/married                .031   0.37        .056    0.87      .136    1.90
Single/single                -.060   1.41       -.125    3.08     -.011    0.24
New Widow                     .100   2.02        .048    1.20     -.031    0.75
Kids/no kids                 -.096   1.51       -.159    3.92     -.182    4.37
No kids/kids                 -.118   1.30        .316    4.52      .393    4.92
No kids/no kids              -.041   1.39       -.106    3.43     -.142    3.66
Delta state house price       .608   8.78        .545   13.21      .475   11.80
Changed state                -.044   1.06        .137    5.01      -127    4.51
Constant                     -.218   1.41        .367    2.24      .368    1.73




                                       60
                                    Table 14.b
Models of Change in Ln House Value Between Waves—United Kingdom—Home owners
                                 who are Movers
                                     Horizon
                                 One year         Five years      Ten years
                              Coef.     t       Coef.     t     Coef.    t

Education 13-15 baseline    .044    0.64      .054   1.60       .105   1.94
Education > 16 baseline    -.006   -0.08      .101   3.22       .121   2.39
Trend                       .002    0.14      .006   0.43       .019   0.50
Age 50-54                   .204    1.50      .289   4.46       .250   2.39
Age 55-59                   .231    1.74      .252   4.02       .198   1.96
Age 60-64                   .068    0.52      .226   3.60       .183   1.86
Age 65-69                   .116    0.81      .205   3.21       .133   1.34
Age 70-74                   .091    0.65      .145   2.20       .109   1.07
Age 75-79                   .099    0.68      .085   1.25       .062   0.61
ln income at baseline       .064    1.69      .024   1.22       .081   2.41
Volatility at baseline     -.725    0.77      .258   0.63      -.276   0.47
Married/single             -.139    0.70      .432   5.75      -.505   4.13
Single/married             -.045    0.31      .094   1.45       .219   2.06
Single/single              -.072    1.18      .038   1.20      -.059   1.05
New Widow                   .055    0.17      .442   3.92       .496   2.79
Kids/no kids               -.020    0.10     -.074   1.29      -.099   1.14
No kids/kids               -.451    1.58      .015   0.09      -.148   0.84
No kids/no kids             .026    0.24     -.048   0.96      -.144   1.73
Change in household size    .114    2.38      .116   6.63       .047   1.90
Work/not work              -.152    1.62     -.138   3.99      -.081   1.57
Not work/ work              .063    0.47     -.039   0.67       .038   0.39
Not work/not work           .005    0.07     -.015   0.44       .013   0.21
Delta region house price    .309    0.68      .838   9.22       .903   6.61
Changed region             -.163    2.71     -.122   4.21      -.019   0.42
Constant                   -.721    1.76     -.398   1.58     -1.010   1.68




                                     61
                                        Table 15.a
         Models of Change in Volatility Between Waves—United States—Movers
                                         Horizon
                                     One year        Five years       Ten years
                                Coef.       t       Coef.       t    Coef.      t

Education 13-15 baseline       -.102   1.04       -.276    2.52      -.505    3.84
Education > 16 baseline        -.028   0.25       -.496    4.33      -1.01    7.43
Year at baseline                .002   0.43       -.002    0.32      -.007    0.94
Age 50-54                       .263   1.83        .434    2.44       .547    1.92
Age 55-59                       .303   2.14        .549    3.14       .689    2.43
Age 60-64                       .275   1.93        .627    3.61       .596    2.11
Age 65-69                       .354   2.45        .347    1.96       .327    1.14
Age 70-74                      -.027   0.17        .253    1.37       .348    1.16
Age 75-79                       .178   1.07        .310    1.49       .215    0.66
ln income at baseline           .073   2.10        .298    6.71       .509    8.98
Married/single                 -.329   1.85       -.046    0.36       .002    0.01
Single/married                 -.069   0.31       -.253    1.32       .020    0.09
Single/single                  -.130   1.55       -.011    0.11       .116    0.96
Became widowed                  .043   0.49        .097    1.07       .113    1.05
Kids/no kids                    .392   2.44        .579    4.84       .332    2.53
No kids/kids                    .059   0.28        .242    1.24       .344    1.45
No kids/no kids                 .163   2.23        .292    3.32       .160    1.37
Change in household size        .074   1.62        .051    1.51       .037    1.06
Work/not work                   .499   3.85        .801    8.23       .550    5.31
Not work/work                   .233   1.34        .207    1.05       .279    0.99
Not work/not work               .252   3.41        .300    3.52       .193    1.78
Owner                          -.302   1.14       -.636    2.09      -1.32    3.52
ln house value (baseline)       .080   1.28        .188    2.57       .375    4.18
ln home equity (baseline)       .074   1.40        .137    2.13       .052    0.65
(Have negative home equity)     .297   1.37        .597    2.30       .225    0.69
Constant                      -1.316   3.02      -4.055    7.45     -5.568    7.91




                                         62
                                        Table 15.b
       Models of Changes in Volatility Between Waves—United Kingdom—Movers
                                         Horizon
                                     One year         Five years       Ten years
                                Coeff       t       Coeff     t     Coeff     t

Education—com sch leaver      -.000    0.09       .001     0.57      .001    0.42
Education—A levels            -.001    0.61       .001     0.38     -.000    0.28
Year at baseline               .003   15.48       .016    78.48      .038   54.77
Age 50-54                     -.006    1.98       .003     1.17     -.003    0.81
Age 55-59                     -.007    2.56       .001     0.50     -.007    1.88
Age 60-64                     -.005    1.90       .002     1.15     -.000    0.10
Age 65-69                     -.004     1.5      -.000     0.12      .003    0.84
Age 70-74                     -.002    0.71      -.000     0.21      .002    0.74
Age 75-79                     -.004    1.55      -.000     0.03      .006    1.68
ln income at baseline         -.001    0.55       .000     0.57      .004    2.61
Married/single                 .002    0.31      -.003     0.95     -.002    0.54
Single/married                -.001    0.31       .002     0.85      .010    2.63
Single/single                 -.001    0.75       .002     1.29      .005    2.26
Became widowed                 .001    0.09       .010     2.43      .002    0.33
Kids/no kids                   .010    1.78       .003     1.27     -.006    1.53
No kids/kids                  -.010    1.14      -.001     0.22     -.018    2.47
No kids/no kids               -.004    1.12       .002     0.73     -.005    1.35
Change in household size       .002    1.99      -.000     0.63     -.002    2.14
Work/not work                 -.002    0.86      -.002     0.96     -.003    1.41
Not work/work                 -.008    2.07       .004     1.65      .004    1.00
Not work/not work             -.001    0.52       .000     0.10      .001    0.41
Owner                         -.009    1.34       .009     1.99      .001    0.21
ln house value (baseline)      .004    1.20      -.004     2.10     -.001    0.51
ln home equity (baseline)     -.002    0.87       .001     1.06     -.001    0.45
(Have negative home equity)   -.019    1.32       .004     0.60     -.007    0.74
Constant                      -.017    1.43      -.201   -22.26     -.571   34.66




                                        63
                                   Appendix Tables

                                     Appendix Table 1
Differences in Housing Price Volatility by State among Movers in HRS Samples

                           A. HRS original cohort⎯ages 51-61
                                Transitions over number of years
____________________________________________________________________
                                   2 years         10 years

All owners who move                    0.078          0.149
 Owner to renter                       0.035          0.092
 Owner to owner                        0.084          0.158

All renters who move                   0.049          0.066
 Renter to renter                      0.042          0.069
 Renter to owner                       0.058          0.050

All movers                             0.069          0.128

____________________________________________________________________

                         B. AHEAD original cohort ages 70+
    _____________________________________________________________________
                         Eight year transitions
________________________________________________________________________
                                                           70-79      80+          Total
All owners who                                              0.035   -0.020         0.022
move
 Owner to renter                                           -0.007   -0.073         -0.022
 Owner to owner                                             0.041    0.054          0.048

All renters who                                               -0.030       0.132   0.001
move
 Renter to renter                                             -0.004       0.059   0.007
 Renter to owner                                              -0.031           0   -0.027

All movers                                               0.018     0.011           0.020
________________________________________________________________________.




                                          64
