                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LOVE, HATE AND MURDER:
                  COMMITMENT DEVICES IN VIOLENT RELATIONSHIPS

                                             Anna Aizer
                                            Pedro Dal Bó

                                        Working Paper 13492
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13492


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We wish to thank Laura Dugan for generously providing the data on prosecutorial policies and domestic
violence services. We also thank Thomas Dee and Robert Pollak as well as seminar participants at
Brown and Harvard Universities. This work was supported by grant number 1R03HD051808-01A2
from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and grant number
0648700 from the National Science Foundation (NSF). Its contents are solely the responsibility of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the NICHD or the NSF. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Anna Aizer and Pedro Dal Bó. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Love, Hate and Murder: Commitment Devices in Violent Relationships
Anna Aizer and Pedro Dal Bó
NBER Working Paper No. 13492
October 2007
JEL No. J12,J16,K4

                                              ABSTRACT

Many violent relationships are characterized by a high degree of cyclicality: women who are the victims
of domestic violence often leave and return multiple times. To explain this we develop a model of
time inconsistent preferences in the context of domestic violence. This time inconsistency generates
a demand for commitment. We present supporting evidence that women in violent relationships display
time inconsistent preferences by examining their demand for commitment devices. We find that "no-drop"
policies -- which compel the prosecutor to continue with prosecution even if the victim expresses a
desire to drop the charges -- result in an increase in reporting. No-drop policies also result in a decrease
in the number of men murdered by intimates suggesting that some women in violent relationships
move away from an extreme type of commitment device when a less costly one is offered.

Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu

Pedro Dal Bó
Department of Economics
Brown University
Robinson Hall
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Pedro_Dal_Bo@Brown.EDU
     1. Introduction

       Everyday roughly 14 thousand women in the US are battered and 4 are killed by

their intimate partners. An interesting and often puzzling aspect of violent relationships

is its cyclical nature (Walker, 1979; Strube, 1988). Battered women who leave and seek

the help of authorities in pressing criminal charges against their partners often return to

the abuser and ask the authorities to drop the charges, despite the high probability of

future victimization. The well-documented fact that women repeatedly change their mind

after leaving or reporting the batterer suggests that the idea of a rational agent with stable

preferences weighing the benefits and costs of reporting abuse and leaving may not be an

appropriate framework for studying domestic violence. Rather, a framework in which

preferences change with battering may be more appropriate.

       In this paper we propose a model of time inconsistent preferences to study

domestic violence. The victim’s preferences change with time from the battering

incident. That is, right after a battering incident, while in shock and fear, a woman’s

valuation of the relationship is low but increases as time passes. This is consistent with

empirical evidence on how emotional states affect the desirability of different goods or

actions (see Loewenstein, 1996; Read and van Leeuwen, 1998; Loewenstein et al, 2001;

Gilbert et al. 2002; Wilson and Gilbert 2003). This model can explain how a woman

might leave her partner after a battering incident with the intention of not returning, but

after some time, her emotional attachment resurfaces and she returns.

       In principle, models with changing but time consistent preferences (ie: traditional

models of rational addiction or the cue theory of consumption) can also explain cyclical




                                              2
behavior.2 However, the key difference between time consistent and inconsistent agents

is that the latter, if aware, will try to discipline their future behavior by committing

themselves to a certain future action. In the case of smoking, for example, a person may

wish to commit him or herself to quitting and therefore may welcome devices such as

higher taxes (Gruber and Koszegi, 2001; Gruber and Mullanaithan, 2002). In the case of

domestic violence, a woman may want to commit herself not to return to the batterer and

thus welcome policies that commit her to doing so.

        In this paper we study the demand for such a commitment device: “no-drop”

policy of prosecution. This policy stipulates that once a woman brings charges against a

batterer, the prosecution will continue regardless of her stated wishes to drop the charges.

In this way, no-drop policies offer a commitment device for women who want to

terminate a violent relationship but fear that their intentions may change.

        We develop a model of time inconsistent preferences in the context of violent

relationships that yields two predictions. First, if women are sufficiently time

inconsistent, no-drop policies will increase reporting of battering incidents. That is,

women will be more likely to report violent partners when they are offered a device that

will enable them to commit to prosecuting them. Second, no-drop policies will reduce

the number of men murdered by intimates as women in violent relationships will

substitute an expensive private commitment device (murder of the batterer) for a cheaper

public commitment device provided by the no-drop policy.

        We follow this with empirical estimation of the impact of no drop policies on

reporting and intentional intimate partner homicide. The results provide evidence in favor

2
 For consumption cycles in rational addiction models see Ryder and Heal (1973), Becker and Murphy
(1988), Dockner and Feichtinger (1993) and Palacios-Huerta (2003). For the cue theory of consumption,
which can also provide cycles, see Laibson (2001).


                                                   3
of our theory of time inconsistent preferences in battering relationships. First, we find

that no-drop policies lead to a 14-18 percent increase in reporting, as measured by the

number of men arrested for domestic violence. This is consistent with the model’s

prediction that women in battering relationships demand commitment devices if they are

sufficiently time inconsistent. We also find that no-drop policies led to a 15-22 percent

decline in the number of men intentionally murdered by intimates, a large fraction of

whom have documented histories of battering. Our finding that no-drop policies reduce

the number of men murdered by intimates provides evidence that battered women will

move away from an extreme type of commitment device –murder– when a less costly one

is offered in the form of no-drop prosecution. Finally, we find no evidence that no drop

policies lead to a reduction in domestic violence as measured by the number of women

killed by intimate partners or the number of women admitted to the hospital for an

assault. This suggests that the reduction in the number of men being murdered by

intimates can not be explained by a reduction in the number of violent relationships due

to no-drop policies. Nor do we believe that the reduction can be due to underlying

changes in the type or composition of violent relationships as the effect appears to be

immediate.

       The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we explain the cyclical nature of

battering relationships in the context of time inconsistent preferences. Though an

economist (Mill, 1869) was one of the first to address the issue of domestic violence,

modern economic literature on the subject is somewhat limited. The recent literature has

focused on explaining violence under the assumption of time consistent rational agents




                                              4
and consists of a handful of studies.3 The main distinction between our work and

previous work is our assumption of time inconsistent agents.

        There exists an extensive literature on time inconsistency of time-preferences that

can trace its roots to Strotz (1956) and Phelps and Pollak (1968). Yet most of the

literature has focused on present biased preferences as in Ainslie (1991), Loewenstein

and Prelec (1992), Laibson (1997) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999) among others. Our

model differs in that the time inconsistency of preference is not in regards to discounting

but in regards to the valuation of possible choices in a given period.

        Our second contribution is that we provide new empirical evidence consistent

with the theory of time inconsistent preferences, adding to the growing non-experimental

empirical evidence of time inconsistency and the demand for commitments, see

Angeletos et al. (2001), Madrian and Shea (2001), Gruber and Mullainathan (2002) and

Della Vigna and Malmendier (2003).

        The fact that the introduction of no-drop policies reduces the number of men

murdered by intimates has interesting implications outside domestic violence. It implies

that when agents are time inconsistent, the analysis of policies that incorporate a

commitment element should consider the effect on the demand for alternative




        3
            Tauchen et al (1991) provide a non-cooperative model of families that incorporates the
possibility of violence and study the impact of future changes in male and female incomes among 125
women in a battered women’s shelter in Santa Barbara. Aizer (2006) estimates the impact of the shrinking
male-female wage gap on violence against women and the impact of domestic violence on birth outcomes.
Regarding the effect of policies, Tauchen and Witte (1995) study the impact of different arrest policies on
future violence. Dee (2003) and Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) estimate the impact of unilateral divorces
laws on intimate partner homicide and suicide. Iyengar (2007) estimates the impact of mandatory arrests on
intimate partner homicide. Finally, Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1996) provide a signaling model of leaving a
violent relationship and Pollak (2002) presents a model of intergenerational transmission of domestic
violence.



                                                    5
commitment devices. In this case, a public policy that offers a cheap commitment device

results in a decrease in the demand for a costly private commitment device.

        The rest of this paper is laid out as follows. In section 2 we provide background

information on the prevalence and costs of domestic violence in the US. In section 3 we

describe the cyclical nature of battering. In section 4 we describe no-drop policies and

present anecdotal evidence in favor of the idea of time inconsistent preferences. In

section 5 we present a model of domestic violence with time inconsistent preferences and

study the effect of no-drop policies on violence and reporting. In section 6 we present

our empirical estimates of the impact of no drop policies on domestic violence, reporting

(as measured by arrest rates) and intimate partner homicide.



      2. The problem of battering

      Domestic violence is a problem of considerable social importance in the US given

its prevalence and the severity of its impact on the health and well-being of those

affected. In 2001, women in the US reported 590 thousand incidents of rape, sexual and

other assault at the hands of intimate partners and on average 4 women are killed each

day by a partner. Though the number of reported assaults is high – it is likely an

underestimate. Survey data suggest that only one half to one fifth of such assaults are

reported to the police.4 Data gathered through personal surveys and medical professional

assessments suggest that between 8 and 14 percent of women have been assaulted in the

past year by an intimate, with lifetime prevalence estimated at 25 - 30 percent (See Jones

et al. (1999). For women, intimate violence accounts for 33 percent of all homicides.

4
  Bureau of Justice Statistics (1998); 2002 Minnesota crime survey; Tjaden and Thoennes (2000b), data are
from the NCVS – National Criminal Victimization Survey.


                                                    6
      According to a report issued by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2002,

“intimate partner violence occurs in all countries, irrespective of social, economic,

religious or cultural group.” Findings from population-based surveys of women from 35

countries around the world suggest that between 10 and 69 percent of women have been

physically assaulted by an intimate male partner at some point in their lives, with 3 to 27

percent assaulted in the last year.

      The costs associated with domestic violence are significant. Women who are

victims of domestic violence suffer directly both physically and emotionally from the

injury itself. Reported injuries range from scratches, bruises and welts to lacerations,

broken bones and head or spinal cord injuries (Tjaden and Thoennes , 2000a). One third

of women injured by an intimate required medical attention and of those, 26 percent were

hospitalized overnight for their injuries. The CDC estimates that the costs associated

with domestic violence attributed to medical care service use amount to roughly 4 billion

annually.5

      Domestic violence also diminishes a woman’s ability to work outside the home.

The CDC estimates that in 1995, victims of physical assault lost on average 7.2 days of

work outside the home as a direct result of their injuries and 8.4 days of household work,

yielding total annual costs in terms of lost earnings in excess of $.7 billion.6 Additional

studies have found that women who had been victims of domestic violence were more




5
  Costs include both mental health and medical care costs with the latter consisting of physician visits,
physical therapy, outpatient visits, inpatient care and emergency department visits. The costs were
calculated using cost data from the MEPS and utilization data from the NSVAW. See CDC (2003).
6
  Costs were calculated by multiplying the estimated number of lost days by age group by the average
earnings of women in that age group and summing over all age groups. The costs reflect 1995 earnings and
incidence rates.


                                                   7
likely to use welfare, have longer unemployment spells, and experience higher job

turnover than those who had not (Lloyd and Taluc, 1999; Browne et al., 1999).

     The children of women abused by their partners also suffer. Parker et al. (1994)

study 1200 births to women in Boston and find that women who were the victims of

intimate violence were at significant risk for low-birthweight, infections and anemia,

controlling for a host of other potential confounders. Aizer (2006) employs instrumental

variable methods to estimate the impact of violence against women on birth outcomes

and finds that victimization while pregnant significantly increases the likelihood of a low

birth weight birth. In addition, children who witness violence against their mothers

(between 50 and 64 percent of all women report that their children routinely witnessed

the abuse) are at increased risk for developmental problems including high levels of

anxiety and depression, low self-esteem, and poor school performance - similar to those

who have themselves been abused (WHO, 2002).




     3. The cyclical nature of violent relationships

     Despite the high costs of domestic violence in terms of physical and emotional

injury, lost days of work and the negative impact on their children, many victims refuse

to leave their batters or seek the help of authorities. Among the reasons cited by battered

women for why they remain are: love of their partners, financial dependence, lack of

support by third parties and fear for their safety or the safety of their children (WHO,

2002; Sagot, 2000; Strube, 1988 and references therein). In a study of victims of

domestic violence in Omaha, Nebraska, nearly 60 percent of women stated that one of the

reasons they remain in relationships is their love for their abusers (Dunford et al, 1990).


                                              8
The decision to leave also depends on the severity and frequency of the beatings

(Gelles,1976; Strube, 1988). Reasons for not reporting abuse to the authorities include

considering the incident a private matter, not wanting the police or courts involved, fear

of perpetrator, wanting to protect the perpetrator or the relationship and believing that the

police could or would not do anything (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1998; Tjaden and

Thoennes, 2000). While these reasons are consistent with the idea of rational agents

weighing the benefits and costs of leaving or reporting, a more complex picture appears

once we consider the dynamics of battering.

      While some women refuse to leave their batterers, perhaps just as common are

women who leave their batterers multiple times only to return despite the high probability

of future victimization. Past studies have found that between 25% and 75% of women

seeking help in shelters return to their partners shortly after leaving the shelter.7 Studies

by psychologists provide additional evidence of this cyclical pattern (see Walker, 1979).

Reasons provided for returning include: a belief that the batterer wants to change,

emotional attachment, economic needs, pressure from others and fear. Interestingly,

women who seek help in shelters underestimate their probability of returning to the

abuser (Griffing et al., 2002). Evidence suggests that after leaving, women may

experience an increased emotional attachment to their batterers, making them more likely

to return (Dutton, 1995; Griffing et al., 2002). Over time women seem to learn the

importance of emotional attachment: Griffing et al (2002) find that women with past




7
  See Strube (1988). When women do leave, they typically do so only after years of abuse. Tjaden and
Thoennes (2000) found that victims of physical assault suffered an average of 4.5 years of victimization by
the same partner, with 26.6% of the women suffering more than 5 years. On average, women suffer 7
assaults at the hands of the same partner.


                                                     9
experience of leaving and returning assign more importance to emotional attachment as a

reason to return.8

         Just as women leave and return to their batterers, it is also common for women who

report their partners to the authorities to change their mind afterwards, dropping the

charges and returning to their partners, only to be battered again in the future. Studies in

the 1970s and 1980s found that among women whose husbands had been arrested for

assault against them, between 50 and 90 percent requested that the charges be dropped by

the prosecutor, despite evidence that women who drop charges are four times more likely

to suffer future violence than those who do not.9

         The well-documented fact that many women change their minds after leaving or

reporting their partners suggests that the idea of a rational agent with stable preferences

weighing the benefits and costs of leaving or reporting may not be appropriate. We

believe that the dynamics of battering indicate that women’s preferences change as time

from the battering incident elapses. Right after the incident, the costs of remaining in the

relationship are clear to the woman and her valuation of the relationship will be low. As

time passes her emotional attachment to the batterer may reappear as fear is replaced by

other feelings such as loneliness. Our assumption that women value the relationship less

when fearful is consistent with psychological evidence on how emotional states affect the

desirability of different goods or actions (see Loewenstein 1996; Read and van Leeuwen,

1998; Loewenstein et al., 2001; Gilbert et al., 2002; Wilson and Gilbert, 2003). We

propose to model women in battering relationships as having time inconsistent

preferences.

8
    They did not find differences across women in the other reasons for returning.
9
    See Parnas (1970), Field and Field (1973), Bannon (1975), Ford (1983) and Ford and Regoli (1992).


                                                     10
      The cyclical character of battering relationships could be explained without relying

upon changing preferences. Women could leave and return in response to changes in the

likelihood of violence. Women might also leave and report as a tool to improve their

bargaining position in the relationship without intending to end the relationship.10

However, neither can explain the large number of women who initially report that they

do want to end the relationship but finally return to their batterers. A third explanation

may be that women have limited information about their outside opportunities and may

return after they obtain better information. However, this is not completely consistent

with the fact that battered women in shelters highly underestimate the likelihood of

returning. Finally, cyclical behavior can in principle be explained with changing but time

consistent preferences as in the rational theory of addiction (Becker and Murphy, 1988;

Dockner and Feichtinger 1993; and Palacios-Huerta 2003) and the cue theory of

consumption (Laibson, 1997).

      A key difference between these alternative explanations of the cyclical nature of

battering relationships and our theory of time inconsistent preferences revolves around

the demand for commitment devices. With time inconsistent preferences there is a

tension between the intentions of a woman right after a battering incident and the same

woman some time after. If a woman knows that her intentions will change in the future

and she dislikes the decision that she will make in the future, she may desire to commit

herself to a course of action now. In contrast, these alternative explanations do not

generate a demand for commitment. In the rest of the paper we provide both anecdotal

and quantitative evidence that is consistent with a model in which battered women do
10
  Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1996) develop a model to explain that women might leave their abusive
partners to signal that they are willing and able to end a violent relationship. However, this model explains
less well the extreme cyclicality that is observed with women leaving and returning multiple times.


                                                     11
demand commitment devices by examining the effect of a policy that commits women to

prosecute their batterer. This no-drop policy is described in the next section.




     4. No-Drop policies

     Over the past 25 years, local prosecutors and legislators have adopted a series of

legal innovations with the objective of increasing prosecution of domestic violence. One

of the most common and controversial is a “no-drop” policy which compels the

prosecutor to continue with prosecution even if the victim expresses a desire to drop the

charges and ceases to cooperate with the prosecution. In a survey of 50 of the largest US

cities, in 1979 only one city (Omaha, Nebraska) had a no drop policy and by 1996, all but

six cities had a no-drop policy. See table 1 for a listing of the cities and the year in which

they adopted a no-drop policy.

     In this paper we offer a rationale for adopting no-drop policies that is based on the

tension between the victim’s intentions at different points in time. Her preferences for

prosecution and ending the battering relationship are strongest right after a battering

incident. Over time, her preferences change such that she no longer wishes to prosecute

and she has often reconciled with the abuser. Hence, if at the time of the battering

incident she knows that she will forgive her partner and drop charges in the future, she is

less likely to report him at that time. But if her power to drop charges in the future is

removed (because of a no-drop policy), she may be more willing to report him. In this

way, the no-drop policy provides the victim with a commitment device to overcome the

time inconsistency of her preferences.




                                             12
      Evidence from surveys of victims supports the idea of time inconsistency of

preferences and the value of no-drop policies. Smith et al. (2001) presents the following

comments by victims in cities with “no drop” policies: “The prosecutor did not listen to

me when I recanted my story. They continued to prosecute. In the long run, I am so glad.

He got punished.” Another woman states “If it hadn’t been for the laws of arresting and

prosecuting, I would have been back with him. I am glad they stuck with it and enforced

the laws.”

      To our knowledge, there is no scientific study of the effect of no-drop policies on

the number of women who are battered, the seriousness of domestic violence assaults or

the proportion of assaults that are reported.11 However, there is evidence that this policy

did represent a significant change in policy and led to an increase in prosecutions and

convictions (Smith et al., 2001).




      5. The model

      In this section we present a simple model of domestic violence in which the woman

displays changing preferences regarding the value of the relationship and is aware of this.

The objective of this model is to show how providing a commitment device in the form

of no-drop policies would affect both a man’s behavior and a woman’s response to it.

The model provides one surprising result: implementation of no-drop policies leads to a

reduction in the number of batterers who are murdered. The reason is that murder is an

extreme form of a commitment device. When the government provides a cheaper one,

11
  Perhaps the closest is that of Dugan, Nagin and Rosenfeld (2003) who incorporate no-drop policies
among other prosecutorial and police policies to create an index of “exposure reduction.” They find that
too little exposure reduction may increase intimate partner homicide, while greater amounts can reduce it.


                                                    13
women who were willing to kill their partners to avoid returning to them, will now report

them to the authorities instead. In addition the model shows that a no-drop policy results

in an increase in reporting if the degree of time inconsistency is large enough and has an

ambiguous effect on the amount of battering.

      The model without a “no-drop” policy is depicted in Figure 1. First the man chooses

between battering (B) or not (NB). Battering gives him a utility of v. We assume that this

utility is randomly distributed in the real numbers –with c.d.f. G(v). This assumption

captures the fact that some men really enjoy battering while others dislike it. If no

battering occurs the game ends and the players receive a normalized payoff of zero. If

battering occurs, the woman has three options: kill her partner (K), do nothing (N), or

report him to the authorities (R). If she kills him, he suffers a cost d for being dead,12 and

she faces the cost c of being prosecuted by the authorities and the loss m of the value she

assigns to the relationship (this includes both the sentimental and economic value of the

relationship). If she does nothing, the relationship continues. Since she has been battered

her valuation of the relationship is diminished by the amount h. We assume that this

utility is randomly distributed in the positive real numbers –with c.d.f. F(h). This

assumption captures the fact that battering affects women’s valuation of the relationship

differently. We assume that the man does not know the value of h when he makes his

decision.




12
  We do not assume the cost of being dead is infinite since some men may be willing to batter their wives
even under the serious threat of being killed by them.


                                                   14
     Figure 1: Game Tree


                                                   v-d, -m-c
                                         K                            v-s, r-h, r
                                                           D
                              W1          R        W2      ND
                     B                   N

           M                                       v, -h

                         NB                                     c, m>0
                                                                -r<c
                                                                d>j>s>0
                                0, 0



     We assume that reporting the battering partner to the authorities has a direct benefit

(or cost) r to the woman. She benefits from reporting him to the authorities if the police

scare him or remove him while he is still violent. Reporting him to the police may also

have costs, resulting in a negative r. He may get upset and violent or there may be stigma

costs associated with police intervention. Therefore, the parameter r may be positive or

negative depending on whether the direct benefits or costs of reporting prevail (we

assume that –r<c, that the cost of killing him is greater than the cost of reporting him).

     If she reports him, the legal procedure starts and a new self of the woman (W2)

decides in period two whether to drop charges (D) or not (ND). Her new self (W2) has a

different valuation of the relationship than the valuation of the previous self (W1). The

payoffs of these two selves (W1 and W2) are written in the second and third place,

respectively, in the payoff vectors for the actions D and ND. Both selves obtain the same


                                              15
utility level from ND and continuing with the legal procedures, -m in addition to r.13 The

first self assigns a value of –h to dropping the charges and staying in the relationship,

while the second self values it as if nothing had happened, 0. These payoffs are in

addition to the direct benefit of reporting r. Note that the preferences between the

woman’s selfs differs in h: the larger h, the greater the degree of time inconsistency

displayed by the woman.

         Finally, the man (whose payoff is indicated in the first place of the payoff vector)

suffers a cost of s if the woman reports him and then drops the charges and suffers a cost

of j if the woman does not drop the charges. This parameter represents the expected

disutility of going to jail.

         We assume that the parameters c, d, j, m and s are positive. In addition, we assume

that the worst punishment is death, followed by jail and then arrest when it is not

followed by prosecution (d>j>s).

           If a “no-drop” policy is in place the game is the same with the exception that the

second self does not have the option of dropping the charges. That is, once she reports

him she is committed to prosecuting him.

         We study next how a “no-drop” policy would affect the behavior of the players.

First, we provide a description of equilibrium behavior with and without such a policy.

We follow this with a comparison of the two situations in terms of battering, and the

woman’s response to it.




13
     Remember that payoffs are normalized so as to have the utility if no battering occurs equal to zero.


                                                       16
         5.1. Without a “no drop” policy:

           The subgame perfect equilibrium can be solved easily by backwards induction.

W2 always drops the charge since r-m is lower than r. Knowing this W1 must choose

among kill (K), report (R) and do nothing (N). Her decision will depend on the disutility

of remaining in a battering relationship (h) and whether reporting him has direct benefits

or costs regardless of what she does later (r positive or negative). If r is positive,

reporting him when she will drop the charges later is always better than doing nothing.

Thus she compares K and R. She will choose to report him if r-h>-m-c, (the utility from

reporting exceeds that of killing him). Thus, the woman reports the batterer with

probability F(r+m+c) and kills him with the complementary probability. If r is negative,

reporting him when she will drop the charges later is always worse than doing nothing.

Thus she compares K and N. She will choose to do nothing if -h>-m-c. Thus, the woman

does nothing with probability F(m+c) and kills him with the complementary probability.

Figure 2 shows the equilibrium response to battering for both positive and negative r and

the corresponding vector of payoff for the players as a function of h.14

           The decision of the man will depend on his expectation of the woman’s response

to battering. Given the distribution of men’s taste for domestic violence, we have that a

proportion 1-G((1-F(r+m+c))d+ F(r+m+c)s) will choose to batter if r is positive.




14
     We do not duplicate the payoff of the two selves when they coincide.


                                                      17
     5.2. With a “No-drop” policy:

       The main difference between the case without a no-drop policy and with such a

policy is under the latter, reporting is always better than killing. This follows from the

fact that W2 cannot drop the charges and reporting the man is less costly than killing him

(–r<c). Thus she compares N and R. She will do nothing if –h>r-m. Thus, the woman

does nothing with probability F(m-r) and reports him with the complementary

probability. Note that the probability of reporting him is increasing in r and decreasing in

m. Then, we have that a proportion 1-G((1-F(m-r))j) of men will choose to batter.

       Figure 2: Equilibrium Actions for the Woman


                                                    r>0 Case
    No-drop        N (v, -h, 0)                           R (v-j, r-m)


   No policy                      R and D (v-s, r-h, r)                   K (v-d, -m-c)


                                   m-r                               m+r+c                 h


                                                    r<0 Case
    No-drop               N (v, -h, 0)                           R (v-j, r-m)


   No policy                             N (v, -h, 0)                      K (v-d, -m-c)


                                         m-r                   m+c                         h




     5.3. The effects of the “no drop” policy:

       From the comparison of the ranges of h that result in a battering man being killed

we obtain the following proposition. The result follows directly from Figure 2.


                                               18
      Proposition 1: A no-drop policy reduces the probability that a battering man is

killed.

          The intuition for this result is as follows. Without a “no-drop” policy the woman

knows that she will drop the charges in the future, therefore reporting him to the

authorities will not end the relationship. The only way she has to commit herself to

ending the relationship is by killing him. She will do so if her valuation of her future life

with the batterer (m-h) is low enough. If instead a “no drop” policy is in place, reporting

him to the authorities serves as a commitment device since she will not be able to drop

charges.

          From Figure 2 we can also study the effect of the “no drop” policy on the

reporting of battering.

          Proposition 2: A no-drop policy increases the reporting if the degree of time

inconsistency is large enough (h>m-r) but may have a negative effect otherwise.

          If reporting a batterer to the police provides a short run cost to the woman but no

benefit (r<0) the intuition is straight forward. The woman knows that withoug the policy

she will drop the charges later and thus will not report him after the battering. If instead

she cannot drop the charges later she may be willing to report him as a way to commit

herself to ending the relationship. Moreover, a no-drop policy may increase reporting

since some women (those with an extremely high h) will decide to report the batterer

instead of killing him.

      Contrary to what would be obtained under the assumption of stable preferences in

this model, restricting the set of choices attached to reporting for a woman with unstable




                                               19
preferences may actually increase the reporting of battering incidents. However, when the

degree of time inconsistency is sufficiently low (h<m-r) and there are short run benefits

of reporting (r>0) no-drop policies actually decrease reporting. In this case, women are

willing to report battering to obtain the short run benefit but are not willing to commit to

prosecution, hence, they would report without a “no drop” policy but not with such a

policy in place.

       Proposition 3: A no-drop policy has an ambiguous effect on the amount of

battering.

       The decision to batter depends on women’s response to battering. On the one

hand, from proposition 1, we know that a “no drop” policy will result in a lower

probability of the batterer being killed. Since this is the harshest punishment possible, a

“no drop” policy can actually make battering more attractive. In addition, such a policy

may result in fewer cases being reported if the degree of time inconsistency is small,

which would also make battering more attractive. On the other hand, there are cases in

which a “no drop” policy will increase the number of cases reported and prosecuted since

charges cannot be dropped, and this would make battering less attractive. The total effect

will depend on the relative strength of the different forces.

     While this simple model of domestic violence shows that the effect of no-drop

policies on battering is theoretically ambiguous, its effect on the murder of batterers is

not. When a woman displays time inconsistent preferences and exhibits some degree of

sophistication regarding her inconsistency (eg, she can anticipate the inconsistency) she

may be willing to commit herself to ending the relationship. If the government does not

provide such a commitment option, she may prefer to kill her batterer rather than remain


                                             20
in the violent relationship. Hence, a non-ambiguous result of the model is that “no drop”

policies diminish the number of batterers murdered by their partners.

     Moreover, if preferences display a large enough degree of time inconsistency, the

effect of no-drop policies on reporting is positive since women may start reporting

knowing that they will not be able to drop charges in the future.




     6. Empirical Analysis

     In this section we estimate the impact of no-drop policies on intimate partner

homicide, underlying violence against women and the reporting of battering. We proceed

in two stages. First, we estimate the impact of no-drop policies on intimate partner

homicide using data on the 48 largest cities in the US for the period 1979-1996. Second,

we estimate the impact of no-drop policies on the number of women admitted to the

hospital for an assault (an alternative and less extreme measure of domestic violence than

homicide) and arrests for domestic violence (our measure of reporting) for the seven

largest counties in California (because these data are not available for the 48 cities).




     6.1. The impact of no-drop policies on intimate partner homicide

     6.1.1. Data

       Our data for this part of the analysis includes information on prosecutorial and

police policies regarding domestic violence (including the presence of no-drop policies),

services for domestic violence victims and intimate partner homicides in 48 of the largest




                                             21
US cities for the period 1979-1996.15 For our analysis, two cities were dropped (New

York City and Baltimore) because of ambiguity in the definition of the city and the

resulting difficulty linking these cities with other data.16

      Data on intentional homicides by intimate partners come from the FBI Uniform

Crime Reports Supplemental Homicide Reports (SHR) 1979-1996. A homicide was

considered an intimate partner homicide if the assailant was a husband (wife), ex-

husband (ex-wife), common law husband (common-law wife), or boyfriend (girlfriend).

Homicide by an ex-boyfriend (ex-girlfriend) is not recorded. The small number of

intimate partner homicides in which the victim and assailant were of the same sex was

dropped. These data also do not contain unintentional or negligent killings – all

homicides included here were intentional. Intimate partner homicide figures were

adjusted by the FBI for missing data on relationship assuming underreporting

independent of sex, race and marital status of the victims.17 We keep all homicides

victims between the ages of 20 and 55 (the age group for which intimate homicide is

most prevalent).

      Figures 3A and 3B display trends in intimate partner homicide for the 48 cities and

the nation as a whole for the period 1979-1996. As is evident from the graphs, the trends

are similar for our sample and the nation as a whole suggesting that our results are likely

generalizable. While the annual number of female intimate partner homicides nationally

has declined slightly from 1500 to 1250 over the nearly 20 year period, the number of

15
   The data on prosecutorial policies and services were collected by Laura Dugan, Daniel Nagin and Richard
Rosenfeld for the National Institute of Justice and the National Consortium on Violence Research. See
Dugan, Nagin and Rosenfeld (2000) and (2003).
16
   For example, New York City consists of five counties, each with a different prosecutor.
17
    This would result in an over-reporting of intimate homicide victims if stranger homicides are less likely
to have missing data on relationship to the assailant.



                                                     22
men killed by wives has declined dramatically from 1400 to less than 500 annually. Other

studies have shown that more than half of men killed by their partners had documented

histories of battering.18 If we interpret the number of women killed by intimates as a

reflecting the amount of underlying domestic violence, then the fact that this number has

remained relatively constant suggests that the decline in the number of men killed is not

attributable to a decline in domestic violence.




      6.1.2. Results

      In Figure 4 we present the average number of men and women killed by intimates

over this period in the years immediately before and after a no-drop policy was adopted

(t=0 in the year the policy is adopted, t= -1 in the year before and t=1 in the year after).19

As is evident from the graph, there is a decline in the number of men killed by women in

the years immediately after the adoption of a no-drop policy. In contrast, the number of

women killed by their partners appears, if anything, to increase with the adoption of no-

drop policies (though not significantly) and then decline. Prior to the adoption of the

policy, there does not appear to be any downward trend in the intimate homicide rate

suggesting that passage of the law does not simply reflect underlying trends.

      In Table 2A we present estimates of the impact of no-drop policies on male and

female victims of intimate partner homicide controlling for other characteristics that

could also affect intimate homicide rates. We employ log-linear regressions as well as

18
   A study conducted in Georgia of 226 female inmates imprisoned for having killed an intimate partner
found that 90 percent of women claimed that the victim assaulted or abused her at the time of the crime and
in more than 50 percent of the cases there was a record of a history of domestic abuse. See Haley (1992).
19
   Numbers represent the (weighted) average number of homicides per city for the 30 cities that passed a
no-drop policy 1981-1994.


                                                    23
negative binomial regression models following Grogger (1990) which yield similar

results.20 All regressions include the log of the population age 20-55 (we do not constrain

the coefficient to be equal to 1) and city and year fixed effects and are weighted by the

population of the city.

      In column 1 of Table 2A we present results of a regression of the natural log of

males killed by intimate partners on an indicator for whether a no-drop policy was in

place in that year controlling for city and year fixed effects as well as the natural log of

the population of men age 20-55, the share black, and the rate of non-intimate homicides.

The estimate of the impact of no-drop policy of -.188 is statistically significant. In

contrast, in column 2 we find that no drop policies have a positive (0.117) but

insignificant impact on homicide of females by intimate partners. In columns 3-8, we

present the results of regressions that include additional controls: average area wages, the

employment to population ratio, AFDC benefits for a family of four in the state, services

for domestic violence victims, and the lag of the number of women killed by their

partners as a control for changes in underlying domestic violence.21 As is evident from

the table, inclusion of these additional controls does not significantly alter the negative

and significant relationship between no-drop policies and the number of men killed by

intimates. 22 In the second panel of the table are results of the negative binomial



20
   Poisson models were rejected due to over-dispersion (the variance exceeded the mean in these data).
When there is over-dispersion, Poisson estimates are inefficient with standard errors biased downward. The
negative binomial distribution can be thought of as a Poisson distribution with unobserved heterogeneity
which, in turn, can be conceptualized as a mixture of two probability distributions, Poisson and Gamma.
21
   With the exception of population counts and share black in the city, data for the above controls are
collected annually and thus are not merely linear interpolations between census years. This is important as
we are identifying the impact of no-drop policies off a non-linear change in policy.
22
   As a “falsification” check, we also estimate the impact of no-drop policies on non-intimate partner
homicide. When we do, the point estimate from a log-linear regression is -0.061 and it is imprecisely
estimated with a standard error of 0.046.


                                                    24
specification in which the outcomes are the number of male and female intimate partner

homicides.23 The results are very similar to those from the log linear regressions.

      We also estimate the impact of no drop policies on intimate partner homicide

stratified by age of the victim. We argue that if no-drop policies are decreasing male

homicides because of substitution of commitment devices, then we should find greater

effects among those in longer relationships which would allow women time to learn of

their difficulty committing. While we lack information on relationship tenure, we do

have information on the age of the victim which serves as a very crude proxy for

relationship length: younger victims are more likely to be in shorter relationships relative

to older victims.

      In Table 2B we present the results of a log-linear specification stratified by age of

the victim. We define as old, victims age 35-54 and as young, victims age 20-34. As is

evident from the table, we find that the impact of no drop policies on intimate partner

homicide is limited (and considerably stronger) for older victims, consistent with the

notion that women need time to learn of their difficulty to commit to leaving without any

commitment device.




      6.1.3 Robustness


23
  Hausman, Hall and Grilliches (1984) propose a conditional negative binomial model for panel data.
However, Allison and Waterman (2002) argue that this model is not a true fixed effect method because
conditioning on the total count for each city does NOT eliminate the intercept from the likelihood function.
Rather, Allison and Waterman argue and provide simulation results that suggest that an unconditional
negative binomial regression that includes dummy variables for the city fixed effects yields unbiased
estimates. The unconditional negative binomial regression results with dummy variables for the fixed
effects that are presented in Table 2A are similar to the log linear results and the conditional negative
binomial model (xtnbreg in STATA) are considerably smaller (roughly half the size of the unconditional
estimates) but significantly different from zero.


                                                    25
     When we employ a log-linear model, we necessarily exclude from the analysis any

observation in which there are no intimate partner homicides. These tend to be smaller

cities which receive small weights in the weighted regressions. To check whether our

results are driven largely by these excluded observations, in Table 2C we present results

in which we add 1 to the dependent variable so that the observations previously dropped

are now included (and equal to zero). We do this for the subsample of older victims as

there are more dropped zeros than for the general sample. The results are similar, though

smaller.

     It may be the case that the adoption of no-drop policies coincides with the adoption

of other policies that address domestic violence, in which case our estimates of the

impact of no-drop policies on intimate partner homicide may suffer from omitted variable

bias. To address this issue, in Table 3 we present estimates of the impact of no-drop

policies on intimate partner homicide controlling for additional domestic violence

policies. These policies include: whether the police have a separate domestic violence

unit, whether there is a “pro-arrest” police for violation of a protection order and whether

the city has what is referred to as a “mandatory arrest policy” which states that when an

officer suspects domestic violence, he must arrest the offender. In the first two columns

of Table 3 are estimates based on the entire sample and in columns five and six the

estimates are based only on older victims. As is evident from the table, the addition of

these controls does not appear to have any effect on the impact of no-drop policies on

intimate partner homicides. This also provides evidence that the reduction in male

homicides as a result of no-drop policies does not merely reflect a shift or change in the

seriousness with which the authorities take issues of domestic violence. If it did, the



                                             26
other policies would have a similar effect. Finally, we include controls for male and

female labor force participation, earnings and education in columns three and four and

seven and eight. In contrast to most of the other controls, these are not collected annually

but are intercensal linear interpolations. The results are very similar.

      To assess the extent to which the results may be driven by one city, we estimate 48

separate log linear regressions dropping one city from each. We present the resulting

distribution of estimates of the coefficient on no-drop policies in Table 4A. The median

estimate is -0.213 with a 95 percent confidence interval of [-.217, -.208]. We therefore

conclude that it is not the case that the results are driven by one city.

      An additional concern is that the estimates of the effect of no-drop policies may be

capturing downward trends in homicides which are not controlled by year fixed effects.

As an additional check to assess whether this may be driving our results, we randomly

generate no-drop policies and estimate the impact of these randomly generated laws on

male and female intimate partner homicide. We repeat this exercise 1000 times. The

results are presented in Table 4B. As is evident from the results, the randomly generated

no drop policy has no significant impact on either the number of men or women killed by

intimates which suggests that the significant results that we obtain are not driven by

downward trends in homicides unrelated to the adoption of no-drop policies.

      The data support the prediction of our model that the number of batterers who are

murdered unambiguously declines with the adoption of no-drop policies. Our findings

with respect to females are inconclusive (consistent with our model that provides no

prediction with respect to the effect of no-drop policies on domestic violence). Not only

are the effects insignificant, but they refer only to extreme acts of violence. Thus, to


                                              27
empirically assess the extent to which no-drop policies affect underlying domestic

violence and reporting, we turn to a subset of the data for seven counties in California for

which we have additional information.




      6.2. Impact of no-drop policies on underlying violence and reporting

      6.2.1. Data

      For our analysis of the impact of no drop policies on underlying domestic violence

and reporting, we focus on the seven largest counties in California, representing 63

percent of the state, for which we have information on the presence of no-drop policies as

well as the number of men arrested for domestic violence (our measure of reporting) and

the number of women admitted to the hospital as a result of an assault (our measure of

underlying violence). 24 These data are available by race, county and year for the period

1990-2000.25

      Our measures of reporting and underlying violence are proxies. Data on actual

reports by the victims are not available – though evidence suggests that over the period of

the 1990s as more cities adopted no-drop policies, the share of victims reporting the


24
   The seven counties are: Alameda, Fresno, Los Angeles, Sacramento, San Diego, San Francisco and Santa
Clara. Together they represent 19 million individuals or 63 percent of the population of California. In all
but Los Angeles and San Diego counties, there is only one prosecutor for the entire county so that the
presence (or absence) of a no-drop policy applies to all residents in the county (not just those in the largest
city). In Los Angeles and San Diego counties, the cities of Los Angeles and San Diego have a separate
prosecutor and the information we have on the presence of no-drop policy refers to the city prosecutor,
(although it is important to note that 40 percent of the population in Los Angeles and San Diego counties
live in Los Angeles and San Diego city, respectively). We consider the measurement error introduced by
this in the analyses.
25
   The data on arrests for domestic violence were collected by William Wells and Willian DeLeon-
Granados for the California Department of Justice, Criminal Justice Statistics Center. The data on
admissions to the hospital for an assault were calculated by the authors from the California hospital
discharge database.


                                                      28
victimization to the police increased from 48 to 56 percent (Greenfeld et al, 1998). Nor

do we have measures of the incidence of domestic violence. Instead, we use the number

of women admitted to the hospital for an assault as a proxy for underlying violence,

eventhough it is an imprecise measure for two reasons. First, it includes all women

admitted to the hospital for assault and therefore includes those assaulted by non-

intimates. Second, it includes only those for whom the injuries were serious enough to

warrant hospital admission and excludes all women who were assaulted but did not seek

medical attention. We do believe, however, that it is a useful measure for three reasons:

1) it is the only local-area measure of violence available (and it is available by race and

year); 2) it is devoid of any reporting bias as it does not depend on women admitting that

they were battered by their partners and 3) since a high proportion of women (76-87

percent) who are assaulted are assaulted by an intimate, most hospital admissions for

assault will likely have been caused by an intimate.26

        To identify the impact of no-drop policies on domestic violence against women

and reporting, we use variation across the seven different counties in California for the

period 1990-2000. Four of the counties had a no-drop policy in place by 1990. Three of

the counties adopted a no-drop policy during the study period (Santa Clara adopted in

1991 and Alameda and Fresno each adopted in 1994). Our estimate of the impact of no-

drop policies on violence and reporting is therefore a difference-in-differences estimate

comparing the difference (before and after) in outcomes for the those counties that adopt




26
  Estimates from the NVAWS suggest 76 percent while evidence from a medical chart review of pregnant
women admitted to the hospital for assault and presented by Goodwin and Breen (1990), suggests 87
percent.



                                                 29
a no-drop policy with the difference in outcomes over the same period for those counties

that observed no change in their no-drop policy.



      6.2.2. Results

      In Table 5 we present regression estimates of the impact of no-drop policy on

violence against women from log-linear regression models (columns 1-2) and negative

binomial models (columns 6-7) that include many controls. For all regressions in this

table, county fixed effects and quadratic time trends are included as well as time-varying

county specific controls for differences in population growth, per capita income, the

employment to population ratio, non-intimate homicide and the number of shelters

available for victims of domestic violence. We find no significant impact of no-drop

policies on violence as measured by the log of the number of women admitted to the

hospital as a result of assaults (column 1). As a “falsification check” we also estimate the

effect of no-drop policies on hospitalization for car crashes and, as expected, we find no

effect (column 2). We find similar results with the negative binomial regressions.

Having established that no-drop policies do not appear to have any impact on underlying

violence, we turn to estimating their impact on reporting.

      In Figure 5 we present a measure of reporting domestic violence (the number of

men arrested for domestic violence ) in the years immediately before and after a no-drop

policy was adopted (t=0 in the year the policy is adopted, t= -1 in the year before and t=1

in the year after). As is evident from the graph, there is a large increase in this ratio in the

years immediately after the adoption of a no-drop policy. Prior to the adoption of the




                                              30
policy, there does not appear to be much change in reporting, suggesting that the passage

of the law does not simply reflect underlying trends.

      To control for any other changes that might have been coincident with the adoption

of no-drop policies and could influence arrest rates, we turn to regression analysis. In

column 3 of Table 5 we examine the impact of no-drop policies on reporting as measured

by the natural log of the number of arrests including all controls mentioned above. We

find that counties that adopt a no-drop policy witness a 14-17 percent higher rate of arrest

for domestic violence relative to counties that do not adopt such a policy over this period.

However it is not clear from this analysis if this finding is due to an increase in reporting,

or an increase in domestic violence as a result of no-drop policies, (though the evidence

suggests that domestic violence did not increase with the adoption of no-drop policies).

Thus in columns 4 we estimate the impact of no-drop policies on arrests controlling for

violence against women (as measured by female assaults). We find that no-drop policies

still increase arrests by 14 percent. Finally, we attempt to control for police policies that

might be correlated with no-drop policies and arrest rates. However, unlike prosecutor

offices which tend to be county-wide, police departments are more local in nature and as

such their policies with respect to domestic violence also vary at a more local level than

the county. We only have information on the police policies of the largest city in each

county, but we include an indicator for whether that city had a mandatory arrest policy in

place in column 5.27 When we do, we find that mandatory arrests have a very small and

insignificant negative effect on arrests for domestic violence and do not alter the impact



27
  Oakland and Fresno adopted mandatory arrest in 1993, LA and San Diego had such a policy in place in
1990 (the beginning of our sample), San Francisco never adopted one, San Jose adopted in 1994 and
Sacramento in 1996.


                                                  31
of no-drop policies on outcomes. We find similar results with the negative binomial

regressions.

      As noted previously, two of the seven counties (LA and San Diego) have more than

one prosecutor’s office and our measure of no-drop policies refers to the largest city in

each county, introducing considerable measurement error if another city within either

county should change its no-drop policies during this period. This did in fact happen in

Los Angeles. Within Los Angeles County, LA City (the largest municipality in LA

County) adopted a no-drop policy in 1986 (before the start of our sample) but Long

Beach City, which is a much smaller part of Los Angeles County, adopted in 1991.28

Since statistics on arrests for domestic violence are not available separately for LA City

and Long Beach, by including LA County in our regressions, we are introducing

measurement error. To address this we exclude LA County from the sample and present

the results in the second panel of Table 5. Our estimates of the impact of no-drop

policies on arrests increase considerably (likely as a consequence of the reduction in

measurement error) but do not change for assaults. In the third panel of Table 5 we

exclude both LA county and San Diego counties, although we have no evidence that any

other city in San Diego county changed its no-drop policy during this period. The results

are similar to previous estimates.



      7. Conclusions

        Motivated by the cyclicality of violent relationships we present a theory of

domestic violence that incorporates time inconsistent preferences. Our theory predicts


28
 As of 2000, 9.5 million reside in LA County of which 461,000 reside in Long Beach and 3.7 million in
LA City.


                                                  32
that the adoption of no-drop policies would result in an increase in the reporting of

battering to the authorities and, more surprisingly, a decrease in the murder of violent

partners. The reason for the latter is that no-drop policies provide to women in battering

relationships a cheaper commitment to end the relationship than murder.

     Consistent with our theory we provide evidence that the adoption of no-drop

policies in the US have resulted in a reduction of male homicides by intimates and an

increase in reporting of battering. Unfortunately, we find that no-drop policies have had

no effect on the prevalence of domestic violence as measured by female hospitalizations

for assault, although this measure is far from perfect.

       Our results underscore the importance of considering the value of commitments

when evaluating policies. In particular, we provide evidence that agents may substitute a

cheaper public commitment device when one is offered for a more expensive private one.




                                             33
                                      References

Ainslie, G. (1991). “Derivation of ‘rational’ economic behavior from hyperbolic
discount curves, American Economic Review 81(2), 334–340.

Aizer, A. (2006) “Wages, Violence and Health and Household” mimeo, Brown
University.

Allison, P.D. and R.P. Waterman (2002) “Fixed-Effects Negative Binomial Regression
Models” Sociological Methodology, 32, 247-265.

Angeletos, M., Laibson, DL, Repetto, A., Tobacman, J. and S.Weinberg (2001). “The
Hyperbolic Buffer Stock Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 47–68.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. and S. Mullainathan (2004) “How Much Should We Trust
Difference in Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249-75

Becker, G.S. and K.M. Murphy (1988). “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal of
Political Economy 96, 675-700.

Browne A, Saloman A, and S.S. Bassuk (1999). “The Impact of Recent Partner Violence
on Poor Women’s Capacity to Maintain Work,” Violence Against Women 5, 393-426.

Bureau of Justice Statistics (1998). Violence by Intimates: Analysis of Data on Crimes by
Current or Former Spouses, Boyfriends, and Girlfriends. NCJ 167237.

Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2003). Costs of Intimate Partner Violence
Against Women in the United States, March, Atlanta.

Dee, T. (2003) “Until Death Do You Part: The Effects of Unilateral Divorce on Spousal
Homicides,” Economic Inquiry 41(1), 163-82.

Della Vigna, S. and U. Malmendier (2006). “Paying Not to Go to the Gym,” American
Economic Review 96 (3), 695-719.

Dutton, D.G. (1995). The Domestic Assault of Women: Psychological and Criminal
Justice Perspectives. UBC Press: Vancouver.

Dockner, E.J. and G. Feichtinger. “Cyclical Consumption Patterns and Rational
Addiction.” American Economic Review 83, 256-63.


                                           34
Dugan, L., Nagin, D.and R. Rosenfeld (2000). “Exposure Reduction or Backlash? The
Effects of Domestic Violence Resources on Intimate Partner Homicide,” A Final Report
to the National Institution of Justice for Grant # 97WTVX0004.

Dugan, L., Nagin, D. and R. Rosenfeld, (2003).“Exposure Reduction or
Retaliation? The Effects of Domestic Violence Resources on Intimate Partner
Homicide,” Law & Society Review 27 (1), 169-98.

Dunford F.W., D. Huizinga and D.S Elliot (1990). Domestic Violence Experience in
Omaha, Nebraska, 1986-1987. Boulder, CO: University of Colorado at Boulder Institute
of Behavioral Science.

Dunkle, K.L, R.K Jewkes, H.C. Brown, G.E. Gray, J.A. McIntryre and S. D Harlow
(2004). “Gender-based violence, relationship power, and risk of HIV infection in women
attending antenatal clinics in South Africa,” The Lancet 363, 1415-21.

Farmer, A. and J. Tiefenthaler (1996). “Domestic Violence: The Value of Services as
Signals,” American Economic Review 86(2), 274-9.

Field, M.H. and H.F. Field (1973). “Marital Violence and the Criminal Process: Neither
Justice nor Peace,” Social Service Review 47, 221-40.

Ford, D.A. (1983). “Wife Battery and Criminal Justice: A Study of Victim Decision-
Making,” Family Relations 32, 463-75

Ford, D.A. and M.J. Regoli (1992). “The Preventive Impacts of Policies for Prosecuting
Wife Batterers,” in E.S Buzawa and C.G. Buzawa (eds.), Domestic Violence: The
Changing Criminal Justice Response. Auburn House: Wesport, Connecticut.

Gelles, R.J. (1976). “Abused Wives: Why do they Stay,” Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 659-68.

Gilbert, D.T., M.J. Gill and T.D. Wilson. (2002). “The Future is Now: Temporal
Correction in Affective Forecasting,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 88(1), 430–44.

Greenfeld, LA et al (1998) “Violence by Intimates: Analysis of Data on Crimes by
Current of Former Spouses, Boyfriends and Girlfriends” US Dept of Justice NCJ-167237.




                                          35
Griffing S., D. Fish Ragin, R.E. Sage, L. Madry, L.E. Bingham and B.J. Primm (2002).
“Domestic Violence Survivors’ Self-Identified Reasons for Returning to Abusive
Relationships,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 17(3), 306-319.

Grogger, J (1990). “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: An Analysis of Daily
Homicide Counts.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 85 (410), 295-303.

Gruber, J. and S. Mullainathan (2002). “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier?”
NBER WP8872.

Gruber, J and B. Koszegi (2001) “Is Addiction ‘Rational’? Theory and Evidence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1261-303

Haley, J. (1992). “A Study of Women Imprisoned for Homicide.” Georgia Department of
Corrections, June.

Hausman, J., Hall, B. and Z. Griliches (1984). "Econometric Models for Count Data with
an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship." Econometrica 52:909-38.

Iyengar, R. (2007). “Does the Certainty of Arrest Reduce Domestic Violence? Evidence
from Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws.” NBER Working Paper #13186

Jones, A.S., Capmbell, J.C. and Scholleberger, J. et al. (1999). “Annual and Lifetime
Prevalence of Partner Abuse in a Sample of Female HMO enrollees” Women’s Health
Issues 9(6), 295-305.

Koss M., P. Koss and J. Woodruff (1991). “Deleterious Effects of Criminal Victimization
on Women’s Health and Medical Utilization,” Archives of Internal Medicine 151, 342-7.

Laibson, D.I. (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112, 443–77.

Laibson, D.I. (2001). “A Cue-Theory of Consumption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
116, 81-119.

Lloyd, S. and N. Taluc (1999). “The Effects of Male Violence on Female Employment,”
Violence Against Women 5, 370-92.

Lowenstein, G.F. and D. Prelec. (1992). “Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice: Evidence
and Interpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2), 573-97



                                           36
Loewenstein, G.F. (1996). “Out of Control: Visceral Influences on Behavior.”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65(3), 272–92.

Loewenstein, G., E. Weber, C. Hsee and N. Welch. (2001). “Risk as Feelings,”
Psychological Bulletin 127(2), 267-86.

Madrian, B.C. and D. Shea (2001). “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149–87.

Mill, J.S. (1970 [1869]). The Subjection of Women. Cambridge: MIT Press.

O’Donoghue, T. and M. Rabin. (1999). “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic
Review, 89(1), 103-24.

Palacios-Huerta, I. (2003). “Multiple Addictions,” mimeo, Brown University.

Parker, B., J. McFarlane and K. Soeken (1994). “Abuse During Pregnancy: Effects on
Maternal Complications and birth Weight in Adult and Teenage Women” Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 84(3), 323-8.

Parnas, R.I. (1973). “Prosecutorial and Judicial Handling of Family Violence,” Criminal
Law Bulletin 9.

Phelps, E. and R.A. Pollak (1968) "On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
Equilibrium Growth," Review of Economic Studies 35(2), 185-199.

Pollak, R.A. (2004). “An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence,” Journal of
Population Economics 17(2), 311-29.

Read, D. and van Leeuwen, B. (1998). “Predicting Hunger: The Effects of Appetite and
Delay on Choice,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 76(2), 189–
205.

Ryder, H.E. and G.M. Heal (1973). “Optimum Growth with Intertemporally Dependent
Preferences,” Review of Economic Studies 40, 1-33.

Sagot, M. (2000). La ruta crítica de las mujeres afectadas por la violencia intrafamiliar
en América Latina: estudios de casos en diez países. OPS.




                                            37
Smith, B.E., R. Davis, L.B. Nickles and H.J. Davies (2001). “An evaluation of efforts to
implement no-drop policies: two central values in conflict.” American Bar Association.

Stevenson, B. and J. Wolfers (2006). “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
Laws and Family Distress,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 267-88.

Strube, M.J. (1988). “The Decision to Leave an Abusive Relationship: Empirical
Evidence and Theoretical Issues,” Psychological Bulletin, 104(2), 236-50.

Strotz, RH. (1956). “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,”
Review of Economic Studies 23, 165–80.

Tauchen, H.V., A.D. Witte and S.K. Long (1991). “Violence in the Family: A Non-
random Affair,” International Economic Review 32(2), 491-511.

Tauchen, H.V. and AD Witte (1995). “The Dynamics of Domestic Violence,” American
Economic Review 85(2), 414-8.

Tjaden, P. and N. Thoennes (2000a). “Extent Nature and Consequences of Intimate
Pratner Violence: Findings from the NSVAW”, NCJ 181867.

Tjaden, P. and N. Thoennes (2000b). “Full Report of the Prevalence, Incidence and
Consequences of Violence Against Women: Findings from the NSVAW”, NCJ 183781.

Walker, L. (1979). The Battered Woman. New York: Harper & Row.

Wilson, T.D. and Gilbert, D.T. (2003). Affective forecasting. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 35, pp. 345-411). San Diego:
Academic Press.

WHO, World Report on Violence and Health, Geneva, 2002.




                                           38
Table 1: Year No-Drop Policy Adopted by City

City           year no drop             2000 pop
Albuquerque       1987                   448,607
Atlanta           1983                   416,474
Austin            1994                   656,562
Baltimore         1987                   651,154
Boston            1992                   589,141
Buffalo           1995                   292,648
Charlotte         1993                   540,828
Chicago                                 2,896,016
Cincinnati        1995                   331,285
Cleveland         1992                   478,403
Columbus                                 711,470
Dallas            1995                  1,188,580
Denver            1986                   554,636
Table 4B: Rand    1994                   951,270
El Paso           1989                   563,662
Fort Worth                               534,694
Honolulu                                 371,657
Houston                                 1,953,631
Indianapolis                             791,926
Jacksonville                             735,617
Kansas City                              441,545
Long Beach                               461,522
Los Angeles                             3,694,820
Memphis           1995                   650,100
Miami             1986                   362,470
Milwaukee         1994                   596,974
Minneapolis       1993                   382,618
Nashville         1994                   569,891
New Orleans       1996                   484,674
New York          1990                  8,008,278
Oakland           1994                   399,484
Oklahoma City     1996                   506,132
Omaha             1976                   390,007
Philadelphia                            1,517,550
Phoenix           1984                  1,321,045
Pittsburgh                               334,563
Portland          1987                   529,121
Sacramento        1984                   407,018
San Antonio       1990                  1,144,646
San Diego         1984                  1,223,400
San Francisco     1989                   776,733
San Jose          1994                   894,943
Seattle                                  563,374
St Louis                                 348,189
Toledo            1988                   313,619
Tucson            1996                   486,699
Tulsa             1996                   393,049
Virginia Beach    1996                   425,257
Washington        1996                   572,059
Total                                  43,858,041

US population                        281,421,906

Percent of total                         15.6%
Table 2A: Impact of No-Drop Policies on Intimate Homicides



Log-Linear Regression
                                                      Male      Female         Male     Female     Male     Female     Male     Female
No-drop policy                                       -0.188      0.116        -0.167     0.144    -0.176     0.137    -0.193     0.117
                                                     [0.103]    [0.084]       [0.096]   [0.094]   [0.097]   [0.095]   [0.091]   [0.091]
Ln(population)                                        1.943      1.057         1.904     0.876     1.923     0.897     1.956     0.557
                                                     [0.385]    [0.376]       [0.387]   [0.378]   [0.391]   [0.383]   [0.437]   [0.416]
Control for share black & non-intimate homicide         Y          Y             Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for county wages, employment:population & AFDC benefits                  Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for services                                                                                 Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for ln(lag women killed)                                                                                         Y         Y


Observations                                               689       760       689       760       689       760       649       718
R-squared                                                  0.78      0.77      0.78      0.78      0.78      0.78      0.77      0.78




Negative Binomial Regression                               Male     Female     Male     Female     Male     Female     Male     Female
No-drop policy                                            -0.174     0.113    -0.169     0.136    -0.146     0.133    -0.167     0.102
                                                          [0.082]   [0.072]   [0.082]   [0.073]   [0.084]   [0.072]   [0.086]   [0.072]
Ln(population)                                              1.61     0.432      1.6      0.271     1.599      0.27     1.962     0.177
                                                          [0.394]   [0.367]   [0.398]   [0.365]   [0.393]   [0.365]   [0.403]   [0.394]

Control for share black & non-intimate homicide        Y              Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for county wages, employment:population & AFDC benefits                 Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for services                                                                                Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for ln(lag women killed)                                                                                        Y         Y


Observations                                               810       810       794       794       794       794       749       749

Interpretation                                            -16.0%    12.0%     -15.5%    14.6%     -13.6%    14.2%     -15.4%    10.7%

City and year fixed effects included in all regressions
robust standard error in brackets
Table 2B: Impact of No-Drop Policies on Intimate Homicides Stratified by Age of the Victim, Log-Linear Specification


Older Victims (35-55)
                                                  Male   Female           Male      Female       Male      Female       Male     Female     Male     Female
No-drop policy                                   -0.252    0.145         -0.248      0.156      -0.255      0.151       -0.29     0.138    -0.261     0.157
                                                 [0.110]  [0.091]        [0.110]    [0.091]     [0.111]    [0.089]     [0.121]   [0.104]   [0.111]   [0.090]
Ln(population)                                    1.788    1.052          1.706      0.908       1.719      0.922       1.786     0.655     1.984      0.91
                                                 [0.334]  [0.313]        [0.346]    [0.326]     [0.348]    [0.327]     [0.435]   [0.439]   [0.375]   [0.378]
Control for share black & non-intimate homicide     Y        Y              Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for county wages, employment:population & AFDC benefits             Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for services                                                                               Y          Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for ln(lag women killed)                                                                                          Y         Y
Control for ln (lag women killed by partners +1)                                                                                             Y         Y


Observations                                        634        708        634         708        634         708        468       524       595       674
R-squared                                           0.72       0.71       0.72        0.71       0.72        0.71       0.71      0.69      0.72      0.7

Younger Victims (20-34)
                                                   Male  Female           Male      Female       Male      Female       Male     Female     Male     Female
No-drop policy                                     0.097   0.047          0.099       0.06       0.086      0.054       0.039     0.067      0.05     0.063
                                                  [0.104] [0.073]        [0.103]    [0.073]     [0.099]    [0.074]     [0.106]   [0.080]   [0.099]   [0.074]
Ln(population)                                      0.71   1.391          0.685      1.277       0.704      1.276       0.919     1.314     0.806     1.195
                                                  [0.350] [0.313]        [0.361]    [0.314]     [0.363]    [0.313]     [0.454]   [0.355]   [0.402]   [0.336]
Control for share black & non-intimate homicide              Y              Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for county wages, employment:population & AFDC benefits             Y          Y           Y          Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for services                                                                               Y          Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
Control for ln(lag women killed)                                                                                          Y         Y
Control for ln (lag women killed by partners +1)                                                                                             Y         Y


Observations                                        636        805        636         805        636         805        529       669       600       766
R-squared                                           0.72       0.76       0.72        0.76       0.72        0.76       0.73      0.75      0.73      0.75
Robust standard errors in brackets
Table 2C: Impact of No-Drop Policies on Intimate Homicides Among Older Couples (age 35-54) Log-Linear Specification Adding 1 to the Dependent Variable

                                                          Male     Female     Male     Female      Male      Female      Male      Female      Male      Female     Male     Female
No-drop policy                                           -0.197     0.099    -0.192     0.105     -0.186      0.105      -0.19      0.111     -0.269      0.074     -0.19     0.112
                                                         [0.085]   [0.073]   [0.084]   [0.073]    [0.083]    [0.073]    [0.084]    [0.073]    [0.093]    [0.085]   [0.084]   [0.073]
Ln(population)                                            1.337     1.086     1.273     1.006      1.259      1.005      1.515      0.902      1.547      0.65      1.534     0.881
                                                         [0.238]   [0.234]   [0.244]   [0.245]    [0.245]    [0.247]    [0.265]    [0.274]    [0.316]    [0.320]   [0.266]   [0.280]
Control for share black and non-intimate homicide rate      Y         Y         Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y         Y         Y
Control for county wages & employment:population                                Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y         Y         Y
Control for services (hotlines/shelters)                                                             Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y         Y         Y
Control for lag women killed by partners                                                                                   Y          Y
Control for ln (lag women killed by partners)                                                                                                   Y          Y
Control for ln (lag women killed by partners +1)                                                                                                                     Y         Y


Observations                                              941       941       941       941        941        941        895        895        667        667       895       895
R- Squared                                                0.73      0.71      0.73      0.71       0.73       0.71       0.72       0.7        0.72       0.7       0.72      0.7
Robust standard errors in brackets
Table 3: Impact of No-Drop Policies on Intimate Homicides Controlling for Other Domestic Violence Policies

                                                                       All                                       Older Victims
                                                    Male     Female            Male     Female       Male     Female       Male     Female
No-drop policy                                     -0.201     0.098            -0.16     0.099      -0.254      0.1       -0.199     0.158
                                                   [0.101]   [0.093]          [0.083]   [0.099]     [0.111]   [0.093]     [0.115]   [0.096]
ln (population)                                     2.319     1.105            2.133     1.01        2.835     1.456       2.377     1.256
                                                   [0.537]   [0.591]          [0.518]   [0.665]     [0.557]   [0.525]     [0.785]   [0.732]
Share population black                             -0.007    -0.008           -0.028    -0.028      -0.022    -0.011      -0.034    -0.019
                                                   [0.043]   [0.018]          [0.032]   [0.016]     [0.015]   [0.014]     [0.019]   [0.019]
Adult non-intimate homicides per 10000              0.254     0.226            0.249     0.217       0.186     0.147       0.172     0.14
                                                   [0.175]   [0.124]          [0.179]   [0.136]     [0.065]   [0.065]     [0.068]   [0.067]
Average wage in county                             -0.007     -0.03           -0.003    -0.018       0.007    -0.014      -0.012    -0.015
                                                   [0.019]   [0.019]          [0.020]   [0.022]     [0.014]   [0.014]     [0.026]   [0.026]
Employment:population in county                     0.984    -0.024            0.068    -0.173       0.53     -0.575      -0.447    -1.208
                                                   [1.005]   [0.781]          [0.998]   [0.879]     [0.550]   [0.565]     [0.599]   [0.608]
AFDC benefits (family of 4)                        -0.001    -0.002           -0.002    -0.002      -0.001    -0.001      -0.002    -0.001
                                                   [0.001]   [0.001]          [0.001]   [0.001]     [0.001]   [0.001]     [0.001]   [0.001]
Ln(dv hotlines)                                    -0.032    -0.038           -0.032    -0.035      -0.044     -0.11      -0.084    -0.137
                                                   [0.053]   [0.053]          [0.042]   [0.044]     [0.040]   [0.035]     [0.060]   [0.063]
Lag women killed by partners                        0.007     0.006             0.06     0.04       -0.003    -0.003      -0.047     0.003
                                                   [0.005]   [0.004]          [0.052]   [0.037]     [0.012]   [0.013]     [0.049]   [0.048]
Police pro-arrest policy for PO violation          -0.129     0.016           -0.114     0.01       -0.298     0.143      -0.305     0.127
                                                   [0.108]   [0.118]          [0.079]   [0.141]     [0.100]   [0.112]     [0.104]   [0.115]
Police mandatory arrest for dv                      0.024    -0.016            0.066     0.022      -0.089     -0.09      -0.015    -0.075
                                                   [0.111]   [0.121]          [0.095]   [0.142]     [0.110]   [0.110]     [0.113]   [0.115]
Police domestic violence unit                      -0.105    -0.112            -0.13    -0.108      -0.361    -0.287      -0.411    -0.242
                                                   [0.113]   [0.086]          [0.124]   [0.080]     [0.126]   [0.120]     [0.125]   [0.122]
Female labor force participation                                               6.792      5.17                             0.105     0.036
                                                                              [4.480]   [5.219]                           [0.051]   [0.043]
Male labor force participation                                               -10.106    -5.001                            -0.011     0.038
                                                                              [5.272]   [4.348]                           [0.093]   [0.085]
Male median earnings                                                           0.053     0.055                             7.876     9.268
                                                                              [0.051]   [0.051]                           [4.823]   [4.426]
Female median earnings                                                        -0.119    -0.103                           -11.732    -6.434
                                                                              [0.091]   [0.092]                           [4.387]   [4.481]
% of men 25 + with at least 4 yrs college                                     -0.027    -0.048                             0.037     0.048
                                                                              [0.028]   [0.051]                           [0.036]   [0.036]
% of females 25 + with at least 4 yrs college                                  0.181     0.078                             0.098    -0.027
                                                                              [0.047]   [0.047]                           [0.047]   [0.048]
Observations                                         633      701               633       701        502        573         502       573
R-squared                                            0.78     0.78              0.79      0.78       0.74       0.71        0.75      0.71
Robust standard errors in brackets
City and year fixed effects included in all regressions
Table 4A: Dropping 1 City at a Time Log Linear Regression - Distribution of Coefficients

                                   Males
Minimum                            -0.133
Maximum                            -0.219
Median                             -0.189
Mean                               -0.188


Standard Deviation                 0.017

95 % CI                       [-0.193, -0.183]




Table 4B: Randomly Generated No-Drop Policy - Distribtion of Coefficients based on 1000 Simulations

                                   Males                         Females
Minimum                            -0.184                         -0.202
Maximum                             0.178                          0.232
Mean                              -0.0024                        -0.0015


Standard Deviation                 0.071                          0.061

95 % CI                      [-0.0025, 0.0020]              [-0.0017, 0.0023]
Table 5: Impact of No-Drop Policies on Violence Against Women and Arrests for Domestic Violence

                                                                              Log-Linear Regressions                                                               Negative Binomial Regressions
                                                                                                                                                                           Arrests for        Arrests for    Arrests for
All Counties                    Ln(female assaults)      Ln(car crashes)           Ln(arrests)         Ln(arrests)   Ln(arrests)   Female assaults   Car crashes      Domestic Violence Domestic Violence Domestic Violence
No-drop policy                        -0.034                  0.002                  0.139               0.143         0.168          -0.002           -0.045                0.163               0.104         0.132
                                      [0.090]                [0.043]                [0.063]             [0.063]       [0.061]          [0.02]           [0.90]              [0.052]             [0.051]       [0.065]
Per capita income                        0                      0                      0                   0             0                0                0                    0                  0              0
                                      [0.000]                [0.000]                [0.000]             [0.000]       [0.000]          [4.10]           [2.26]              [0.000]             [0.000]       [0.000]
Employment:population                  2.853                  1.714                  2.253               1.935         2.225           3.328            4.584                -1.042             -3.712         -3.553
                                      [1.545]                [0.901]                [1.194]             [1.170]       [1.364]          [3.48]           [4.91]              [1.096]             [0.999]       [0.970]
Non-Intimate Homicide Rate             0.008                    0                    0.001                 0             0             0.024            0.017                0.019               0.002         0.002
                                      [0.001]                [0.001]                [0.002]             [0.002]       [0.002]          [7.63]           [7.52]              [0.003]             [0.003]       [0.003]
Female population                                                                                                                         0                0                    0                  0              0
                                                                                                                                      [14.63]          [15.87]              [0.000]             [0.000]       [0.000]
Shelters for victims of DV            -0.044                 -0.001                  -0.011             -0.006        -0.008          -0.036            0.039                -0.045              0.009         0.005
                                      [0.031]                [0.021]                 [0.014]            [0.014]       [0.014]          [1.39]           [1.93]              [0.027]             [0.031]       [0.031]
White                                 -1.775                 -0.284                  -1.639             -1.433        -1.428          -0.208            1.268                0.103              -0.114         -0.106
                                      [0.117]                [0.074]                 [0.107]            [0.177]       [0.178]          [0.99]           [7.65]              [0.167]             [0.136]       [0.136]
Hispanic                              -1.507
                                      [0.104]                [0.059]                 [0.106]            [0.178]       [0.178]          [3.19]          [3.43]              [0.124]           [0.105]           [0.104]
Ln(female population)                  1.102                  1.048                   1.143              1.015         1.015
                                      [0.053]                [0.028]                 [0.078]            [0.138]       [0.138]
Ln(female assaults)                                                                                      0.116         0.113
                                                                                                        [0.079]       [0.079]
Female assaults                                                                                                                                                                               0.003             0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.000]           [0.000]
Mandatory arrest policy                                                                                               -0.051                                                                                   -0.054
                                                                                                                      [0.077]                                                                                  [0.068]
Observations                            231                   231                     224                 224           224             231             231                  231               231               231
R-squared                               0.97                  0.99                    0.92                0.92         0.92
Interpretation                                                                                                                         -0.2%           -4.4%               17.7%             11.0%             14.1%


                                                                                                                                                                         Arrests for       Arrests for       Arrests for
Without Los Angeles County      Ln(female assaults)      Ln(car crashes)           Ln(arrests)         Ln(arrests)   Ln(arrests)   Female assaults   Car crashes      Domestic Violence Domestic Violence Domestic Violence
No drop policy                          -0.1                  0.036                  0.148               0.157         0.198          -0.032           -0.041               0.22             0.135              0.15
                                      [0.093]                [0.041]                [0.090]             [0.088]       [0.076]          [0.39]          [0.84]              [3.33]            [2.35]           [0.061]
Per capita income                        0                      0                      0                    0            0                0               0                   0                 0                 0
                                      [0.000]                [0.000]                [0.000]             [0.000]       [0.000]          [3.68]          [2.32]              [0.59]            [0.60]           [0.000]
Employment:population                  7.071                  1.774                  0.082               -0.559        0.159           4.457           6.294               -4.878            -5.714            -5.682
                                      [2.403]                [1.157]                [2.189]             [2.322]       [2.414]          [2.37]          [8.97]              [3.75]            [5.06]           [1.108]
Non-Intimate Homicide Rate             0.009                    0                    0.003               0.002         0.002           0.021           0.012               0.013             0.005             0.005
                                      [0.002]                [0.002]                [0.005]             [0.006]       [0.006]          [9.18]          [5.72]              [4.44]            [1.49]           [0.003]
Female population                                                                                                                         0               0                   0                 0                 0
                                                                                                                                       [9.73]          [9.45]              [4.08]            [0.40]           [0.000]
Shelters for victims of DV            -0.043                  0.133                  -0.017             -0.013        -0.034           0.002           0.116               0.024             0.053             0.048
                                      [0.052]                [0.028]                 [0.047]            [0.047]       [0.052]          [0.04]          [2.55]              [0.52]            [1.28]           [0.040]
White                                 -2.056                 -0.543                  -1.671             -1.477        -1.466          -0.303           1.111               0.204             0.503             0.508
                                      [0.170]                [0.110]                 [0.171]            [0.241]       [0.239]          [1.76]          [8.28]              [1.13]            [3.00]           [0.170]
Hispanic                              -1.689                 -0.625                  -0.989             -0.827        -0.822          -0.471           0.534               0.305             0.566             0.568
                                      [0.112]                [0.070]                 [0.115]            [0.227]       [0.226]          [3.97]          [6.13]              [3.15]            [6.18]           [0.092]
Ln(female population)                  1.226                  1.182                   1.129              1.012         1.01
                                      [0.072]                [0.045]                 [0.084]            [0.185]       [0.184]
Ln(female assaults)                                                                                      0.095         0.092
                                                                                                        [0.109]       [0.109]
Female assaults                                                                                                                                                                                0.01             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                              [6.25]           [0.002]
Mandatory arrest policy                                                                                               -0.094                                                                                   -0.027
                                                                                                                      [0.101]                                                                                  [0.061]
Observations                            198                   198                     191                 191           191             198             198                  198               198               198
R-squared                               0.89                  0.98                    0.61                0.61         0.62
Robust standard errors in brackets
Interpretation                                                                                                                         -3.1%           -4.0%               24.6%             14.5%             16.2%




                                                                                                                                                                         Arrests for       Arrests for       Arrests for
Without LA or San Diego        Ln(female assaults)      Ln(car crashes)            Ln(arrests)         Ln(arrests)   Ln(arrests)   Female assaults   Car crashes      Domestic Violence Domestic Violence Domestic Violence
No drop policy                         -0.044                 0.096                   0.25               0.253         0.244           0.045            0.052              0.292             0.209             0.163
                                       [0.109]               [0.048]                [0.076]             [0.078]       [0.073]         [0.087]          [0.042]            [0.055]           [0.055]           [0.055]
Observations                             165                    165                   158                 158           158             165              165                165               165               165
R-squared                               0.86                    0.96                  0.49                0.49          0.49
Robust standard errors in brackets
Interpretation                                                                                                                         4.6%             5.3%               33.9%             23.2%             17.7%
County fixed effects and a quadratic time trend included in all regressions
                         Figure 3A:                                   Figure 4: Average number of homicides per city
              Intimate Homicid Victims by Sex:                                   before and after no-drop
                     1979-1996 National
                                                               14
1800
                                                               12
1600
1400                                                           10

1200                                                            8
                                                                                                                       Males
1000                                                  male
                                                                6                                                      females
800                                                   female
600                                                             4
400
                                                                2
200
  0                                                             0
       1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995                  t-3         t-2   t-1     t   t+1   t+2    t+3




                          Figure 3B:                                 Figure 5: Impact of no-drop policies on arrests
              Intimate Homicide Victims by Sex:                                  for domestic violence
                      1979-1996 48 Cities
                                                               570
400                                                            560
350                                                            550
300                                                            540
                                                               530
250
                                                      Male     520
200
                                                      Female   510
150
                                                               500
100                                                            490
 50                                                            480
  0                                                            470
      1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995                         t-2           t-1        t          t+1    t+2
