                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF PUBLIC DRUG INSURANCE

                                         Darius Lakdawalla
                                           Neeraj Sood

                                        Working Paper 13501
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13501


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We are grateful to the National Institute on Aging for funding (1R01AG021940). For many helpful
comments and suggestions, we thank seminar participants at the 2007 NBER Summer Institute Health
Care session. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Darius Lakdawalla and Neeraj Sood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Welfare Effects of Public Drug Insurance
Darius Lakdawalla and Neeraj Sood
NBER Working Paper No. 13501
October 2007
JEL No. H2,H51,I11

                                               ABSTRACT

Rewarding inventors with inefficient monopoly power has long been regarded as the price of encouraging
innovation. Public prescription drug insurance escapes that trade-off and achieves an elusive goal:
lowering static deadweight loss, while simultaneously encouraging dynamic investments in innovation.
As a result of this feature, the public provision of drug insurance can be welfare-improving, even for
risk-neutral and purely self-interested consumers. In spite of its relatively low benefit levels, the Medicare
Part D benefit generate $3.5 billion of annual static deadweight loss reduction, and at least $2.8 billion
of annual value from extra innovation. These two components alone cover 87% of the social cost of
publicly financing the benefit. The analysis of static and dynamic efficiency also has implications
for policies complementary to a drug benefit: in the context of public monopsony power, some degree
of price-negotiation by the government is always strictly welfare-improving, but this should often
be coupled with extensions in patent length.

Darius Lakdawalla
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
darius@rand.org

Neeraj Sood
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
neeraj_sood@rand.org
I      Introduction

Patents encourage innovation by awarding inefficient monopoly power to inventors. This leads

to the familiar trade-off between inducing innovation, and ensuring the efficient utilization of

invented goods. Public prescription drug insurance provides a way out of this dilemma, because

it helps decouple the price consumers pay from the price innovators receive. By subsidizing co-

insurance for drugs, public insurance encourages utilization, but without necessarily

compromising innovators’ prices, profits, and incentives for research. As such, public insurance

can simultaneously promote static and dynamic efficiency, which are often at odds.


The social value of publicly provided drug insurance is typically thought to derive from its

insurance value, and the value of care provided to less affluent groups. However, its static and

dynamic efficiency effects imply that public drug insurance is valuable to risk-neutral, self-

interested consumers. We demonstrate this point theoretically, and the data suggest that it is of

considerable quantitative importance. Even though Part D is not a particularly generous

insurance plan, it generates an annual value of $3.5 billion in static deadweight loss reduction,

and $2.8 billion in additional innovation. The total value of $6.5 billion is within 13% of median

estimates for Part D’s social cost. Part D is nearly welfare-improving, even ignoring the aspects

of the program typically thought to generate its entire social value.


Taken as a whole, the Part D legislation — like many public prescription drug insurance

programs — addresses more than just insurance for prescription drugs. While prescription drug

insurance per se enhances welfare, the auxiliary provisions of the Part D program rest on shakier

conceptual foundations. Two provisions in particular bear on its efficiency effects. First, the

original legislation forbade the government from using its newfound buying power to negotiate

                                                 1
prices. This was motivated by concern that price-negotiation could lower pharmaceutical profits

and dampen innovation incentives. Second, and in stark contrast, the legislation also placed

limits on the ability of innovators to “game” the patent system by acquiring extended patent

protection. Many pharmaceutical companies use a variety of strategies to extend monopolies and

block the entry of generic competitors; the Medicare Modernization Act placed explicit

restrictions on such behavior.


The prohibition on price-negotiation is likely to be welfare-decreasing, even in a dynamic sense.1

In particular, some degree of price-negotiation is always welfare-improving. The argument is a

familiar application of the “second-best” principle: it is welfare-enhancing to distort an efficient

margin slightly, as long as it reduces distortion along another, inefficient margin. While patents

distort consumer utilization, the innovator is nonetheless able to maximize his static profits with

respect to price. Initially, therefore, small deviations from the optimal monopoly price have no

impacts on monopoly profits, or on incentives for innovation. In contrast, they strictly lower the

degree of deadweight loss from under-utilization by consumers. As a result, some degree of

price-reduction enhances the efficiency of utilization, but has no deleterious effects on

innovation, at least on the margin. The recent proposal in Congress to begin price-negotiation

may thus rest on sounder economic footing than the original legislation.


The case for or against “patent-gaming” is not nearly as clear-cut, but there is an important

interaction between the two provisions. Somewhat surprisingly, the recent push to negotiate



1
 While the current Congress has passed legislation that could end up overturning the prohibition on price-
negotiation, it remains in place as of this writing. The Medicare Prescription Drug Price Negotiation Act of 2007
(H.R. 4) requires the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to negotiate prescription drug
prices for Medicare Part D starting in 2008. This has not yet been signed into law.

                                                         2
prices actually undercuts the economic case for limiting patent-gaming. The key is the well-

known result that the dynamically optimal patent is long, but “narrow,” in the sense that it

awards a negligibly small per-period profit over an infinitely long period of time (Gilbert and

Shapiro, 1990; Klemperer, 1990) . There is an important analogy between prescription drug

policy and this principle of optimal patent design. Patent-gaming can be thought of as a de facto

means of increasing patent length (albeit at some social cost). In contrast, price-negotiation

reduces profits at a given point in time, and thus serves to “narrow” patent width. Since it is

welfare-improving to simultaneously lengthen patents and narrow market power, it is similarly

welfare-improving to couple patent-gaming with price-negotiation. This is precisely the opposite

of the way the original Part D legislation was configured.


In this paper, we analyze the welfare economics of the Medicare Part D program, with special

attention to its provisions for drug insurance, price-negotiation, and patent-gaming. We begin

with some relevant background material, and then present our analysis in three parts. Section III

presents a simple theoretical model that demonstrates the welfare effects of Medicare Part D, as

well as the approach to calculating them. Section IV uses the theoretical model to quantify the

welfare effects of the program. Finally, Section V analyzes how the passage of Part D affects

optimal innovation and procurement policy.


II     The Medicare Part D Program

Design and Benefits of Medicare Part D


Medicare Part D subsidizes the costs of prescription drugs for Medicare beneficiaries and was

introduced by the passage of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization

Act of 2003 (MMA). Beneficiaries can obtain the Medicare Drug benefit through two types of
                                              3
private plans: beneficiaries can join a Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) for drug coverage only, or

they can join a Medicare Advantage plan (MA) that covers prescription drugs (MA-PD).

Beneficiaries are required to make premium payments to obtain Part D coverage. However,

premiums are highly subsidized. Medicare Part D covers roughly 75% of the costs.


Medicare Part D establishes a standard drug benefit that Part D plans may offer. The standard

benefit is defined in terms of the benefit structure and not in terms of the drugs that must be

covered. In 2007, this standard benefit requires payment of a $265 deductible. The beneficiary

then pays 25% of the cost of a covered Part D prescription drug up to an initial coverage limit of

$2400. Once the initial coverage limit is reached, the beneficiary is subject to another deductible,

commonly known as the “Donut Hole,” in which they must pay the full cost of drugs. When total

out-of-pocket expenses on formulary drugs for the year, including the deductible and initial

coinsurance, reach $3850, the beneficiary then reaches catastrophic coverage, in which he or she

pays a 5% coinsurance. In practice, Part D plans might deviate from this standard benefit but

they must offer coverage that is equivalent to or better than the standard benefit in actuarial

terms. The law also stipulates that employers sponsoring prescription drug coverage for retirees

can receive a federal subsidy if the coverage is at least actuarially equivalent to the standard

Medicare drug benefit. Employers would receive a 28% subsidy to their portion of the individual

retiree’s drug costs between $250 and $5,000. Finally, Medicare Part D also provides more

generous insurance and additional subsidies to low-income beneficiaries. Currently, dual-

eligible (eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid) beneficiaries constitute the majority of the

beneficiaries receiving low income subsidies as they are automatically enrolled in Part D plans.




                                                  4
Role of Price Negotiations


One of the controversial features of the MMA was it did not allow Medicare to negotiate prices

directly with pharmaceutical companies. Many critics regard this as poor stewardship of tax

dollars, while those in favor argue that price-negotiation could dampen innovation incentives by

lowering pharmaceutical profits. However, this original legislation might be overturned by the

Medicare Prescription Drug Price Negotiation Act of 2007 (H.R. 4). This bill, passed earlier this

year by the House of Representatives, would require the Secretary of Health and Human

Services to negotiate directly with manufacturers to lower covered Part D drug prices, beginning

in 2008. This would reverse the MMA prohibition against federal negotiation of drug prices.

The status of the bill remains uncertain, as of this writing. In April of 2007, an attempt to force a

Senate vote on the bill was blocked (Marre, 2007). For his part, President Bush has consistently

promised to veto it if passed (Espo, 2007).


MMA and Patent-Gaming


Patent-gaming refers to activities of pharmaceutical companies to extend monopolies and block

entry of cheaper generics in markets for blockbuster drugs near patent expiration. The most

common tactic is to file a lawsuit against a generic competitor for infringement of a patent on the

original product.2 Under the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984




2
  Another tactic is to file multiple patents with the FDA after a potential generic entrant applies for FDA approval,
and then to sue the new entrant for the infringement of these later patents. Such lawsuits have triggered multiple but
staggered 30-month delays. For example, the manufacturers of Paxil, a blockbuster antidepressant, received 5
staggered 30-month extensions delaying the approval of generics by 65 months. Still other tactics include the
conduct of clinical trials in children, for which the Hatch-Waxman act guarantees six months of market exclusivity,
or introducing new versions of a patented product that differ only in dosage, appearance or indications for use. For
example, Eli Lilly (the manufacturer of the antidepressant Prozac), introduced Sarafem, a new drug chemically
identical to Prozac but colored pink and lavender instead of green. Sarafem got more than 2 years of market
                                                          5
(commonly known as the Hatch-Waxman Act) the filing of any lawsuit—no matter how

frivolous—triggers an automatic 30-month delay in the introduction of generics.3 An FTC study

found that brand name companies sued the first generic entrant and triggered the automatic 30-

month extension for 72% of the drugs analyzed in the study. The study also found that, for cases

resolved in the courts, generic entrants prevailed 73% of the time (FTC, 2002). The MMA

imposed limits on patent-gaming by stipulating that brand name companies could not get more

than one 30-month extension for lawsuits filed against generic entrants. The law also allows the

generic applicant to assert a counterclaim to de-list a patent related to the brand name drug. This

further discourages branded companies from such patent-extension strategies.


III      The Welfare Effects of Stand-Alone Public Drug

         Insurance

We first analyze the welfare effects of extending insurance, without any additional provisions.

This analysis distills the key welfare effects of drug insurance alone. It demonstrates one of the

unique features of such insurance: its potential to lower deadweight loss and raise monopoly

profits, simultaneously. It can achieve this outcome by partially decoupling the consumer’s price

from the revenue earned by the monopolist.




exclusivity, because it was approved for treating premenstrual depression, anxiety and irritability (whereas Prozac
was approved for major depression), and an additional 6 months extension because it was tested in clinical trials for
children (Angell, 2004).
3
 Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-417, 98 Stat. 1585 (codified at
21 U.S.C. § 355 (1994) and 35 U.S.C. § 271(d)-(h) (1994)) ("Hatch-Waxman Act").

                                                          6
Static Implications


The provision of drug insurance can reduce deadweight loss, because co-payments below the

monopoly price increase utilization by consumers. Define D( p ) as the demand function, P(Q )

as inverse demand, MC as the constant marginal cost of production, and pm as the equilibrium

monopoly price. The social surplus generated by competitive provision of the good is given by:


                                     SS c ≡ ⎛⎜ ∫           P (Q )dQ − MC * D ( MC ) ⎞⎟
                                                D ( MC )
                                                                                               (1)
                                             ⎝ 0                                     ⎠


In the absence of insurance, deadweight loss in the branded pharmaceutical market is social

surplus under competition, minus social surplus under monopoly:


                                 DWL ≡ SS c − ⎛⎜ ∫                P(Q )dQ − MC * D ( pm ) ⎞⎟
                                                       D ( pm )
                                                                                               (2)
                                               ⎝ 0                                         ⎠


Now suppose that the government offers prescription drug insurance. Specifically, suppose the

government covers the share (1 − σ ) of the market price, and leaves the consumer with the co-

insurance rate σ . If the government continues to pay the monopoly price for pharmaceuticals,

the actuarial cost of the insurance is pm (1 − σ ) D(σpm ) . From a purely static point of view, this

cost is simply a transfer from the government to the pharmaceutical industry.4 The welfare

effects emerge from the change in quantity induced by this policy.


Of course, Part D could impact the monopoly price charged for pharmaceuticals. The

government may use its newfound monopsony power to negotiate prices downward, or



4
    Later, we include the deadweight cost of public funds, which is so far absent.

                                                                   7
monopolists may exploit the subsidy to consumers and choose to raise prices. We discuss these

possibilities later. For now, we analyze the welfare effects of the program, given some arbitrary

post-Part D monopoly price, pm' .


Deadweight loss is a function of what the government pays monopolists, and offers consumers in

terms of co-insurance. This relationship can be expressed as:



                                      P(Q )dQ − MC * D( MC ) ⎞⎟ − ⎛⎜ ∫           P (Q )dQ − MC * D (σpm' ) ⎞⎟ (3)
                                                                       D ( σpm )
       DWL( pm' , σ ) ≡ ⎛⎜ ∫
                                                                              '
                             D ( MC )

                         ⎝ 0                                  ⎠ ⎝ 0                                         ⎠


Ultimately, what matters for deadweight loss is simply σpm' , the price faced by consumers. The

welfare effect of lowering the consumer price — either by lowering the co-insurance or by

lowering the price paid to monopolists — is given by:


                                                | ' = D' (σpm' )(σpm' − MC )
                                          dDWL
                                      −                                                                          (4)
                                          dσpm' pm ,σ


From a static point of view, lowering the price paid by consumers always lowers deadweight

loss, as long as σpm' > MC , or that consumers continue to face a price that is at least as large as

marginal cost. Empirically, this assumption seems to hold for Medicare Part D. Marginal cost is

typically estimated to be 20% of the branded drug price (Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz, 1991;

Grabowski and Vernon, 1992; Berndt, Cockburn, and Griliches, 1996). In contrast, the average

coinsurance rate under Medicare Part D is currently about 62%, well above marginal cost.5




5
  This number was calculated by the authors using the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) data described
later. Appendix A presents a formal proof that the anticipated percentage change in co-insurance rate (along with
the elasticity of demand) is a sufficient predictor of the change in utilization, even with a nonlinear benefit design.
                                                            8
There is one remaining loose end: to show that Part D will always raise consumption, once we

account for the behavioral response of innovators. Part D may induce innovators to raise their

monopoly price, but never by so much as to reduce quantity below its initial level. For a

percentage subsidy s , a firm with constant cost faces the profit function:


                                        (1 + s ) p( q) q − MC * q                                 (5)


This has the first-order condition


                                                              MC
                                        p' ( q) q + p( q) =        ,                              (6)
                                                              1+ s


which makes clear that a subsidy is equivalent to a reduction in marginal cost. As such,

subsidies will always raise quantity.


Dynamic Implications


The original intent of Medicare Part D was to provide drug insurance without affecting prices

paid to innovators. Earlier, we showed that drug insurance improves static welfare by lowering

deadweight loss. We now show that this original aspect of Part D induces more innovation, and

increases dynamic social surplus.


Let I denote industry investment in research, and let g ( I ) denote the probability of discovery

with g ′ ( I ) > 0 and g ′′ ( I ) < 0 . In other words, R&D investment raises the probability of new drug

discovery, but in a concave fashion. Suppose the innovator enjoys a patent monopoly for T

periods after the discovery and will make zero profits thereafter. If the firm discounts the future

at the rate r , it invests in research in order to maximize the present value of expected profits:

                                                    9
                                        Π( I ) = g ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e − rtπ (σ , pm )dt ⎤ − I
                                                            T
                                                                                                                       (7)
                                                         ⎢⎣ 0                    ⎥⎦


By the envelope theorem, stand-alone drug insurance raises the expected profits of innovators,

          dπ
because      < 0 . It will also induce more innovation. The privately optimal level of innovation
          dσ

is given by:


                                                        1                       1
                                  g' (I ) =                            ≡                                               (8)
                                              ⎡ e −rtπ (σ , p )dt ⎤
                                                T
                                                                           Π (σ , pm , T )
                                                                             m

                                              ⎢⎣ ∫0          m    ⎥⎦


The marginal product of research is the reciprocal of monopoly profits, Π m and, by extension, of

patent length (Nordhaus, 1969). Therefore, since reductions in co-insurance raise profits, they

must also stimulate innovation.


Define I pat ( Π m ) as the level of investment induced by monopoly profits Π m . Expected social

surplus can be written as:


               S (T , pm , σ ) ≡ g ( I pat ( Π m )) ⎡ ∫ e −rt SS c dt − ∫ e −rt DWL(σpm )dt ⎤ − I pat ( Π m )
                                                        ∞                T
                                                                                                                       (9)
                                                    ⎢⎣ 0                 0                  ⎥⎦


The marginal value of introducing stand-alone drug insurance is given by:


  Sσ |σ =1 = I π Π σm ⎧⎨ g ' ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e − rt SS c dt − ∫ e − rt DWL( pm )dt ⎤ − 1⎫⎬ + g ⎡ − ∫ e − rt DWL' ( pm ) pm dt ⎤ < 0
                                       ∞                 T                                    T

                       ⎩           ⎢⎣ 0                  0                   ⎥⎦ ⎭        ⎢⎣ 0                           ⎥⎦

                                                                                         (10)




                                                             10
The term in curly braces is strictly greater than unity, because total social surplus from the

innovation must be strictly larger than the innovator’s profits.6 Therefore, the first term is

negative. This measures the value of drug insurance as a stimulant to innovation. The second

term is negative, because pm > MC , implying that deadweight loss will rise with a higher price.

This is the value of insurance in mitigating deadweight loss.


Notice the important presumption that the profits of innovators do not exceed social surplus.

Clearly, this condition always holds in a completely private market, even one afflicted by moral

hazard in insurance provision (Lakdawalla and Sood, 2006). Intuitively, consumers would never

voluntarily pay more than their consumer surplus for a drug in a spot market, and they would

never pay more for an insurance policy than the expected value of its covered treatments. Public

subsidies for employer-provided health insurance make it theoretically possible that profits could

exceed social surplus. However, given the estimated rate of surplus-appropriation by innovators

(see the discussion beginning on page 25), this would require extremely large transfers. It is

even less likely among the elderly population, where prescription drug insurance was relatively

uncommon.7


However, another more controversial question concerns whether there is currently too much or

too little innovation, or equivalently, how much innovators ought to be able to appropriate. In

the standard model, innovators ought to appropriate the full value of social surplus, which is




6
 In theory, distortions like subsidies for health insurance could result in profits being higher than social surplus.
However, we later document empirical evidence confirming social surplus is larger than profits.
7
 As of 2003, 60% of the aged (65+) population had no drug insurance, or insurance that was less generous on
average than the standard Part D benefit.

                                                           11
impossible in the absence of price-discrimination. Some economists have pointed out that patent

races, public subsidies, and other imperfections can alter this result, sometimes substantially.

Others have emphasized the extremely low rates of social-surplus appropriation by innovators.8


Resolving this controversial question lies beyond the scope of this paper, but we can interpret our

analytical results, regardless of whether innovation is too high or too low. If, as in the standard

case, innovation is too low, Part D has a direct welfare benefit, without any auxiliary provisions.

This is the analysis presented above. If in fact there is too much innovation, the direct effects of

Part D on innovation reduce social welfare. However, this adds additional value to price-

negotiation or similar measures to limit, or even reduce, the profits of innovators. In this case, a

Part D program coupled with price-reductions that hold innovator profits constant would be

strictly welfare-improving.9 The rest of the analysis is presented from the point of view of the

standard model, that there is too little innovation; the possibility of “over-innovation” is

discussed further in Section V, when we consider the benefits of price-negotiation.


Public Financing and Deadweight Cost


In the analysis above, we abstracted from the costs of public-financing. When the government

has access to an efficient lump-sum tax mechanism, it does not matter whether insurance is

publicly or privately financed. Clearly, the deadweight costs of public financing play a

substantial role in the optimal policy configuration. However, in this section, we show that they




8
 For contrasting views in the context of pharmaceuticals, see Garber, Jones, and Romer (2006), compared with
Philipson and Jena (2006). In a broader context, see Shapiro (2007), compared with Nordhaus (2004).
9
  Such a scheme would also be feasible, since innovators have already revealed their willingness to operate at
today’s profit levels.

                                                         12
do not change the basic conclusion that some public financing of drug insurance is welfare-

improving —deadweight costs merely change the optimal level of financing. When deadweight

costs of taxation rise, the optimal degree of public financing falls, but some public subsidy for

drug insurance is always optimal, because of its value as a deadweight-loss reduction device.


Paying more money out of the public treasury, as opposed to private pockets, incurs social cost.

This has two effects. First, providing insurance to the uninsured becomes less beneficial, on

balance. Second, it now becomes strictly costly to attract the currently insured to a public plan

with the same co-insurance rate. In the absence of deadweight costs, public subsidies for

insurance premia represent a pure transfer to such people. With deadweight costs, this transfer

imposes net costs on society.


In spite of these costs, some degree of subsidization remains optimal. Intuitively, providing a

small subsidy to the uninsured always provides some positive benefit, because of the reduction in

deadweight loss. Moreover, the cost of “crowd-out” (i.e., attracting currently insured consumers

to a less generous public plan) is initially zero, because in an unsubsidized equilibrium, they

strictly prefer their more generous private plans.


This intuition can be seen most easily by calculating the optimal degree of subsidy, given a

public co-insurance rate σ and a private co-insurance rate σ p . Specifically, suppose that there

are N initially uninsured consumers, and I privately insured consumers. Without loss of

generality, we assume that the insured consumers are all identical, and all have policies with co-

insurance rate σ p .




                                                 13
Define s as the share of the consumer’s premium that is publicly financed. Define N (s ) as the

number of uninsured consumers choosing the public drug plan at the premium subsidy s , and

define I (s ) as the number of insured consumers doing the same.10 The social marginal cost of

public funds is μ : for example, if raising $1 of revenue introduces $0.50 of deadweight loss, we

say that μ = 0.5 . Finally, D( p ) is per person demand at the price p . We assume this is

uniform across people, but relaxing this assumption leaves the analysis unchanged. The social

cost of a publicly financed drug benefit offering co-insurance rate σ is thus:


                                       DWC = sμD (σpm )(1 − σ ) pm [N ( s ) + I ( s )]                                       (11)


The total reduction in deadweight loss for all consumers is given by:


                                                  D ( σpm )                           D ( σpm )
                                        N ( s)∫               P ( q )dq + I ( s ) ∫               P ( q )dq                  (12)
                                                D ( pm )                           D ( σ p pm )




The optimal degree of public financing maximizes deadweight loss reduction, net of social cost,

according to:


          max s ⎧⎨ N ( s ) ∫                                            P( q )dq ⎫⎬ − sμD (σpm )(1 − σ ) pm [N ( s ) + I ( s )] (13)
                             D ( σpm )                      D ( σpm )
                                       P( q )dq + I ( s ) ∫
                 ⎩          D ( p m )                      D ( σ  p
                                                                 p m  )           ⎭


The first-order condition for the optimal subsidy can be written as:




10
     Both I and N also depend on the co-insurance rates                 σ    and   σ p , but since we regard these as fixed, we do not
explicitly consider them.

                                                                        14
       D ( σpm )                      D ( σpm )
Ns ∫               P( q )dq + I s ∫               P ( q )dq − sμD(σpm )(1 − σ ) pm [N s + I s ] − μD (σpm )(1 − σ ) p m [N + I ] ≤ 0
     D ( pm )                     D ( σ p pm )

                                                                                                                (14)


To show that the optimal value of s exceeds zero, it suffices to show that the marginal return to

s is strictly positive when s = 0 . Without subsidies, neither insured nor uninsured consumers

will choose the public drug benefit; otherwise, they would have chosen such an insurance policy

in the private market. Therefore, evaluated at zero, the marginal return to public financing is

given by:


                                                         D ( σpm )                      D ( σpm )
                                                  Ns ∫               P ( q)dq + I s ∫               P ( q )dq > 0      (15)
                                                        D ( pm )                     D ( σ p pm )




If MC < σ ≤ σ p , both terms are strictly positive. If σ > σ p , the first term is strictly positive,

and the second term is zero. To see this, observe that I s (0) = 0 . Intuitively, insured consumers

will not switch to a less generous plan, absent a strictly positive subsidy. Therefore, since I ( s )

will be uniformly zero for all s below some strictly positive s * > 0 , its derivative must be zero

at s = 0 .11


Two other points follow from the first-order condition for public financing. Not surprisingly, the

optimal degree of public financing is lower when the marginal cost of public funds μ is higher.

In addition, the degree of public financing is higher when the deadweight loss from monopoly is

higher. Indeed, for competitive markets with pm = MC , there are no static grounds for the




  More formally, there exists some s > 0 such that insured consumers are exactly indifferent between the public
11                                                  *

and private plans: a strictly positive subsidy is required to compensate the insured consumers for their partial loss of
coverage. Therefore, I ( s ) = 0 , for all                s ≤ s * ; this implies that I s (0) = 0 .

                                                                                15
public financing of health insurance. Arguments would need to be made on the conventional

bases of insurance value, altruism, or merit goods.


IV     Calibrating the Welfare Effects

In this section, we calculate—in a “back-of-the-envelope” fashion – the welfare impacts of

Medicare Part D. We consider both the static and dynamic benefits of increased drug

consumption and the associated increase in pharmaceutical innovation induced by Medicare Part

D. We also estimate the social costs of financing this benefit due to deadweight loss from

increased taxation. We exclude dual eligibles from the analysis as they already receive generous

public prescription drug insurance from Medicaid. The introduction of Medicare Part D does not

substantially change the generosity of insurance for dual eligibles; all it does is transfer insurance

from Medicaid to Medicare Part D.


The net benefits of Part D can be calculated according to the following equation:


         NB = Enrollees * ( PC Static Benefit ) + ( Dynamic Benefit ) − ( Deadweight Cost ) (16)


In words, the net benefit of the program is equal to: the number of enrollees multiplied by the

per capita static benefits to those enrollees, plus the dynamic benefit of the program, minus the

deadweight costs of financing. The first term embodies the utilization effects on enrollees, the

second the innovation effects, and the third the social cost of funding premiums and employer

subsidies. Appendix B provides a summary of the calculations involved in calibrating the static

benefits, dynamic benefits and dead weight costs of Part D. A more detailed exposition of this

calibration is provided below.



                                                 16
Part D Enrollees and Non-Enrollees


We need to estimate both the number of enrollees, and the number of non-enrollees eligible for

the employer subsidy payment. The latter group affects the financial cost of the program, if not

the static welfare benefit. We used data from the 2003 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey

(MEPS) to estimate these quantities.


Methods

The Medicare Modernization Act classifies an individual’s private prescription drug coverage as

“creditable” or “non-creditable.” Broadly speaking, “creditable coverage” is private insurance

that is actuarially at least as generous as Medicare Part D. Individuals without creditable

coverage are required to enroll in Part D within 63 days of being eligible, or face a late

enrollment penalty if and when they enroll. Those with creditable coverage are not subject to

this penalty provision. Moreover, if a firm provides a Part D-eligible employee with creditable

coverage, that firm is entitled to a 28% subsidy on their portion of the individual retiree’s drug

costs between $250 and $5,000.


In our calculations, we assume that there are no costs of switching to Part D. Therefore,

everyone without creditable coverage (i.e., less generous than Part D) switches to the program.

We also assume that people with creditable coverage refuse to switch.12 Evidently, therefore, we

need to identify individuals with and without “creditable coverage.” To do so, we use actual



12
  This assumption has less transparent foundations. Clearly, people with very generous coverage fail to switch, but
the effects for people with marginally more generous coverage are theoretically unclear. On the one hand, the
subsidy of the Part D premium suggests that some may switch to Part D. On the other hand, employers could pass
along the subsidy they receive for privately insuring a worker who is still employed, which may fully counteract the
value of the premium subsidy. We adopt the simple assumption of no-switching, because it best matches actual
enrollment data, as shown in Table 1.

                                                        17
prescription drug expenditures observed in the MEPS,13 and calculate the average co-insurance

rate generated by the individual’s current plan (or lack thereof), and by the standard Medicare

Part D benefit. Those whose average co-insurance rate is lower under Part D are classified as

having no creditable coverage, and vice-versa. Appendix A presents a formal proof that the

average co-insurance rate is a sufficient predictor of value for an insurance plan, even one with a

nonlinear benefit design.


Estimates

Using the MEPS sampling weights we estimate that, excluding dual eligibles, 36 million

beneficiaries would be eligible for Medicare Part D. Next, for each MEPS respondent we then

calculate the average coinsurance for prescription drugs under 2 scenarios: (1) their current

coverage; or (2) enrollment in the standard Medicare Part D benefit, described earlier. Based on

this analysis, we identify individuals with and without creditable coverage. We estimate that

59% of eligible respondents, or roughly 21 million beneficiaries, have no creditable coverage.

We assume all these individuals enroll in Part D.


The remaining 15 million already have more generous insurance compared to the standard Part D

benefit and are assumed not to enroll in Part D. Based on information about the source of

coverage in MEPS we estimate that roughly 26% of beneficiaries have creditable insurance from

an employer or union, which would then receive the employer subsidy instituted by Medicare

Part D. Finally, 14% of beneficiaries have creditable insurance from other sources such as




13
  Notice that we calculate the effective co-insurance rate from current spending. This is equivalent to calculating
the first-order welfare effect of switching to Part D. Individuals with a positive first-order welfare effect will
benefit, and vice-versa.

                                                         18
Veterans Administration, Indian Health Service and state pharmaceutical assistance programs.

The employer subsidy is not paid in these cases.


As a validity check, we compared our enrollment estimates to the actual enrollment rates

reported by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), both of which appear in Table

1. The HHS estimates show that, as of January 2007, and excluding dual eligibles, 36 million

beneficiaries were eligible for Medicare Part D. Of these, 21 million were estimated to have no

creditable coverage prior to Part D.14 The remaining 15 million had creditable coverage from

employer/union or from other sources such as Veterans Administration, Indian Health Service

and state pharmaceutical assistance programs (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2007). These numbers

are quite similar to the estimates we derived from analysis of the MEPS.


Table 1: Prescription Drug Coverage Sources Among Medicare Beneficiaries.



                                                    HHS Estimates                       MEPS Estimates
                                            Population (mil)   Percent              Population (mil) Percent
Coverage Type
 Enrolled/No creditable Coverage                             21              59%                    21        59%
 Creditable Employer Coverage                                10              28%                     9        26%
 Others with Creditable Coverage                              5              13%                     5        14%
Total                                                        36             100%                    36       100%




14
  Of the 21 million beneficiaries, 17 million enrolled in Part D and the remaining 4 million continued to have no
creditable coverage. We assume that, over the long-run, these remaining 4 million respondents will switch into the
more generous coverage afforded by the Part D program. If not, this incomplete take-up rate would lower the
welfare benefits of the program.

                                                        19
Static Benefits


The next step is computing the static benefit enjoyed by enrollees in Part D. Using a linear

approximation to demand, the benefit associated with a particular change in price and quantity is

                                                                      1
simply the size of deadweight loss reduction “triangle,” or             ( − Δp )( Δq) —one half times the
                                                                      2

reduction in price, times the increase in quantity. This benefit can be equivalently written using

the anticipated percentage changes in price and quantity, along with the elasticity of demand.

Appendix A presents a formal proof that the anticipated percentage change in co-insurance rate

and elasticity of demand are sufficient predictors of change in utilization, even with a nonlinear

benefit design.


Assuming that the price paid to the manufacturer does not change,15 some simple algebra yields

the equivalent formulation of the static benefit for an enrolling consumer:


                                      1 ⎡ (σ ND − σ D ) ⎤ ⎡ (σ ND − σ D ) ⎤
                               SB =     ⎢               ⎥⎢               e⎥OOPND                          (17)
                                      2 ⎣ σ ND          ⎦ ⎣ σ ND          ⎦


The terms σ D and σ ND are the average share of price paid by the consumer with and without

Part D, respectively. OOPND is the out of pocket prescription drug expenditure of the consumer

under the status quo, and e is the elasticity of demand. To calculate the static welfare impact of

Medicare Part D, we need empirical estimates of: (1) The percentage change in price to the




15
  This assumption matches the available empirical evidence. For example, Lichtenberg and Sun (2007) use data
from a large retail pharmacy before and after introduction of Medicare Part D and find that Medicare Part D had a
negligible impact on overall prices paid to manufacturers but a significant impact on prices faced by consumers.

                                                        20
consumer induced by Medicare Part D, (2) the elasticity of demand for prescription drugs, and

(3) the out of pocket costs of purchasing prescription drugs.


Percentage Change in Price

We calculate the percentage price change that enrolling consumers would enjoy if they took up

the program by computing — for each elderly consumer in MEPS — the difference in average

coinsurance between: (1) status quo insurance, and (2) an insurance plan with the features of the

standard Medicare Part D benefit described earlier. We calculate this percentage change in price

for each MEPS respondent estimated not to have creditable coverage. Respondents with

creditable coverage are assumed not to enroll in Part D and thus experience no change in price.

Based on these calculations the average percentage change in coinsurance for those without

creditable coverage due to the standard Medicare Part D benefit was estimated to be 30.1%.


Price Elasticity of Demand

Long-run generic prices (assumed to be equal to marginal cost) are approximately 20% of the

prices charged for the corresponding on-patent drug (Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz, 1991;

Grabowski and Vernon, 1992; Berndt, Cockburn, and Griliches, 1996). Thus we assume that the

mark-up on pharmaceutical prices is roughly 80%. The standard theory of monopoly would then

imply, based on a 80% mark-up by monopolists, a price elasticity of uninsured demand around

1.25, or the inverse of the markup.


However, the above elasticity is not the relevant one for insured patients who face copayments,

rather than manufacturer prices (Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight, 2007). Thus, for the insured

consumers we use elasticity estimates that rely on changes in patient cost sharing among the

insured elderly population. For example, Chandra, Gruber and McKnight (2007) estimate the
                                                21
price elasticity of prescription drugs among the elderly by studying a policy change that raised

patient cost-sharing for retired public employees in California. Their estimates of price elasticity

range from 0.5 to 1.5.16 We take the midpoint of their range, and assume that the price elasticity

is 1.0 among the insured elderly population. Based on these estimates of the elasticity of demand

and percentage change in price the average percentage change in number of prescriptions for

those without creditable coverage was estimated to be 34.5%.


Out-of-Pocket Costs

The out of pockets costs of purchasing drugs are available directly from MEPS. For those

without creditable coverage, out-of-pocket costs are estimated to be $1,302.


Results

Based on these estimates, we estimate the aggregate static benefit of Medicare Part D to be $3.5

billion or $99 per eligible beneficiary. There is wide variation in the per capita benefit enjoyed

by beneficiaries depending on insurance coverage, or lack thereof, prior to the introduction of

Medicare Part D. Since insurance coverage is highly correlated with income, the poor enjoy

greater benefits than the rich. For example, we estimate the per capita benefits to be $116 for

those with incomes less than $15,000 per year, $94 for those with income between 15,000 and

50,000, and $46 for those with incomes greater than $50,000. Similarly, beneficiaries in poor

self-reported health and those with higher prescription drug costs also enjoy greater benefits.

Those reporting their general health to be “poor” enjoy per capita benefits of $190, those




16
   They also do not find significant variation in price elasticity of prescription drugs by age, income, and health
status.

                                                           22
reporting “good” health enjoy per capita benefits of $109 and those reporting “excellent” health

only receive $51 in per capita benefits.


Dynamic Benefits


Since Medicare Part D likely increases pharmaceutical company profits, it has the dynamic

benefit of inducing additional innovation. We can estimate the value of this induced innovation

just as we estimated the static value of the program.17 First, we maintain the assumption

(inherent in the original MMA legislation) that Part D continues to forbid price-negotiation, and

that pharmaceutical firms will continue to receive the monopoly prices set before Medicare Part

D ( p m ) . However, firms do experience an increase in demand for their products due to the

reduction in price for consumers after the introduction of Medicare Part D.


Step 1: Change in Pharmaceutical Revenues

For a given consumer, the percentage change in total drug expenditures is equal to the percentage

                                                     (σ ND − σ D )
increase in the quantity of drugs consumed,                          e , which is calculated as above.
                                                         σ ND

Assuming manufacturer prices have been so far unaffected by Part D, the percentage change in

quantity is equal to the percentage change in revenues for innovators. The average percentage

change in price for all eligible beneficiaries was estimated to be 17.9%. This estimate combined

with the elasticity estimates implies an average percentage increase in drug expenditures of

20.5%.



17
  We are proceeding under the standard assumption that there is too little innovation, because innovators cannot
capture full social surplus. In Section V, we discuss how Part D could be configured for maximal welfare benefit, if
in fact there is over-innovation in the status quo.

                                                        23
Step 2: Creation of New Chemical Entities

The increase in pharmaceutical revenue will induce more R&D and innovation. The number of

new drug introductions induced by Part D will depend on the elasticity of new drug introductions

with respect to pharmaceutical revenues. Acemoglu and Linn (2004) estimate that the elasticity

of non-generic drug approvals with respect to revenues is roughly 3.5. We use this elasticity and

the estimate of change in pharmaceutical revenues to calculate the percentage change in the

number of new chemical entities (NCEs). The baseline rate of NCE introduction is assumed to be

32 NCEs per year. This is the average number of NCEs introduced per year during the period

1995 to 2004 as reported in the FDA Orange Book. Applying the estimated percentage change

to this baseline level yields the absolute number of new drugs projected from the passage of Part

D.


Step 3: Innovator’s Private Value of New Chemical Entities

The next step is to compute the annual private value of these additional drugs to their innovators.

In general, it is quite difficult to compute the expected value of the marginal drug directly,

because it is hard to identify the marginal drug and just as hard to identify expected value.

However, it is easier to calculate the actual marginal cost of bringing an additional drug to

market. Theory suggests that this marginal cost ought to be equal to the expected marginal

private value of an additional drug.18 Di Masi et al. (2003) estimate that the marginal research

and development cost of bringing an NCE to market is $939 million in year 2006 dollars. To

annualize this cost, we use a standard empirical estimate of the annual cost of capital in the




18
  Grabowski et al (2002) provide empirical evidence that the theory is consistent with the data in the pharmaceutical
industry.

                                                         24
pharmaceutical industry, of 12% per year.19 Therefore, the annualized marginal cost of bringing

an NCE to market is expected to be (0.12)*($939m) = $113 million. This then yields our

estimate of the annualized marginal expected private benefit.


Step 4: Marginal Social Value of New Chemical Entities

The last step is to infer the marginal social value, which theory predicts will exceed the private

value to the innovator (although see the caveat in footnote 17). To estimate the social return, we

must estimate the fraction of social surplus captured by the innovator. Several estimates are

available from the literature. Based on data from 1948 to 2001, for example, Nordhaus (2004)

estimates that innovators capture just 2.2% of the total present value of social returns to

innovation. In a pharmaceutical context, Philipson and Jena (2006) use data from over 200

published studies of healthcare innovations to estimate the distribution of surplus-appropriation

by pharmaceutical innovators. They find that the median producer share of social surplus is

17%, the first quartile is roughly 10% and the third quartile is roughly 25%. To be conservative,

we assume that innovators are able to capture as much as a quarter of the social surplus from

pharmaceutical innovation. This parameter yields an estimated social rate of return on

pharmaceutical R&D investments of 48% per year, four times the estimated private return. This

suggests that the annual social value of the marginal drug is equal to ($113 million)/(0.25) =

$452 million.




19
  The latest estimates of the cost of capital by industry are available online at
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/. Based on these data, we estimate the cost of capital for the pharmaceutical
industry to be 12% per year. This estimate of cost of capital is similar to estimates of private rate of return on R&D
investments in the pharmaceutical industry (Grabowski, Vernon, and DiMasi, 2002).

                                                          25
Gross Static and Dynamic Benefit of Part D

Using the methods described in Step 1 we estimate that Medicare Part D would increase

pharmaceutical sales by $15 billion per year. Given baseline pharmaceutical sales of $275

billion in the US in 2006, this corresponds to a 5.4% increase. The 3.5 innovation elasticity from

Acemoglu and Linn (2004) then implies that the number of new drugs per year would increase

by roughly 19%, or 6.1 NCEs. Earlier, we calculated an annual social value of $452 million for

the marginal additional drug, which yields a gross dynamic benefit of $2.8 billion annually.

Combining the dynamic with the static benefit yields a gross risk-neutral welfare benefit for

Medicare Part D of $6.3 billion annually.


Deadweight Costs of Financing Medicare Part D


It remains to compare the aggregate benefits of Part D with its social cost. The program itself is

just a costless transfer. However, since it is publicly financed, there are deadweight costs

associated with its financing.


The actuarial cost of the Medicare Part D insurance for a beneficiary who enrolls in the standard

Part D plan is simply:


                      ⎡                                             (σ − σ D ) ⎤
                    s ⎢Total _ Exp(1 − σ D ) + (1 − σ D )Total _ Exp ND       e⎥               (18)
                      ⎣                                               σ ND     ⎦


s is the subsidy provided by Medicare Part D and is estimated to be 75%. The first term in the

square brackets is the actuarial cost of the benefit under the initial demand for pharmaceuticals

and is simply the total cost of prescription drugs times the plan share of costs. The second term is

the actuarial cost of the additional demand induced by Medicare Part D and is equal to the

                                                26
change in total drug costs times the plan share of costs. As discussed earlier, the percentage

                              (σ ND − σ D )
change in total drug costs,                   e , is simply the percentage change in price to consumers
                                 σ ND

induced by Part D times the elasticity of demand. All the above quantities can be easily

estimated from available data. Using data from the MEPS, we estimate average total drug costs

for MEPS respondents without creditable coverage who are likely to enroll in Medicare Part D to

be $1,537. As discussed earlier, we can also calculate the price change consumers would enjoy if

they took up the program; price-elasticities of demand for pharmaceuticals (taken from the

literature) then imply the associated increase in drug costs. Similarly, the costs of providing the

employer subsidy (28% of costs between $250 and $5000) can be estimated easily using data on

prescription drug expenditures for those with creditable employer/union provided insurance. The

results show that for those receiving the premium subsidy, Medicare costs are $893 per enrollee

and for those receiving the employer subsidy, Medicare costs are $584 per enrollee. These

estimates are similar to those obtained by HHS. For example, the average premium for a Part D

plan was roughly $27 per month or $327 per year. Since Medicare subsidizes premiums by 75%,

Medicare costs of providing the premium subsidy equal $985 ($327*3) per year. Similarly, HHS

estimates indicate that the cost of employer subsidy was $549 per beneficiary receiving the

subsidy (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2007).


The true social cost of the program is the deadweight cost associated with paying the actuarial

cost out of public funds. While there is debate in the public finance literature on the magnitude

of deadweight loss, we use a conventional estimate — that each additional dollar spent on




                                                      27
Medicare Part D generates 30 cents of deadweight costs due to increased taxation (cf, Jorgenson

and Yun, 2001).20


Based on these estimates, we estimate the deadweight costs of financing Medicare Part D to be

$7.2 billion per year, 87% of which is covered by the risk-neutral benefits of the program. This

analysis reveals that conventional estimates of demand, dynamic benefit, and deadweight loss

yield the surprising result that Part D insurance is nearly “break-even” for a society of risk-

neutral and self-interested consumers.


V       Drug Insurance and Innovation Policy

The previous section characterized the direct welfare benefit of Medicare Part D. The passage of

a public prescription drug insurance program — welfare-improving or not — also has important

indirect effects, by changing the socially optimal rewards for innovation, and thus the optimal

public policy toward innovation. We consider the optimal configuration of innovation policy,

with a focus on two policy instruments in particular. First, the government could potentially use

its bargaining power to influence prices paid to innovators. Second, it can increase or decrease

de facto patent length by regulating patent-gaming. We show that using both these instruments

in conjunction with public drug insurance can allow the government to achieve first-best

utilization and innovation. Of course, there may be significant informational or political

constraints to pursuing the first-best policy. Therefore, we go on to show that it is always strictly

welfare-improving to negotiate prices down to some degree, and we derive the conditions under




20
  Different authors have suggested that the number could be as high as $1 of deadweight loss for each $1 of public
spending (cf, Feldstein, 1999).

                                                        28
which the government should tighten or loosen patent enforcement. As is often the case, the

exact degree of price negotiation or patent enforcement requires the estimation of the key trade-

offs outlined below.


The First-Best Benchmark


In addition to the co-insurance rate, suppose the government can also set a price paid to

innovators, and a de facto patent length. Since the government is not perfectly free to dictate

terms to innovators, define Π R as the minimum profits innovators will accept. The government

now solves:


       S R (T , p g , σ ) = max T , pg ,σ g ( I pat ( Π m )) ⎡ ∫ e − rt SS c dt − ∫ e − rt DWL(σp g )dt ⎤ − I pat ( Π m )
                                                                 ∞                 T

                                                             ⎢⎣ 0                  0                    ⎥⎦                (19)
       s.t. Π ≥ Π
              m        R




This has the first-order conditions:


   I π Π Tm ⎛⎜ g ' ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e −rt SS c dt − ∫ e −rt DWL(σp g )dt ⎤ − 1⎞⎟ − g ( I )e −rT DWL(σp g ) + λΠ Tm = 0
                             ∞                T

             ⎝           ⎢⎣ 0                 0                   ⎥⎦ ⎠

   I π Π mp ⎛⎜ g ' ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e −rt SS c dt − ∫ e −rt DWL(σp g )dt ⎤ − 1⎞⎟ − g ( I ) ∫ e −rt dtDWL' (σp g )σ + λΠ mp = 0
                             ∞                T                                      T

             ⎝           ⎢⎣ 0                 0                   ⎥⎦ ⎠               0


   I π Π σm ⎛⎜ g ' ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e −rt SS c dt − ∫ e −rt DWL(σp g )dt ⎤ − 1⎞⎟ − g ( I ) ∫ e −rt dtDWL' (σp g ) p g + λΠ σm = 0
                             ∞                T                                      T

             ⎝           ⎢⎣ 0                 0                   ⎥⎦ ⎠               0




If the government knows all the parameters of the problem, and can freely adjust its policy

instruments, it can always achieve the first-best outcome. Given the conventional result that

first-best innovation requires profits equal to total social surplus, the family of first-best policy

solutions satisfies:




                                                              29
                                        σp g = MC
                                        D (σp g )( p g − MC )(1 − e −rT ) = SS c


The first condition guarantees efficient utilization in the goods market. The second ensures that

the innovator earns the total social value of his invention. Under these conditions, deadweight

loss is zero, and g ' ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e − rt SS c dt − ∫ e − rt DWL(σp g )dt ⎤ = 1 .
                                ∞                 T

                            ⎢⎣ 0                  0                    ⎥⎦


If the first-best is achieved, the constraint on price-negotiation would fail to bind, since profits

would be higher than monopoly profits. As such, we can solve for the optimal policy

configurations using the two equations above:


                                                       D ( MC ) MC
                                          σ =
                                                 SS c
                                                          + D( MC ) MC
                                               1 − e −rT                                       (20)
                                                          SS c
                                           pg =        − rT
                                                                    + MC
                                                (1 − e ) D ( MC )


Notice that, for any nonzero value of T , this yields a co-insurance rate strictly between zero and

one, a strictly positive price, and positive profits.


This analysis proceeded from the standard case under which monopoly profits are less than their

first-best level. This result would fail in the case where there is over-innovation prior to the drug

insurance policy enactment. In this case, reducing prices has the additional advantage of

reducing wasteful innovation. However, it is no longer clear that the innovator will accept the

first-best level of profits, if this is less than monopoly profits. The government’s degree of

negotiating leverage becomes crucial. It may or may not be possible for the government to




                                                           30
induce innovators to accept the first-best level of profits. As such, the second-best solution

would involve profits equal to Π R .


The discussion above presumes that the first-best policy parameters are known to policymakers.

In practice, this may be too much of a simplifying assumption in a world with many drugs, and

heterogeneous consumers. Nonetheless, the first-best configuration provides us with intuition

about how to achieve welfare improvements. The aim is to reduce deadweight loss without

paying too high a price in terms of deadweight loss due to foregone innovation. On page 34, we

formalize this intuition and characterize a simple policy configuration that always achieves a

welfare-improvement, even if not the first-best outcome.


Price-Negotiation


Provided that consumers face prices above marginal cost, some degree of price-negotiation is

always welfare-improving. Recall that S (T , pm , σ ) is total social surplus, for patent length T ,

price pm , and co-insurance rate σ . At the monopoly price, the marginal return to price-

reduction is always positive:


    dS R
         |p =
    dp g m
                                                                                                                     (21)
    I π Π mp ⎛⎜ g ' ( I ) ⎡ ∫ e −rt SS c dt − ∫ e −rt DWL(σpm )dt ⎤ − 1⎞⎟ − g ( I ) ∫ e −rt dtDWL' (σpm )σ + λΠ mp
                      ∞                T                                       T

              ⎝           ⎢⎣ 0                 0                  ⎥⎦ ⎠               0




                                                           31
At the privately optimal monopoly price,21 profits are maximized, and the envelope theorem

implies that Π mp = 0 . Therefore, the value of an initial price-reduction simplifies to:


                                         dS R                 T
                                              | pm = g ( I ) ∫ e −rt dtDWL' (σpm )σ             (22)
                                         dp g                 0




Since deadweight loss is minimized when the consumer faces a price equal to marginal cost, the

marginal return to price-reduction is strictly positive if and only if σpm > MC .


           The usual intuition of the second-best applies here. There are two interconnected

margins of decisionmaking: profits and utilization. It is not optimal to leave the margin of

profits undistorted, while leaving utilization distorted. Therefore, a government that has the

leverage to lower prices ought to do so, at least to some degree.


           Note, however, that this does not justify an unlimited amount of price-negotiation.

Inframarginal reductions in the price will tend to be costly, because they lower profits,

innovation, and expected surplus.22 In addition, the returns to price-negotiation — and thus the

optimal degree of price-negotiation — may fall with the generosity of the drug benefit, because it

lowers deadweight loss, and increases the cost in terms of foregone profits. From an

inframarginal perspective, the policymaker must balance the welfare gains from greater

utilization, against the costs of lost innovation. Note that, for any chosen price-discount, both

these quantities are estimable using the methods presented above, where we estimated the impact




21
     This applies to the optimal price that obtains under any co-insurance and patent regime.
22
     This reasoning might change if the initial level of innovation is too high.

                                                             32
of consumer price-reduction on deadweight loss, and the impact of pharmaceutical revenues on

innovation.


Patent Gaming and Patent Length


Finally, we examine the qualitative impact of drug insurance on the optimal degree of patent

protection. Drug insurance affects the social return to patent protection according to:


         dS R
                =
          dT                                                                                  (23)
               m⎛           ⎡                              ⎤   ⎞
                                ∞           T
         I π Π T ⎜ g ' ( I ) ∫ e SS c dt − ∫ e DWL(σp g )dt − 1⎟ − g ( I )e DWL(σp g ) + λΠ T
                                  − rt        − rt                         − rT             m

                 ⎝          ⎢⎣ 0            0              ⎥⎦ ⎠


The drug benefit has two competing effects on this expression. First, it raises innovation. This

lowers the marginal benefit of patent-extension, by virtue of diminishing returns to innovation.

More formally, when I rises, g ' ( I ) falls, as does the return to patent-extension. On the other

hand, it also lowers deadweight loss, which reduces the marginal social cost of longer patents.

That is, when DWL falls, the marginal return rises. In general, therefore, the introduction of

drug insurance has uncertain effects on the optimal patent length.


However, the interaction between price-negotiation and patent-extension is clearer. Aggressive

price-negotiation is actually complementary with more generous patent-extension policies. The

government should thus seek to “give back” to innovators in the form of longer patents, even as

they “take away” per-period profits by paying lower prices. To see this, observe that if prices

fall, so do profits and the level of innovation. This raises the return to stimulating innovation,

             dS R
and raises        as well.
             dT


                                                 33
Suppose the government negotiates prices such that profits, and innovation, are held constant at

their monopoly levels. In this case, the only parameter changing in equation 23 would be

deadweight loss, which falls. Reductions in deadweight loss increase the optimal patent length,

because monopoly power is cheaper to society. Therefore, if price-negotiation eliminates the

positive impact of drug insurance on profits, it should be coupled with longer patents.


It is not clear that the optimal level of price-negotiation ought to drive down profits to their

original level. However, our analysis implies that one welfare-improving policy configuration is:

public drug insurance, price-negotiation to hold profits fixed at their initial level, and longer

patents. The first two components of this strategy lower deadweight loss and hold innovation

constant. According to equation 23, they also increase the optimal patent length. Relaxing

restrictions on patent-gaming may be a practical way to achieve longer patents, if the cheaper

and more direct method of granting longer patents is politically infeasible.


VI     Conclusion

Part D would nearly pay for itself, even if it provided no insurance value, and served no

redistributive purpose. This is a rather surprising result, considering that the program itself was

designed primarily to provide insurance, and to provide drugs to poorer groups. In the design of

the benefit, a great deal of attention was paid to traditional “insurance” issues of adverse

selection and moral hazard, but less effort was devoted to understanding the risk-neutral

efficiency effects on utilization and innovation. Our analysis suggests that the pure efficiency

effects are quantitatively important.


Our analysis also reveals some surprising conclusions about the auxiliary provisions of Part D.

First, the original legislation prohibited the government from negotiating prices. We showed that
                                                  34
this prohibition is inefficient. In fact, some degree of price-negotiation is strictly welfare-

improving. Banning price-negotiation may be useful if the regulator is unable to commit to an

optimal degree of negotiation, but instead seeks low prices at any cost. However, even in this

case, legislative limits on price-negotiation would make more sense than a total legislative

prohibition.


Second, price-negotiation is often thought of as being a complement to limits on patent-gaming.

Both are thought to be means of curtailing “excessive” pharmaceutical profits generated by the

new drug benefit. Surprisingly, however, the two legislative approaches are more substitutable

than complementary. By lowering profits, price-negotiation actually lowers the cost of patent-

extension, and thus lowers the return to limits on patent-gaming. When patent monopolies earn

fewer per-period rents, longer patents become cheaper means of encouraging innovation.

Therefore, price-negotiation — if it succeeds politically — should likely be coupled with more

tolerance for patent-gaming and other forms of de facto patent-extension activity by innovators.


The economic case for the Part D benefit, and its auxiliary provisions, is quite a bit different than

it may initially appear. The public provision of drug insurance can have significant efficiency

benefits, as can some degree of price-negotiation.




                                                  35
                                            Appendix A

       Consider a health insurance plan that has a deductible of X dollars and offers a

coinsurance of c for expenditures above the deductible. Consider an uninsured consumer with

total expenditure E1, where E1 > X. Assume that the elasticity of demand is e.

       The objective is to predict total expenditures, E2, for this consumer when he or she

enrolls in the health insurance plan with this non-linear benefit structure. First, note that the

change in expenditures is the same as the change in quantity, because we assume prices paid to

the manufacturer do not change. The consumer price does change, and it does so in a non-linear

fashion, because it depends on the level of expenditures. Following the standard theory of

demand, total expenditure when the consumer enrolls in this health insurance plan is given by:

                                    E 2 = X + (E1 − X ) + (E1 − X )(1 − c )e

       The above equation shows that for the first X dollars in expenditures there is no change in

demand as the consumer is below his or her deductible and therefore does not experience any

change in price. For the next E1-X dollars the consumer faces a percentage price reduction of 1-c.

Therefore, the percentage change in demand or expenditures for this region is simply the

percentage change in price times the elasticity of demand.

       In the paper, we argue that the percentage change in coinsurance and elasticity of demand

are sufficient predictors of the percentage change in utilization. In other words, we argue that the

percentage change in total expenditures in this scenario can also be calculated by simply

multiplying the percentage change in coinsurance times the elasticity of demand. Calculated this

way, expenditures when the consumer enrolls in the health plan are given by:

                                                           ⎛1− c ⎞
                                            E 2′ = E1 + E1e⎜     ⎟
                                                           ⎝ 1 ⎠


                                                   1
        Where, c is the average coinsurance when enrolled in the health plan:

                                                   X + c(E1 − X )
                                              c=
                                                        E1

        After substituting for c in the above equation, some simple algebra yields:

                                     E 2′ = X + (E1 − X ) + (E1 − X )(1 − c )e

        Hence, we get that E 2′ = E 2 .

        A corollary of the above result is that the percentage change in coinsurance is a sufficient

predictor of whether the consumer would benefit from insurance. A negative percentage change

in average coinsurance or decrease in coinsurance implies an increase in use and thus an increase

in static welfare.




                                                    2
                                             Appendix B

                                Welfare Effects of Medicare Part D

Enrollment in Part D


                                                    Population    Estimation Notes
                                                                  MEPS respondents for
                                                                  whom status quo coverage
(1) No creditable Coverage/Enrolled                 21 million    is less generous than Part D.
                                                                  MEPS respondents with
                                                                  employer coverage more
(2) Creditable Employer Coverage                    9 million     generous than Part D.
                                                                  MEPS respondents with
                                                                  employer coverage more
(3) Other Creditable Coverage                       5 million     generous than Part D.
                                                                  Total Medicare eligible
                                                                  population as represented
Total                                               36 million    by MEPS.

Static Benefit of Part D:
                                                    Mean or
                                                    Amount        Estimation Notes
                                                                  % change in average
                                                                  coinsurance experienced by
                                                                  MEPS respondents without
                                                                  creditable coverage if they
                                                                  enrolled in the standard Part
(4) % change in price for those who enroll          30.1%         D benefit.

(5)% change in quantity for those who enroll        34.5%         Mean[Row (4)*elasticity]

(6) Out of pocket expenses                          $1,302        Based on MEPS
                                                                  Mean[0.5*Row(4)*Row(5)
(7) Static benefit for those who enroll             $167          *Row(6)]

(8) Total static benefit                            $3.5billion   Row(7)*Row(1)

Dynamic Benefit of Part D:

                                                    Amount        Estimation Notes
                                                                  Row(5)*Row(1)*Drug
(9) Dollar change in pharma revenues                $15 billion   Expenditures from MEPS
                                                                  Row(9)/Total Pharma Sales
(10) % change in pharma revenues                    5.4%          in 2006 ($275 billion)
                                                                  Row(10)*Innovation
(11) % change in number of new drugs                19%           Elasticity (3.51)
                                                                  Row(11)*Average number
(12) Number of new drugs                            6.1           of new drugs per year (32)
                                                                  Cost of R&D per
                                                                  drug(939million)*private
(13) Private return per new drug                    $113million   return

                                               3
                                                                  Row(13)/Ratio of private
(14) Social return per new drug                    $452million    return to total returns (0.25)

(15) Total Dynamic Benefit                         $2.8billion    Row(14)*Row(12)
Dead Weight Costs of Financing Part D:             Mean or
                                                   Amount            Estimation Notes
                                                                  Mean drug costs of MEPS
(16) Average drug expenditures for those who                      respondents without drug
enroll                                             $1,537         coverage
(17) % change in expenditures for those who
enroll                                             34.5%          Mean[Row (4)*elasticity]
                                                                  Based on row(16), row(17),
                                                                  percent subsidy, and
                                                                  average coinsurance in Part
                                                                  D. See text for exact
(18) Actuarial costs of Part D benefit             $19.0billion   formula
                                                                  28% of mean costs between
                                                                  $250 and $5,000 of MEPS
                                                                  respondents with creditable
                                                                  employer provided
(19) Costs of employer subsidy                     $5.2billion    coverage
(20)Total costs of Part D insurance and employer
subsidy                                            $24.2billion   Row(18)+Row(19)
(21) Dead weight costs of Part D insurance and
employer subsidy                                   $7.2billion    0.30*Row(18)




                                            4
References

Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn (2004). "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the
        Pharmaceutical Industry." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 1049-90.
Angell, M. (2004). The Truth About the Drug Companies: How They Deceive Us and What to
        Do About It New York, Random House.
Berndt, E. R., I. M. Cockburn and Z. Griliches (1996). "Pharmaceutical Innovations and Market
        Dynamics: Tracing Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs." Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity: 133-88.
Caves, R. E., M. D. Whinston and M. A. Hurwitz (1991). "Patent Expiration, Entry, and
        Competition in the U S Pharmaceutical Industry." Brookings Papers on Economic
        Activity: 1-48.
Chandra, A., J. Gruber and R. McKnight (2007). "Patient Cost-sharing, Hospitalization Offsets,
        and the Design of Optimal Health Insurance for the Elderly." National Bureau of
        Economic Research Working Paper 12972. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
DiMasi, J. A., R. W. Hansen and H. G. Grabowski (2003). "The Price of Innovation: New
        Estimates of Drug Development Costs." Journal of Health Economics 22(2): 151-85.
Espo, D. (2007). Bush Says He'll Veto Medicare Drug-price Measure. Seattle Times. Seattle,
        WA.
Feldstein, M. (1999). "Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax." Review of
        Economics and Statistics 81(4): 674-80.
Garber, A., C. Jones and P. Romer (2006). "Insurance and Incentives for Medical Innovation."
        Forum for Health Economics and Policy 9(2): Article 4.
Gilbert, R. and C. Shapiro (1990). "Optimal Patent Length and Breadth." RAND Journal of
        Economics 21: 106-112.
Grabowski, H., J. Vernon and J. A. DiMasi (2002). "Returns on Research and Development for
        1990s New Drug Introductions." PharmacoEconomics 20: 11-29.
Grabowski, H. and J. M. Vernon (1992). "Brand Loyalty, Entry and Price Competition in
        Pharmaceuticals After the 1984 Drug Act." Journal of Law and Economics 35(2): 331-
        350.
Jorgenson, D. and K.-Y. Yun (2001). Investment, Volume 3, Lifting the Burden: Tax Reform,
        the Cost of Capital, and U. S. Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2007). "The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit." Kaiser Family
        Foundation Report 7044-06. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation.
Klemperer, P. (1990). "How Broad Should the Scope of Patent Protection Be?" RAND Journal
        of Economics 21: 113-130.
Lakdawalla, D. and N. Sood (2006). "Health Insurance as a Two-Part Pricing Contract." National
        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12681. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
        of Economic Research.
Lichtenberg, F. and S. X. Sun (2007). "The Impact of Medicare Part D on Prescription Drug Use
        by the Elderly: Evidence from a Large Retail Pharmacy Chain." Health Affairs
        forthcoming.



                                              1
Marre, K. (2007). "Senate GOP blocks Medicare Part D Negotiation Bill." The Hill Retrieved
       September 10, 2007, from http://thehill.com/leading-the-news/senate-gop-blocks-
       medicare-part-d-negotiation-bill-2007-04-18.html.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2004). "Schumpeterian Profits in the American Economy: Theory and
       Measurement." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10433.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Philipson, T. J. and A. B. Jena (2006). "Surplus Appropriation from R&D and Health Care
       Technology Assessment Procedures." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
       Paper 12016. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Shapiro, C. (2007). Patent Reform: Aligning Reward and Contribution. National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers.




                                             2
