                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      VERTICAL ARRANGEMENTS, MARKET STRUCTURE, AND COMPETITION:
         AN ANALYSIS OF RESTRUCTURED U.S. ELECTRICITY MARKETS

                                         James B. Bushnell
                                           Erin T. Mansur
                                           Celeste Saravia

                                        Working Paper 13507
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13507


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We thank Soledad Arellano, Severin Borenstein, Joe Bowring, Judy Chevalier, Phil Haile, Stephen
Holland, Jun Ishii, Wally Mullin, Steve Puller, Peter Schott, Fiona Scott Morton, Raphael Thomadsen,
Larry White, Matt White, Frank Wolak, Catherine Wolfram, two anonymous referees, and seminar
participants at Colby College,International Industrial Organization Conference, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, New York University, University of California Energy Institute, University of California
at Irvine, University of Toulouse, Wesleyan University, and Yale University for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by James B. Bushnell, Erin T. Mansur, and Celeste Saravia. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured U.S.
Electricity Markets
James B. Bushnell, Erin T. Mansur, and Celeste Saravia
NBER Working Paper No. 13507
October 2007
JEL No. L11,L13,L94

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines vertical arrangements in electricity markets. Vertically integrated wholesalers,
or those with long-term contracts, have less incentive to raise wholesale prices when retail prices are
determined beforehand. For three restructured markets, we simulate prices that define bounds on static
oligopoly equilibria. Our findings suggest that vertical arrangements dramatically affect estimated
market outcomes. Had regulators impeded vertical arrangements (as in California), our simulations
imply vastly higher prices than observed and production inefficiencies costing over 45 percent of those
production costs with vertical arrangements. We conclude that horizontal market structure accurately
predicts market performance only when accounting for vertical structure.

James B. Bushnell                                  Celeste Saravia
University of California Energy Institute          University of California Energy Institute
2547 Channing Way                                  2547 Channing Way
Berkeley, CA 94720                                 Berkeley, CA 94720-5180
and NBER                                           csaravia@econ.Berkeley.EDU
bushnell@haas.berkeley.edu

Erin T. Mansur
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
erin.mansur@yale.edu
                                                                                                 2


      While rules concerning horizontal market structure form the basis of antitrust policies

in most countries, it is widely recognized that horizontal structure comprises only one piece

of the competition puzzle. Vertical integration and other vertical arrangements between

wholesalers and retailers will also impact the incentives of firms. In addition, regulators

and many economists have focused on the eﬀects that market rules, such as auction design,

may have on equilibrium prices. This paper empirically examines the relative importance of

horizontal market structure and vertical arrangements in determining prices in imperfectly

competitive markets.


      We study three U.S. electricity markets: California, New England, and the Pennsylva-

nia, New Jersey, and Maryland (PJM) market. These were the first three U.S. markets to

undergo regulatory restructuring. There is substantial evidence that the California mar-

ket was the least competitive.1 However, previous studies do not address why there were

apparent diﬀerences in the competitiveness of these markets.


      Events like the California electricity crisis have contributed to a perception that electric-

ity markets are fundamentally diﬀerent from other commodity markets. The complexity

of market rules as well as processes for the production and delivery of electricity have

added weight to this argument. Our results demonstrate that, in fact, fundamental con-

cepts of oligopoly competition do apply to, and are significantly informative about, the

restructured electricity industry. In the markets we study, prices did not diverge greatly,
  1
    See Severin Borenstein, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak (henceforth BBW, 2002), Bushnell
and Celeste Saravia (2002), Paul J. Joskow and Edward P. Kahn (2002), Erin T. Mansur (2007), and
Steven L. Puller (2007).
                                                                                                          3


especially during the important peak hours, from those predicted by a slightly modified

model of Cournot competition, but only after we account for the vertical commitments

made by producers.


    This paper reconstructs market conditions, in detail, for the three markets. First, we

calculate cost functions for the important market participants. Then, with data on firms’

vertical commitments and hourly demand, we simulate market outcomes under diﬀering

assumptions of firm behavior. Specifically, we estimate outcomes under an assumption

of perfect competition and under an assumption of Cournot competition. These two

counterfactual assumptions bound the space of possible static, noncooperative outcomes.

By establishing where actual market outcomes fall within these bounds, we can compare

how markets are performing relative to the extremes determined by structural factors

alone.2


    Our analysis highlights the importance of vertical integration and vertical contracts,

although for reasons that have not received much treatment in the literature on vertical

structure. Much of the concern about the negative impacts of vertical arrangements has

focused on foreclosure, or the ability of the integrated firm to raise rivals’ costs.3 However,

in the markets we study, third-party independent system operators control the common
   2
     Several papers have applied models of oligopoly competition to electricity markets to forecast possible
future market outcomes using hypothetical market conditions (Richard Schmalensee and Bennett W.
Golub, 1984; Richard J. Green and David M. Newbery, 1992; Borenstein and Bushnell, 1999; and Benjamin
Hobbs, 2001). Unlike those papers, we are applying actual market data to simulate market outcomes within
the Cournot framework.
   3
     For example, Thomas G. Krattenmaker and Steven C. Salop (1986), Richard Gilbert and Justine
Hastings (2005), and Patrick Rey and Jean Tirole (forthcoming) describe various strategies for exclusion
and raising rivals’ costs.
                                                                                                     4


distribution networks. This, combined with the fact that electricity is a homogenous

commodity, makes it somewhat more diﬃcult for suppliers to foreclose competitors or

discriminate in favor of their own retail aﬃliates.


       Instead, it is the rigidity of retail prices that creates a strong relationship between

vertical structure and competitive performance. Regulators constrain retailers in their

ability to adjust electricity prices. The rate-making process restricts the frequency with

which retail prices can be adjusted, usually no more frequently than annually. This is

particularly true during our sample period, where transition arrangements put in place

at the time of restructuring strongly restricted retailers’ ability to adjust prices. Even in

completely deregulated retail markets, however, price commitments more than a year in

length are not unusual. The key attribute is that integrated firms are making retail price

commitments before committing production to the wholesale market.


       A restriction on retail price adjustment means that a producer is eﬀectively making

a long-term forward commitment when it integrates with downstream retailers. Vertical

relationships take the form of long-term price commitments to retail customers. The inte-

grated firm has committed to supplying a portion of its output at fixed prices to its retail

customers and therefore has an eﬀectively smaller position on the wholesale market and

less incentive to raise wholesale prices. The impact on the incentives of wholesale produc-

ers is analogous to that provided by a futures contract or other hedging instrument, which

is generally thought to be procompetitive.4 Firms eﬀectively undercut each other in the
   4
   In particular, Blaise Allaz and Jean-Luc Vila (1993) note that an oligopoly equilibrium will be more
competitive when there are more opportunities for firms to contract ahead of the time of delivery.
                                                                                                        5


forward market in an attempt to gain a Stackelberg leader position. These considerations

have been shown to be relevant to electricity markets.5 Many other industries exhibit

similar vertical relationships whereby the presence of long-term, fixed-price contracts are

likely to influence the spot market.6


       In our study, the impact of vertical arrangements on estimated market outcomes is

striking. When vertical arrangements are not taken into account, we demonstrate that

both Eastern markets were dramatically more competitive than would be predicted by

a model of Cournot competition. The California market, by contrast, produced prices

somewhat lower, but largely consistent with an assumption of Cournot competition. We

use publicly available data on long-term retail supply arrangements, which were present in

New England and PJM but not in California. When these retail obligations are included

in the objective functions of suppliers, Cournot equilibrium prices in both New England

and PJM fall substantially.


       In each market, actual prices are similar to our simulated prices that assume Cournot
   5
     Green (1999) discusses the theoretical implications of how hedge contracts impact the England and
Wales electricity market. In the context of the Australian electricity market, Wolak (2000) examines
firm bidding behavior for supplying electricity given long-term contracts. He finds that financial hedging
mitigates market power. Natalia Fabra and Juan Toro (2005) find that the retail commitments arising from
a regulatory transition mechanism in Spain not only strongly influence producer behavior but provide the
foundation for tacit collusion between those producers. Puller and Ali Hortaçsu (forthcoming) incorporate
estimates of producer contract positions into their estimates of the optimality of the bidding of Texas
energy producers.
   6
     Other energy markets—such as railroad coal deliveries and natural gas—are structured similarly where
some of the supply is procured through long-term, fixed-price contracts and some through a spot market
(or short-term contracts). By contrast, in the gasoline industry retailers change prices with impunity
and great frequency. Vertical contracts between refiners and retailers guarantee the supply of physical
product, but almost never set an advanced fixed price for that product. To some degree, many imperfectly
competitive industries—including concrete, construction, telecommunications, and pharmaceuticals—feature
both wholesale forward price commitments and spot markets that foster competition.
                                                                                             6


behavior and that account for vertical arrangements. This is not to imply that firms

followed strict Cournot strategies, but rather that the more complex supply function

strategies they did adopt produced prices similar to Cournot equilibrium ones. With the

vertical arrangements, the upper bounds on these static, noncooperative oligopoly prices

are greatly reduced. In this sense, horizontal structure does explain performance but only

when coupled with these arrangements. After accounting for these structural factors, there

is relatively little variation between markets left to be explained by market rules, local reg-

ulation, and other factors. These results support the hypothesis that long-term contracts

and other vertical arrangements are a major source of the diﬀerences in performance of

electricity markets. Furthermore, had regulators in PJM and New England impeded verti-

cal arrangements as in California, our simulations suggest that not only would prices have

been much higher than they were, but also there would have been substantial welfare loss:

production costs would have increased more than 45 percent relative to those costs with

vertical arrangements.


    This paper proceeds as follows. In Section I, we provide a general overview of the

relevant characteristics of the three markets we study. Section II describes our model. We

present our results in Section III and state our conclusions in Section IV.


I    Electricity Markets’ Structure and Design

The markets we study essentially share the same general organizational structure. Elec-

tricity deregulation has been quite limited in scope, focusing on wholesale pricing and re-
                                                                                                      7


tailing.7 Most large producers were granted authority to sell power at deregulated prices.

Distribution and transmission sectors remain regulated, but have been reorganized to ac-

commodate wholesale markets and retail choice. Most utilities have retained ownership of

transmission lines, but have relinquished the day-to-day control of the network to Inde-

pendent System Operators (ISOs). ISOs operate electricity systems and provide market

participants with equal access to the network. ISOs oversee at least one organized ex-

change through which firms can trade electricity. These ISO spot, or “balancing,” markets

clear a set of supply oﬀers against a perfectly inelastic demand quantity based upon the

actual system needs for power during that time interval.


       Despite commonalities in their general organization, market performance has varied

dramatically across the California, New England, and PJM markets. Figure 1 illustrates

the monthly average prices for the major price indices in each of the three markets from

1998 through the spring of 2003. California began operating in April, 1998. New England

opened in May, 1999. The PJM market opened in the spring of 1998, but firms did not

receive permission to sell at market-based rates until April, 1999. Prices for 1998 were

therefore the product of regulated oﬀer prices into the PJM market-clearing process. As

can be seen from this figure, market prices have varied widely across the three markets,

with significant price spikes arising in PJM during the summer of 1999 and, of course,

during the California crisis of 2000.
   7
    In fact, wholesale electricity markets are not technically deregulated. Under the Federal Power Act,
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has a mandate to ensure electricity prices remain
“just and reasonable.” In areas the FERC has deemed to be workably competitive, firms are granted
permission, through a waiver process, to sell electricity at market-based rates rather than regulatory
determined, cost-based rates (see Joskow, 2003).
                                                                                                          8


       There has been much speculation and debate about the causes of these price diﬀer-

ences. Relative production costs, fuel prices, and overall demand play an important part

in market outcomes.8 In addition, we examine the extent to which the price variation

among the three markets resulted from substantial variation in horizontal structure and

vertical relationships.


Sample Period


       For several reasons, we restrict our sample period to the summer of 1999. Our study

period (June 1 to September 30) was the initial high-demand period after all three markets

were restructured. As discussed below, the vertical arrangements of firms are arguably

exogenously determined in this period. Furthermore, market rules were relatively stable

in our sample period. For example, the number of organized exchanges changed in 2000.9

As this study aims to parse out the eﬀects of horizontal structure, vertical structure,

and market rules, we chose a period when these features are both stable and potentially

exogenously assigned.


       As with any study, one should be cautious in making out-of-sample predictions based

on our sample period.10 Nevertheless, the conditions in 1999 were fairly typical for this
   8
      For example, the extremely high gas prices of the winter of 2000-2001 are reflected in both the
California and New England prices, but less so in PJM where coal is often the marginal fuel during the
winter.
    9
      During the time period of this study, there were two separate markets for electricity in California: a
day-ahead futures market (the Power Exchange, or PX) and a real-time spot market for electricity. Early
in their operations, the PJM and New England markets featured only a single real-time spot market for
electricity overseen by their respective ISOs. After the period of our study, several changes occurred. The
California PX stopped operating in January 2001. A day-ahead market began in PJM in June 2000, while
ISO-NE began operating a day-ahead market in early 2003.
   10
      For example, even though we find that prices are consistent with Cournot competition (accounting
for vertical arrangements), it is possible that extreme changes in market rules would have substantial
                                                                                                           9


industry. This period featured some hot spells in the mid-Atlantic states but relatively mild

weather in California (although California’s summer peak demand was actually greater

in 1999 than during 2000). Our sample period includes a substantial range of market

conditions in each market.11


A     Horizontal Structure


For each market, Table 1 summarizes the market structure. We report the megawatts

(MW) and market shares of generation capacity (Output Max) and retail demand during

the highest peak hour (Load Max ).12 The firms described in the table compose the set of

strategic producers. The non-strategic, competitive fringe equals the aggregation of gen-

eration from firms owning less than 800 MW of capacity in any market.13 By conventional

measures, the PJM market, with a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of nearly 1400, is

much more concentrated then either New England (850) or California (620).


    With a peak demand of 45,000 MW and similar installed capacity, California relies

heavily on imports. In 1999, California imported about 25 percent of the electricity it

consumed. New England, with an installed capacity of about 26,000 MW, is the smallest

market we study. It imports energy to meet approximately 10 percent of demand because
implications on market performance.
  11
     However, some notable periods, such as the summer of 2000 in California, are not represented. BBW
and Bushnell and Saravia (2002) examine nearly three years’ worth of market operations each and find
that the overall competitiveness of the market is consistent across the years when one controls for overall
demand levels.
  12
     Appendix A discusses the data sources for generation output and retail obligations, including all
long-term contracts.
  13
     Thus, any individual fringe firm owns less than 1.8 percent of total capacity in California, 3.1 percent
in New England, and 1.4 percent in PJM. This is less than half the size of the smallest modeled strategic
player.
                                                                                                             10


many of its power plants use older, gas- and oil-fired technology. PJM has about 57,000

MW capacity using primarily coal, nuclear, and natural gas energy sources. PJM is largely

self-contained and imports relatively little power.

       Borenstein, Bushnell, and Christopher R. Knittel (1999), among others, note the limi-

tations of conventional structural measures when applied to electricity markets. At least

as important as market concentration for non-storable goods are the relationship between

production capacity and demand levels, and the elasticity of imported supply. These and

other aspects of each market are explicitly incorporated into our oligopoly framework.

One last critical factor that can influence the relative competitiveness of markets is the

presence of long-term contracts and other vertical commitments. Kenneth Hendricks and

R. Preston McAfee (2006) explore the applicability of horizontal measures in the context

of markets where vertical considerations are important.14 We now examine the vertical

structure of our three markets.


B       Retail Policies and Vertical Arrangements

The retail function in electricity diﬀers from most other industries: regulators severely

constrain firms’ ability to adjust retail prices. Following the restructuring of most U.S.

electricity markets, incumbent utilities were required to freeze retail rates for several years.
  14
     Hendricks and McAfee focus on the role of buyer market power in oﬀsetting the market power of
sellers. They develop a modified HHI, or MHI, in which the downstream and upstream concentrations are
weighted according to the elasticity for the downstream product. Our findings are analogous to the case
where the downstream product is very elastic, as retail firms are very limited in their ability to adjust retail
prices. In this case, Hendricks and McAfee find that it is the size of a firms net position in the upstream
market that matters. Large net sellers and net buyers would distort wholesale prices, while firms that are
“balanced” (i.e., small net position in the upstream market) will have no incentive to impact upstream
prices.
                                                                                                     11


Although entrants were not explicitly bound, the fixed prices of the largest retailers served

as caps on all retailers’ rates. Customers could always elect to remain with the incumbent.

Retailers were vulnerable to wholesale price volatility and responded diﬀerentially across

the three markets.


       In PJM, retailers retained their generation assets. Vertical integration provided a

physical hedge against high wholesale prices and dampened wholesalers’ incentive to set

high prices. As shown in Table 1, the distribution of retail obligations and production

resources was uneven, with some firms frequently in the position of “net seller” while

others were nearly always “net buyers.” For example, PECO was a net seller: in 1999, it

owned 17 percent of the generating capacity but only had retail obligations for 9 percent of

the market’s peak demand. Mansur (2007) examines the relative production decisions of

PJM firms using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences approach. Using data from 1998, when bidding

was still regulated, and 1999, when firms were first allowed to employ market-based bids,

Mansur compares the changes in output quantities of net sellers with those of net buyers.

While controlling for estimates of how firms in a competitive market would have produced,

he finds that the two main net sellers produced relatively less during 1999 than during

1998 as compared to the other, net-buying firms.


       In New England, the divestiture of generation from vertically integrated utilities was

widespread. To hedge their price exposure, retail utilities signed long-term supply con-

tracts, often with the firms to whom they had divested their generation.15 In their study
  15
    The largest producer in New England during our sample period, Northeast Utilities (NU), was in the
process of divesting most of its generation during 1999, but these transactions were not finalized until
                                                                                                      12


of the New England electricity market, Bushnell and Saravia (2002) utilize bidding data

to compare the bid margins of firms they characterize as obligated to serve substantial

retail load with those of firms that were relatively unencumbered by such arrangements.

They find that bid margins from both classes of firms increase monotonically with overall

market demand, but that the margins of the “retailing” class of suppliers were often neg-

ative, indicating that these firms may have utilized their generation assets to lower overall

market prices in hours when they were net buyers on the market. We revisit the potential

for such “monopsony” production strategies in our results below.


    In contrast to New England, where most retailers responded to the risk exposure of rate-

freezes by signing long-term supply contracts, the purchases of the utilities in California

were notoriously concentrated in the spot markets. During the summer of 1999, there were

almost no meaningful long-term arrangements between merchant generation companies

and the incumbent utilities. The largest utilities, Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) and

Southern California Edison, did retain control of nuclear and hydrogeneration capacity.

However, this low marginal cost capacity limited the utilities’ ability to exercise monopsony

power. The failure of the utilities to sign long-term contracts has been attributed to

regulatory barriers put in place by the California Public Utilities Commission (Bushnell,
after September. During the summer of 1999, NU was therefore both the largest producer and retailer
of electricity. Soon after divesting its generation, NU subsidiary Connecticut Light & Power signed long-
term supply arrangements with NRG, Duke Energy, and its own subsidiary, Select Energy. Pacific Gas
& Electric’s unregulated subsidiary National Energy Group (NEG) also controlled a large generation
portfolio, but was obligated to provide power to the non-switching, “default” retail customers served
by New England Electric System (NEES), the former owner of the generation. United Illuminating of
Connecticut and Boston Edison had also signed supply contracts with the purchasers of their generation,
Wisvest and Sithe, respectively. The Sithe contract had expired by the summer of 1999, while the Wisvest
contract expired the following year.
                                                                                             13


2004, further discusses the complexity of this claim).


      Long-term vertical arrangements have been shown to aﬀect market performance sig-

nificantly. However, to our knowledge, there has been no attempt to assess the degree

to which these contracts influenced market outcomes, or how these impacts varied across

markets. These are questions that we address below.


II       Description of Model and Data

We measure the impact of vertical and horizontal market structure on market performance.

Our approach abstracts away from the detailed market rules and regulations in each mar-

ket and examines the range of equilibrium price outcomes that would be predicted from

considering market structure alone. We calculate the upper and lower bounds on market

prices that could be produced in a static, noncooperative equilibrium. These bounds are,

respectively, represented by the Nash-Cournot and perfectly competitive equilibria.


      Several models of oligopoly competition in the electricity industry have employed the

supply function equilibrium (SFE) concept developed by Paul D. Klemperer and Margaret

A. Meyer (1989).16 In many cases there exist multiple SFE, and Klemperer and Meyer

show that these equilibria are bounded by the Cournot and competitive equilibria. To

the extent that market rules and local regulatory diﬀerences influence market outcomes

by helping determine which of the many possible equilibria arise, these impacts can be
 16
   For example, see Green and Newbery (1992) and Aleksandr Rudkevich, Max Duckworth, and Richard
Rosen (1998).
                                                                                                                14


thought of as placing the market price within these bounds.17


       In this section, we briefly describe our equilibrium model and how we apply data from

various sources to our calculations. In Appendix A, we describe the data sources on

equilibrium quantities and prices, as well as the data on vertical arrangements and long-

term contracts. The data sources share features with those used by Borenstein, Bushnell,

and Wolak (henceforth BBW, 2002), Bushnell and Saravia (2002), and Mansur (2007)

in studying the markets of California, New England, and PJM, respectively. Relative to

these other papers, there are several substantial diﬀerences in the application of the data

to our model. The discussion below focuses on these issues.


A        Model


We first consider a general formulation of Cournot competition at the wholesale and retail

levels. Strategic firms are assumed to maximize profits according to the Cournot assump-

tion using production quantities as the decision variable. The total production of firm i is

                                                r
represented by qi,t . Retail sales are denoted qi,t .


       For each strategic firm i ∈ {1, ..., N } and time period t ∈ {1, ..., T } that are assumed

to be independent, firm i maximizes profits:

                        r
(1)      π i,t (qi,t , qi,t ) = pw                            r        r     r      r         r
                                 t (qi,t , q−i,t ) · [qi,t − qi,t ] + pi,t (qi,t , q−i,t ) · qi,t − C(qi,t ),

  17
    Green and Newbery (1992) show that when capacity constraints apply to producers, the range of
possible equilibria narrows as the lower bound becomes less competitive. Even though capacity constraints
are sometimes relevant for the producers in the markets we study, we note that the perfectly competitive
price still represents a lower bound, albeit a generous one.
                                                                                                     15

                 r
where q−i,t and q−i,t are the quantity produced and retail supplied by the other N − 1

firms, respectively, and pw      r
                          t and pi,t are the wholesale and retail market prices. Wholesale


electricity is assumed to be a homogenous commodity with a uniform price. Note that

                                                                             r
retail commitments could be larger than wholesale production so that qi,t − qi,t could be

negative, meaning that firm i is a net purchaser on the wholesale market.


       In the general formulation, the equilibrium positions of firms would take into account

both wholesale and retail demand elasticities as well as production capacity and costs.18

However, in our context we take advantage of the fact that, by time t, both retail quantity

and prices are fixed. Considering that both contract quantity and price are sunk at the

time production decisions are made, the second term of (1), pri,t · qi,t
                                                                     r
                                                                         , drops out of the

equilibrium first-order conditions with respect to actual production, qi,t .


       Under these assumptions, we can represent the Cournot equilibrium as the set of quan-

tities that simultaneously satisfy the following first order conditions for each firm i and

period t:

         ∂πi,t                                         ∂pw
                                                         t
(2)            = pw                            r
                  t (qi,t , q−i,t ) + [qi,t − qi,t ] ·
                                                                0
                                                             − Ci,t (qi,t ) ≥ 0.
         ∂qi,t                                         ∂qi,t

The retail position of firm i now plays the same role as a fixed-price forward commitment in

its impact on the incentives for wholesale market production. As the forward commitment

increases towards the amount produced, the marginal revenue approaches the wholesale

price. In other words, the Cournot model with contracts close to qi,t is similar to the
  18
    For example, Hendricks and McAfee (2006) derive equilibrium conditions for a similar general problem
assuming a form of supply function equilibrium.
                                                                                         16


competitive outcome.


      The impact of vertical arrangements becomes more extreme when one considers the

possibility that such arrangements could create a negative net position for a supplier. In

other words, a supplier’s retail commitment can be greater than its wholesale production.

In such a circumstance, the supplier would want to drive wholesale prices below competitive

levels. We do observe this equilibrium on occasion. Under these conditions, a larger degree

of market power leads to lower prices. Thus the noncooperative outcomes are still bounded

between the Cournot and competitive levels, but the Cournot outcomes constitute the

lower bound on prices in the range where retail arrangements exceed wholesale production.


      For each market and hour, we simulate three prices: the perfectly competitive equilib-

rium; the Cournot equilibrium ignoring vertical arrangements; and the Cournot equilib-

rium that accounts for vertical arrangements. For the Cournot models, we assume firms

                                                            r
solve (2). The no-vertical-arrangements case, where we set qi,t = 0, is the upper bound

on the static, noncooperative price outcomes. For the competitive model, the production

decision of a nonstrategic firm i at time t is described by the condition:


(3)     pw                    0
         t (qi,t , q−i,t ) − Ci,t (qi,t ) ≥ 0.



Equation (3) is used to calculate the lower bound on static, noncooperative outcomes.

Even in the Cournot model, some small firms are assumed to take prices as given and

solve (3).


      The wholesale market price is determined from the firms’ residual demand function
                                                                                             17


(Qt ), which equals the market demand (Qt ) minus supply from fringe firms whose pro-

duction is not explicitly represented. We model the supply from imports and small power

plants, qtf ringe , as a function of price, thereby providing price responsiveness to Qt :

                         f ringe w
(4)     Qt (pw
             t ) = Qt − qt      (pt ).


      The full solution to these equilibrium conditions is represented as a complementarity

problem. Appendix B contains a more complete description of the complementarity con-

ditions implied by the equilibrium and other modeling details, given the functional forms

of the cost and inverse demand described below.


B       Cost Functions

In general, there are two classes of generation units in our study: those for which we are

able to explicitly model their marginal cost and those for which it is impractical to do so

due to either data limitations or the generation technology. Fortunately, the vast majority

of electricity is provided by units that fall into the first category. Most of the units that

fall into the second category, which includes nuclear and small thermal and hydroelectric

plants, are generally thought to be low-cost technologies. Therefore, as we explain below,

the available capacity from units in this second category is treated as inframarginal: the

capacity is applied to the bottom of the firm’s cost function.

Fossil-Fired Generation Costs

      We explicitly model the major fossil-fired thermal units in each electric system. Because

of the legacy of cost-of-service regulation, relatively reliable data on the production costs
                                                                                                      18


of thermal generation units are available. The cost of fuel comprises the major component

of the marginal cost of thermal generation. The marginal cost of a modeled generation

unit is estimated to be the sum of its direct fuel, environmental, and variable operation

and maintenance (VO&M) costs. Fuel costs can be calculated by multiplying a unit’s

“heat rate,” a measure of its fuel eﬃciency by the price of fuel, which is updated as

frequently as daily. Many units are subject to environmental regulations that require

them to obtain nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide tradable pollution permits. Thus, for

units that must hold permits, the marginal cost of polluting is estimated to be the emission

rate (lbs/mmbtu) multiplied by the price of permits and the unit’s heat rate.


       The capacity of a generating unit is reduced to reflect the probability of forced outage of

each unit. The available capacity of generation unit i is taken to be (1 − f ofi ) ∗ capi , where

capi is the summer-rated capacity of the unit and fofi is the forced outage factor reflecting

the probability of the unit being completely down at any given time.19 By ordering all the

generation units owned by a firm, one can construct a stepwise function for the production

cost from that firm’s portfolio. We approximate this step function with a piecewise linear

function with five segments, as we describe in Appendix A.


       There are several categories of generation for which it is impractical to model explicitly

marginal production costs. Much of this energy is produced by conventional generation
  19
    This approach to modeling unit availability is similar to Catherine D. Wolfram (1999). However, it is
a departure from the methods used by BBW, Bushnell and Saravia (2002), and Mansur (2007). In those
studies, unit availability was modeled using Monte Carlo simulation methods. Because of the additional
computational burden of calculating Cournot equilibria, we have simplified the approach to modeling
outages. As we discuss below, the impact of this simplification on estimates of competitive prices is
minimal.
                                                                                          19


sources, but there is also a substantial amount of production from energy-limited (primarily

hydroelectric) resources. Because such generation features either extremely low marginal

cost or “take-or-pay” contractual requirements, we refer to such production as “must-run.”

Our treatment of these resources is described in detail in Appendix A. For purposes of

constructing firm-level production functions, we take the amount of must-run generation

actually produced as given for each hour and apply that production to the cost function

of each firm.


    Thus a firm’s estimated marginal cost function consists of a piecewise linear function

of fossil fuel production costs, where each segment of the piecewise linear function rep-

resents a quintile of the firm’s portfolio marginal cost, beginning at the marginal cost of

its least expensive unit and ending at the marginal cost of its most expensive unit. The

function is perfectly inelastic at full available capacity. This piecewise linear function is

shifted rightward by an amount equal to the quantity of electricity produced by that firm

from must-run (hydroelectric and nuclear) resources. The aggregate production capacity

of a firm can therefore change from hour to hour if that firm has volatile hydroelectric

production.


C    Estimating Residual Demand


For most power plants in each market, detailed information enables us to directly pre-

dict performance given assumptions over firm conduct. For other plants, either we lack

information on costs and outside opportunities—such as imports into and exports out of
                                                                                                20


a market—or the plants’ owners have complex incentives, such as “must-take” contracts.

For these fringe plants, we estimate a supply function, which we then use to determine

the residual demand for the remaining firms. Recall that the derived demand in wholesale

electricity markets is completely inelastic; therefore, the residual demand curve will equal

market demand less the elastic supply of net imports (imports minus exports) and other

fringe plants not modeled. In California, this supply includes net imports and must-take

plants.20 In New England, net imports from New York and production from small firm

generation comprise this supply.21 We estimate only net import supply in PJM. For all

markets, the sample period is June to September, 1999.


       Firms’ importing and exporting decisions depend on relative prices. If firms located

within the modeled market increase prices above competitive levels, then actual fringe sup-

ply will also exceed competitive levels. With less fringe supply and completely inelastic

demand, more expensive units in the market will operate. We assume that firms that are

exporting energy into the restructured markets take prices as given because they are nu-

merous and face regulatory restrictions in their regions. When transmission constraints do

not bind, the interconnection is essentially one market. However, the multitude of prices

and “loop flow” concerns make assuming perfect information implausible. The correspond-

ing transaction costs make fringe supply dependent on both the sign and magnitude of
  20
     BBW discuss must-take plants and why they are not modeled directly in measuring firm behavior.
These plants include nuclear and independent power producers.
  21
     Canadian imports are constant as cheap Canadian power almost always flows up to the available
transmission capacity into New England. Small generation includes those generators not owned by the
major firms. These include small independent power producers and municipalities. See Bushnell and
Saravia (2002) for further discussion.
                                                                                                        21


price diﬀerences.


       For each hour t, we proxy regional prices using daily temperature in bordering states

(T empst ),22 and fixed eﬀects for hour h of the day (Hourht ) and day j of week (Dayjt ). For

each market and year, we estimate fringe supply (qtf ringe ) as a function of the natural log

of actual wholesale market price (ln(pw
                                      t )),
                                           23
                                              proxies for cost shocks (fixed eﬀects for month

i of the summer (Monthit )), proxies for neighboring prices (T empst , Dayjt , Hourht ), and

an idiosyncratic shock (εt ):

                         X
                         9                                       X
                                                                 S
(5)      qtf ringe   =         αi Monthit + β      ln(pw
                                                       t )   +         γ s T empst
                         i=6                                     s=1
                             X
                             7                   X
                                                 24
                         +         δ j Dayjt +         φh Hourht + εt .
                             j=2                 h=2



As price is endogenous, we estimate (5) using two stage least squares (2SLS) and in-

strument using hourly quantity demanded. The instrument is the natural log of hourly

quantity demanded inside each respective ISO system. Typically quantity demanded is

considered endogenous to price; however, since the derived demand for wholesale electric-

ity is completely inelastic, this unusual instrument choice is valid in this case. We exclude

demand from the second stage as it only indirectly aﬀects net imports through prices.
  22
      For California, this includes Arizona, Oregon, and Nevada. New York is the only state bordering
New England, while in PJM, bordering states include New York, Ohio, Virginia, and West Virginia. The
temperature variables for bordering states are modeled as quadratic functions for cooling degree days
(degrees daily mean above 65◦ F) and heating degree days (degrees daily mean below 65◦ F). As such,
T empst has four variables for each bordering state. These data are state averages from the National
Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) web site daily temperature data.
   23
      This functional form is smooth, defined for all net imports, and accounts for the inelastic nature of
imports nearing capacity. For robustness, we also estimate linear, square root, and cube root models of
fringe supply. We discuss how these alternative functional forms impact our results in the next section.
Note that a constant elasticity (log-log) model would drop observations with negative net imports, a
substantial share of the data in some markets. Appendix A describes the sources of the price data.
                                                                                                           22


       For each market, Table 2 reports the 2SLS β coeﬃcients and standard error estimates

that account for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity.24 First-stage regressions suggest

that the instruments are strong.25 The first column reports the results for our main linear-

log specification. California has the most price-responsive import and fringe supply, with

a β = 5392 (and a standard error of 704). In New England, β is 1391 (s.e. 162). Finally, in

PJM, we estimate β as 861 (s.e. 118). We also report the implied elasticities of the residual

demand (i.e., load minus fringe supply) at the sample mean. For robustness, we also

estimate several polynomial functional form specifications of the fringe supply function:

linear, square root, and cube root models. With these models, we find qualitatively similar

elasticity estimates (see Table 2).26

       The coeﬃcient estimates for our main specification, shown in (5), are then used to
                                                                                             PN
determine the N strategic firms’ residual demand (Qt ). In equilibrium, Qt =                    i=1 qi,t   so

we define αt as the vertical intercept:

                X
                N
                       actual
(6)      αt =         qi,t    + β ln(pactual
                                      t      ),
                i=1

where pactual
       t
                   actual
              and qi,t    are the actual price and quantities produced. Therefore, for each

hour, we model the inverse residual demand:
                              PN
                       αt −       i=1 qi,t
(7)      pw
          t = exp(                           ).
                              β
  24
      We test the error structure for autocorrelation (Breusch-Godfrey LM statistic) and heteroskedasticity
(Cook-Weisberg test). First we estimate the 2SLS coeﬃcients assuming i.i.d. errors in order to calculate
an unbiased estimate of ρ, the first-degree autocorrelation parameter. After quasi-diﬀerencing the data,
we re-estimate the 2SLS coeﬃcients while using the White technique to address heteroskedasticity.
   25
      More specifically, the coeﬃcients on load for each of the markets and functional form models are
significant at the 1-percent level.
   26
      In the web appendix, we test how these alternative models impact our Cournot and competitive
simulations. We show that our main findings are robust.
                                                                                                       23


III        Results

                                     r
We first set the retail commitment, qi,t in (2), equal to zero for all firms. This provides

us with counterfactual equilibria whereby the incentive eﬀects of vertical arrangements

and long-term contracts are ignored. We can then test the impact of horizontal market

structure alone. Next, we test the importance of vertical arrangements by comparing

                                       r
these outcomes with those when we set qi,t equal to the approximate levels that we have

been able to determine from public data sources. These commitments will not aﬀect the

behavior of firms taking prices as given. Therefore, the competitive prices—the “lower”

bound—are the same in both the case with contracts and the case without contracts.27

       These phenomena are influenced by several factors. First, it should be noted that each

observation of actual prices reflects a single realization of the actual import elasticity and

outage states that are estimated with error. So the structure of the markets in any given

hour will be somewhat diﬀerent than our aggregate estimates, and therefore may result in

individual prices outside of our estimated bounds.

       Second, the oligopoly and competitive outcomes are functions of our estimates of mar-

ginal costs, which are also subject to measurement error. To the extent that we overstate

the marginal cost of production, observed market prices during very competitive hours,

which will be close to marginal cost, will be lower than our estimated prices. Our treat-
  27
    While we have used the phrase “lower” bound to refer to the competitive equilibrium and “upper”
bound to refer to the Cournot equilibrium, it is important to recognize that the use of these terms should
be qualified. As we describe below, there are observations where the Cournot outcome yields lower
prices than the perfectly competitive outcome, and observations where both the Cournot and competitive
outcomes are above the actual market price, as well as observations when the actual price was greater
than both the Cournot and competitive estimates.
                                                                                                    24


ment of production cost as independent of the hour of day will likely bias our estimates

of costs upward during oﬀ-peak hours, and downward during peak hours. This is because

power plants in fact have nonconvex costs and intertemporal operating constraints, such

as additional fuel costs incurred at the start-up of a generation unit and limits on the rates

in which the output of a unit can change from hour to hour.


       A further caveat concerns the measurement of price. As noted in Appendix A, the PJM

market may have many “nodal” prices for a given hour while we use a weighted average.

The average price will be a noisy measure of the price each firm faces. However, prices did

not vary substantially by location in the summer of 1999.28


       Lastly, even without any measurement error, the Cournot equilibrium can produce

prices lower than perfectly competitive ones when vertical arrangements are considered.

To the extent that large producers also have even larger retail obligations, they may find it

profitable to overproduce in order to drive down their wholesale cost of power purchased for

                                       r
retail service. In terms of (2), when qi,t > qi,t marginal revenue is greater than price, and

therefore it is profit-maximizing to produce at levels where marginal cost is greater than

price. Thus, when the load obligations exceed the production levels of key producers, the

Cournot price in fact becomes the “lower” bound, and the competitive price the “upper”

bound.
  28
     In the summer of 1999, prices varied across locations in 19 percent of the hours. However, these
diﬀerences were small: the largest diﬀerence across locations was less than $1 during 90 percent of the
hours. Furthermore, Mansur (2007) notes that, ex ante, congestion has an indeterminate eﬀect on the
average price. Even the eﬀect of market power is ambiguous: while congestion reduces the elasticity of
residual demand, PJM regulations cap bids in congested areas.
                                                                                                        25


A        Market Level Results


Table 3 summarizes the prices for the Nash-Cournot equilibrium with and without vertical

arrangements, as well as the competitive equilibrium and the actual market prices. Note

that the California market eﬀectively had no long-term vertical arrangements between

utility retailers and suppliers during 1999. There was considerable generation retained by

the two largest, still partially vertically integrated, utilities. However, the overwhelming

majority of this capacity was either nuclear or other “must-take” resources such as regu-

latory era contracts with small producers, or hydroproduction. Functionally, this means

that there is no meaningful diﬀerence between a “no vertical arrangements” and “with

vertical arrangements” case in California.29


       Errors in our cost estimates will have a much larger proportional impact on our es-

timates of competitive prices and Cournot prices during very competitive hours, where

prices closely track marginal cost, than on hours where there is substantial potential mar-

ket power. At low levels of demand even strategic firms are not able to exercise a great

deal of market power, and thus the Cournot prices are very close to the competitive prices.

When firms are able to exercise a great deal of market power, the quantity they produce
  29
     As we have argued above, firms have no ability to impact equilibrium prices with must-take resources
since they would be producing in the market under all possible market outcomes. A firm could allocate
production from its energy-limited hydroelectric resources with the goal of driving down prices (as opposed
to raising them as an oligopolist, or allocating to the highest price hours as would a firm in a perfectly
competitive market). Any attempts to do so by PG&E, the large hydroproducer in California, would be
reflected in the actual production numbers, and therefore already incorporated into the residual demand
of the oligopoly producers. A fully accurate “no vertical arrangements” case in California would consider
the ability of a hypothetical “pure seller” PG&E to allocate water in a way that maximizes generation
revenues. However, the strategic optimization of hydroelectric resources is beyond the scope of this paper.
See Bushnell (2003) for an examination of the potential impacts of strategic hydroproduction in the
Western U.S.
                                                                                          26


will be more sensitive to the slope of the residual demand curve than to their own marginal

costs. This implies that if our cost estimates are biased, the bias will have a diﬀerential

impact on the fit of the two models at diﬀerent demand levels.


   In particular, for low levels of demand both models very closely track marginal costs,

and therefore they will both have similar degrees of bias. At high levels of demand, the

competitive prices still track marginal costs and thus they will still have the same degree

of bias, while at high levels, the Cournot estimates are more sensitive to residual demand

than to marginal costs and thus a cost bias will have less of an eﬀect. We therefore separate

our results into peak and oﬀ-peak hours to better reflect this diﬀerential impact of any

bias in cost measurement, where peak hours are defined as falling between 11 am and 8

pm on weekdays.


   In all three markets, actual prices appear to be consistent with Cournot prices in

comparison with competitive prices during the peak hours of the day. The average prices

in California were $43 for actual prices and $45 for Cournot prices, while competitive

prices were only $35. In New England, actual and Cournot (with vertical arrangements)

both averaged $55, which is $13 above the average competitive price simulation. In PJM,

actual prices were $97 on average. While this is greater than the Cournot price average of

$87, it is nearly triple the competitive average of $35.


   Our oﬀ-peak competitive price estimates exceed actual prices in all markets. For Cali-

fornia and PJM, the low prices do not appear to be caused by monopsony behavior, as the

Cournot prices exceed the competitive prices even at low demand. By contrast, the nega-
                                                                                         27


tive price-cost margins during oﬀ-peak hours in New England are, in fact, consistent with

strategic behavior to some degree. Over the entire sample of oﬀ-peak hours, the median

Cournot equilibrium price is slightly below the median competitive price. However, in the

September oﬀ-peak hours, the median Cournot price in New England was $27.21/MWh in

comparison to an estimated competitive price of $31.02/MWh. The median of the actual

oﬀ-peak September prices was $25.55/MWh. The New England market is the only market

where we see this phenomenon, as it is the only market where the dominant producers

also have large retail obligations and suﬃcient extramarginal resources. This allows these

firms to produce at a loss, on the margin, thereby reducing the equilibrium price.


Kernel Regression Results


      Figure 2 plots actual hourly prices in California from June 1 to September 30, 1999.

We estimate a nonparametric kernel regression of the relationship between the actual

hourly prices and the ratio of current demand to summer peak demand.30 In Figure 2,

this is shown with a black line. In addition, we estimate the kernel regression for our

estimates of prices from each hour’s Cournot equilibrium (gray line) and the prices that

we estimate would arise under competitive behavior (dotted line). In the case of California,

the actual prices and the Cournot estimates are similar except at low demand levels, where

both competitive and Cournot prices exceed actual prices, likely for the reasons described

above.


      In both the New England and PJM markets, Cournot prices that do not account for
 30
      We use the 100 nearest neighbor estimator, namely the Stata command “knnreg.”
                                                                                         28


vertical commitments far exceed actual prices for even moderate demand levels. Figure

3 presents the Cournot prices without the vertical arrangements for New England. Once

the quantity demanded reaches 60 percent of the summer’s peak demand, prices increase

substantially. The results for Cournot pricing without contracts in PJM are most startling.

In Figure 4, we show that for any level of residual demand above 50 percent of installed

capacity, the Cournot price would have been at the price cap of $1000/MWh had firms

divested as in California. From these results, one may be led to conclude that the New

England and PJM markets did not exhibit conventional oligopoly behavior, and were

competitive relative to California despite their less favorable horizontal structures.


   However, once we account for the vertical arrangements, Cournot prices in the two

markets are similar to the actual prices at high demand levels. Figure 5 presents the

analysis for the New England market. As with California, the Cournot prices are similar

to the actual prices at high demand levels. At lower demand levels, note that the Cournot

prices lie slightly below the competitive prices. This is consistent with the monopsony

overproduction strategy previously discussed. Figure 6 illustrates the same analysis for

PJM. Again, Cournot prices are quite close to actual prices at higher demand levels and

actually exceed Cournot prices at the very highest levels of demand. In a web appendix,

we show that the conclusions drawn from Figures 2, 5, and 6 are robust to the errors in

              b coeﬃcient in (5).
measuring the β


Testing Market Performance


   We examine the relative goodness-of-fit of the two estimated price series—Cournot with
                                                                                                         29


vertical arrangements and competitive—to actual prices. For each market and simulation,

we measure the diﬀerence between actual hourly prices (pactual
                                                        t      ) and the simulated hourly

prices (psim                                                  2
         t ). We then compute a variation on the traditional R to measure each model’s


fit. Here, we define R2 as one minus the ratio of the sum of the squared errors over the

sum of the squared actual prices:

                    X
                    T
                      (pactual
                        t      − psim
                                  t )
                                      2

                    t=1
(8)      R2 = 1 −                         ,
                          X
                          T
                            (pactual
                              t      )2
                          t=1

where psim
       t   equals either the hourly Cournot price (pcour
                                                    t    ) or the hourly competitive price

(pcomp
  t    ).


       In all three markets, the Cournot price simulations have greater measures of R2 than

the competitive price simulations. For California, the R2 is 0.94 for the Cournot estimates

and 0.92 for the competitive prices. In New England, the R2 is 0.82 for Cournot and 0.69

for competitive. In PJM the values are 0.78 and 0.18 for the Cournot and competitive

prices respectively. During just the peak hours, the goodness-of-fit measures are similar.31


       A more formal test can examine whether these values are in fact meaningfully diﬀerent.

The empirical model is that actual price equals either the competitive price or the Cournot

price, but is not a function of both. Since there does not exist a mapping of one pricing

model to the other, a non-nested test is required. We follow the methodology of an

encompassing test, as described in Russell Davidson and James G. MacKinnon (1993,
  31
     Specifically, for California on-peak, the R2 is 0.95 for the Cournot estimates and 0.91 for the compet-
itive prices. In New England, the values are 0.84 and 0.69. In PJM, they are 0.78 and 0.16.
                                                                                                                          30


pages 386-387), which is done by testing one hypothesis and including the variables from

the second hypothesis that are not already in the model. In our case, this is just regressing

actual prices on the Cournot and competitive prices:


(9)     pactual
         t      = γ 1 pcour
                       t    + γ 2 pcomp
                                   t    + ut .


We estimate this equation using ordinary least squares (OLS). The standard errors are

adjusted using the correction for heteroskedastic and autocorrelated errors developed by

Whitney K. Newey and Kenneth D. West (1987) (we assume a 24-hour lag structure).

Note that the prices pcour and pcomp
                                t
                                                          b coeﬃcient in (5), which is
                                     are imputed from the β
                      t


estimated with error. Therefore, we must correct the variance-covariance matrix from

estimating (9) to account for this first-stage uncertainty. We use the method described in

equation (15’) of Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (1985).32 In our tests, we impose

a more rigorous standard on the model. In particular, in order for the actual prices to be

consistent with a Cournot model, we require: (1) that we cannot reject γ 1 = 1 and γ 2 = 0;

and (2) that we can reject γ 1 = 0 and γ 2 = 1. In other words, that the model is consistent

with Cournot pricing but is not consistent with competitive pricing. Note that this is a

strong test and that in many supply function equilibria, actual prices will fall between
  32
     After estimating (9) using OLS, the correction requires three steps. First we approximate how a
small change in β   b impacts each of the hourly imputed prices. To do this, we re-estimate the Cournot and
competitive prices using β   b∗ , where β b ∗ equals β∗1.001.
                                                        b         The change in the Cournot price, dpcour         b ≡ f cour ,
                                                                                                                /dβ
                                                                                                            t           t
                  ∗                     ∗
equals (pcour   b ) − pcour (β))/(
               (β              b      b − β).
                                      β      b The change in the competitive price, f            comp
                                                                                                      , is similarly defined.
           t             t                                                                       t
Then, we compute Ft∗ = γ      b1 ftcour + γb2 ftcomp and regress it on both of the imputed prices: pcour      t   and pcomp
                                                                                                                        t    .
We call the estimated coeﬃcients b        δ 1 and b δ 2 . Finally, we calculate the adjusted standard errors. Let the
initial estimated standard errors on γ     b1 , γ
                                                b2 , and β b be σ
                                                                bγ 1 , σ
                                                                       bγ2 , and σ
                                                                                 bβ , respectively. The corrected standard
                       q
                                  2 2
error on γ bi equals σ   bγ i + b
                           2
                                δi σbβ , for i =1 and 2. This method assumes independence of the errors in the
fringe supply, (5), and non-nested test, (9), regressions.
                                                                                                     31


these extremes.

       For all three markets, the tests suggest that Cournot prices are a better fit for actual

peak-hour prices than the competitive prices. In California, we find that the coeﬃcient on

Cournot price is 0.89 with a standard error of 0.24. In contrast, the competitive price is

insignificant at the 5-percent level with a coeﬃcient of 0.13 (s.e. of 0.25). Wald tests reject

the competitive market hypothesis but do not reject the Cournot pricing hypothesis. The

encompassing test for New England results in similar findings as in California. The Cournot

price coeﬃcient equals 1.69 with a standard error of 0.44. In contrast, the competitive

price coeﬃcient is -0.65 (s.e. of 0.34). Finally, the test in PJM implies similar results: the

Cournot price coeﬃcient is 1.02 (s.e. of 0.15) and the competitive price coeﬃcient is 0.40

(s.e. of 0.90). In all three markets, these estimates fail to reject the Cournot model but

do reject the competitive model. During the oﬀ-peak hours when firms have less incentive

to exercise market power, the non-nested tests are somewhat less definitive.33

       In addition to examining predicted prices, we compare the quantity decisions of firms.

In the web appendix, we examine the firm-level production implied by our three cases—

perfect competition and Cournot with and without vertical obligations—as well as the ac-

tual production recorded by the EPA’s Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS)

dataset. These results reinforce a conclusion that firms’ behavior reflected strategies more

complex than Cournot, at least outside of California. As with prices, actual firm-level pro-
  33
    For these hours, only New England and PJM reject the competitive model but do not reject the
Cournot model. The encompassing test for California rejects both models. In California, the Cournot
coeﬃcient is 1.51 (0.25) and the competitive coeﬃcient is -0.82 (0.26). In New England, the Cournot
coeﬃcient is 2.40 (0.82) and the competitive coeﬃcient is -1.43 (0.71). In PJM, the Cournot coeﬃcient is
1.50 (0.60) and the competitive coeﬃcient is -0.93 (0.62).
                                                                                           32


duction quantities were far less extreme than those produced in the “no vertical arrange-

ments” case.


B     Social Welfare Impacts


Utilizing our measures of firms’ cost functions, we can construct estimates of total pro-

duction costs for the various cases. This allows us to produce an estimate of the welfare

impacts of the vertical arrangements. Recall that end-use demand is eﬀectively inelastic in

these markets, so any social welfare impacts of strategic behavior will be reflected solely in

an increase in production costs from perfectly competitive levels. Also recall that, in PJM,

the no-vertical-arrangements case produces many extreme outcomes with a large number

of potential equilibria resulting in prices at the capped level. In PJM, we therefore focus

on the welfare impacts of those hours in which the price did not reach $1000/MWh in the

case of no vertical arrangements. This provides a lower bound on the welfare impact, as

the results will be less extreme in these relatively low-demand hours.


    In PJM, the production costs under the case with vertical contracts are 59 percent lower

than costs without vertical contracts. Extrapolating to the full four-month sample, the

costs of producing electricity for the PJM market from June 1 to September 30, 1999 would

have increased by $2.1 billion if there were no vertical arrangements. In New England,

production costs for our simulations are 32 percent, or $327 million, lower with vertical

contracts. In other words, had New England and PJM regulators impeded the formation

of vertical arrangements (as in California), production costs would have increased by over
                                                                                            33


45 percent in each market.


    In both cases, the cost impacts of these estimates are dominated by the increased costs

of imports. In other words, the bulk of the welfare impact comes from an increase in high-

cost imports, which are assumed to be competitively priced and which replace relatively

low-cost production that is withheld to a far greater extent in the scenarios with no vertical

arrangements due to increased market power.


    These results reinforce the perception that the horizontal market structure in the East-

ern markets, particularly in PJM, is not competitive, and that vertical arrangements are

playing a critical role in mitigating the exercise of market power in the spot market.


C     Stability of Vertical Structure


The above results highlight the impact of the substantial vertical obligations held by some

of the largest generation firms in the two Eastern markets. The arrangements for the

period that we study were determined at roughly the same time as the asset sales. This is

one of the reasons why we focus on a time period relatively early in the life of these markets:

the vertical arrangements are better understood and can reasonably be considered to be

exogenous. However, a natural question to ask is, are these vertical obligations likely to

be stable or would we expect these firms to change their vertical position?


    While this is a very complex issue, with many factors influencing the organization of

these firms, we can examine this question in the context of its impact on market compet-

itiveness and firm profits. In doing so, we adopt the framework of Allaz and Vila (1988),
                                                                                                          34


who model the impact of forward contracts on competition. As we have argued above, in

electricity markets the decision to take on a retail customer shares essential features with

the decision to sign a forward contract. Most importantly, retailers commit to a fixed price

for a subscription period, in advance of wholesale market outcomes. This “advance” retail

rate that a wholesale firm agrees to is therefore a key parameter in addressing the optimal

vertical structure of a firm.


       For the purposes of this exercise, we adopt the extreme assumption that retail margins

will be near zero, and that retail rates will therefore be based upon expectations of whole-

sale prices.34 This is comparable to the perfect arbitrage assumption adopted by Allaz

and Vila in their study of forward markets.35 Given that retailing has no direct profit,

one might imagine that wholesale firms would have no interest in participating at all.

However, by establishing a vertical position, a producer also makes a credible commitment

to produce more in subsequent wholesale markets, thereby reaping advantages similar to

those enjoyed by the leader in a Stackelberg game. This is the logic demonstrated by Al-

laz and Vila, who find that Cournot producers find it optimal to sign fixed-price forward

contracts.36
  34
      In many vertical contexts the retail markup over wholesale prices is more important than wholesale
profits. It is not clear what the likely retail margins in electricity markets will be, but the ease of entry
into retailing, along with continued regulatory oversight of retail pricing, argue that such margins will be
relatively small.
   35
      In other words, the retail and wholesale markets in our context play the role of the forward and spot
markets in the Allaz and Vila context.
   36
      However, recent papers have challenged the view that forward contracting is necessarily procompet-
itive. In particular, producers could enter the forward market as buyers, thereby increasing their net
position (see Philippe Mahenc and François Salanié, 2004), or use the forward market to facilitate tacit
collusion (see Matti Liski and Juan-Pablo Montero, 2006). These papers raise interesting issues in the
context of the vertical arrangements discussed in this section. However, these papers do not challenge the
notion that, given forward obligations that reduce the net positions of firms, the static equilibrium will
                                                                                                          35


    Thus, there are strategic reasons why the firms in these markets would take on vertical

obligations at fixed prices. Their self-imposed obligations commit them to behave more

competitively in the wholesale market, but also force their competitors to respond by

reducing their own production in the wholesale market. But are the positions held by the

firms in the markets studied here near the optimal size? Bushnell (forthcoming) studies

this question in an equilibrium context.37

    While a full equilibrium model with asymmetric firms and nonlinear costs is beyond

the scope of this paper, we can examine the unilateral optimality of a firm’s 1999 vertical

position. We do so by marginally changing a given firm’s vertical position, while holding

the position of all other firms constant. Specifically, we assume that each firm’s vertical

position increases by an amount equal to 1 percent of that firm’s production capacity.

    The results are reported in Table 4. This table describes the change in profits to each

large firm in a market from an increase in forward position by the firm listed in the first

column. Thus the diagonal entries are of the most interest, as they describe the impact

on profits of a given firm from its own increase in forward position. The results indicate

that, as expected, firms in California would want to increase their positions above zero,
be more competitive. Further, in the case of vertical integration, there is no analog to going short in the
forward market. A pure producer cannot make itself less integrated.
  37
     Bushnell derives a modified version of the Allaz and Vila model and applies parameters derived from
these three markets to that model. He finds that the number of firms in the market is the key parameter to
determining the extent of forward (vertical) commitments in the market. This simplified model indicates
that the overall level of vertical commitments in the PJM markets is roughly equal to the equilibrium levels,
while 1999 levels are a little below equilibrium in New England and are obviously far below equilibrium
levels in California. Bushnell finds that the equilibrium level of forward commitments in these three
markets are 81, 71, and 55 percent for PJM, NE, and California respectively. This is contrasted to the
actual levels estimated here to be 85, 50, and zero percent for the same three markets. However, one
key restriction of that model is that it features symmetric firms, and it is therefore unable to address the
question of the equilibrium position of actual individual firms.
                                                                                           36


while all the largest firms in PJM would prefer to reduce their positions. The two firms in

New England with major vertical commitments would also prefer to reduce their positions,

while the merchant producers in that market such as Mirant would prefer to add forward

commitments. This latter result is consistent with the observation that the two large firms

in New England produced quantities consistent with more balanced vertical positions than

their public obligations provided.


   This analysis indicates that, from the perspective of the wholesale profits of an in-

tegrated firm, generation suppliers will continue to seek long-term retail commitments.

However, from the wholesale perspective, those commitments should not be as extensive

as those that were created as an artifact of the transition from state-level regulation. It is

important to emphasize that many other considerations will factor into such decisions, not

least among them the size of retail margins. Thus, this analysis sheds light on only one

aspect of the question of the optimal vertical structure of electricity firms in restructured

markets.


   Going forward, given the apparent importance of vertical arrangements, it will be an

important line of research to better understand what kinds of market environments pro-

duce various retail arrangements. A critical question will be the extent to which retailers

continue to oﬀer relatively long-term price commitments to customers, since these price

commitments are such a mitigating force on the wholesale market behavior of integrated

firms.
                                                                                         37


IV      Conclusions

Within the U.S., experiences with electricity restructuring have varied dramatically. While

the consequences of such initiatives have been disastrous in California and Montana, regula-

tors and policy-makers are for the most part satisfied with the performance of restructured

markets in New York, Texas, New England, and PJM. There has been much speculation

and dispute over the reasons why the deregulation experiment has produced such dramat-

ically diﬀerent results to date in the various regions of the country. Much of the debate

has centered on the relative influence of market structure and market design.


   We examine the impact of market structure by abstracting away from specific market

rules and estimating the market prices that would result from Cournot competition in each

of these markets. We also estimate the prices that would result from all firms adopting a

perfectly competitive position. While other noncooperative equilibrium concepts, notably

the supply function equilibrium, could be applied, these other forms of oligopoly competi-

tion are bounded by the two sets of equilibria we do model. We estimate market outcomes

under two vertical structures: one in which suppliers have no long-term retail obligations,

and one in which the retail obligations of producers that are currently public information

are included in the objective function of those producers. We apply this approach to three

of the oldest and largest markets operating in the U.S., California, New England, and PJM

and examine the summer of 1999.


   We find that the vertical relationships between producers and retailers play a key role
                                                                                           38


in determining the competitiveness of the spot markets in the markets that we study.

These findings support Wolak’s (2000) analysis of long-term contracts in the Australian

electricity market as well as Fabra and Toro’s (2005) analysis of the Spanish market. The

concentration of ownership and low elasticity of import supply combine to give PJM by

far the least competitive horizontal structure. If one ignores the vertical arrangements, a

Cournot equilibrium reaches the price cap in PJM in a majority of hours. Yet the PJM

market was, in fact, fairly competitive except during very high-demand hours. Although

not as severe, we find a similarly dramatic contrast between a Cournot equilibrium with no

vertical arrangements and actual market prices in New England. Once the known vertical

arrangements are explicitly modeled as part of the Cournot equilibrium, the Cournot prices

are dramatically reduced and are reasonably similar to actual prices.


   It is worth noting that our analysis has focused on only one, albeit central, aspect of

electricity markets: the average wholesale price of electric energy. Many other attributes of

electricity markets—such as the costs of reserve capacity, the ability to disseminate accurate

prices over space and time, and the eﬃciency of power plant operations and investment—

should be considered before rendering judgment over which market has produced the “best”

performance.


   We conclude that our results do carry important implications for both electricity re-

structuring and antitrust policies. The horizontal structure of the markets is important,

but similar horizontal structures can produce dramatically diﬀerent outcomes under diﬀer-

ent vertical arrangements. The extent to which these arrangements constitute firm price
                                                                                         39


commitments also plays a strong role in the impact of vertical structure on the market

outcomes. While we observe the central impact of vertical arrangements that have been

exogenously determined, it is a far more diﬃcult task to predict the type of vertical struc-

ture that may eventually evolve in an industry. For electricity markets, the question of

whether and how those arrangements are continued or replaced will likely play a key role

in the future success of these markets.
                                                                                     40


References

[1] Allaz, Blaise, and Jean-Luc Vila. 1993. “Cournot Competition, Forward Markets

   and Eﬃciency.” Journal of Economic Theory, 53(1): 1-16.


[2] Borenstein, Severin, and James B. Bushnell. 1999. “An Empirical Analysis

   of the Potential for Market Power in California’s Electricity Market.” Journal of

   Industrial Economics, 47(3): 285-323.


[3] Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Christopher R. Knittel. 1999.

   “Market Power in Electricity Markets: Beyond Concentration Measures.” Energy

   Journal, 20(4): 65-88.


[4] Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. “Measur-

   ing Market Ineﬃciencies in California’s Deregulated Wholesale Electricity Market.”

   American Economic Review, 92(5): 1376-1405.


[5] Bushnell, James B. 2003. “A Mixed Complementarity Model of Hydro-Thermal

   Electricity Competition in the Western U.S.” Operations Research, 51(1): 80-93.


[6] Bushnell, James B. 2004. “California’s Electricity Crisis: A Market Apart?” Energy

   Policy, 32(9): 1045-1052.


[7] Bushnell, James B. Forthcoming. “Oligopoly Equilibria in Electricity Contract

   Markets.” Journal of Regulatory Economics.
                                                                                      41


 [8] Bushnell, James B., and Celeste Saravia. 2002. “An Empirical Analysis of the

    Competitiveness of the New England Electricity Market.” CSEM Working Paper WP-

    101, University of California Energy Institute.


 [9] Czyzyk, Joseph, Michael P. Mesnier, and Jorge J. Moré. 1998. “The NEOS

    Server.” IEEE Journal on Computational Science and Engineering, 5: 68-75.


[10] Davidson, Russell, and James G. MacKinnon. 1993. Estimation and Inference

    in Econometrics, Oxford University Press.


[11] Dirkse, Steven P., and Michael C. Ferris. 1995. “The PATH solver: Anon-

    monotone stabilization scheme for mixed complementarity problems. Optimization

    Methods and Software, 5: 123-156.


[12] Fabra, Natalia, and Juan Toro. 2005. “Price Wars and Collusion in the Spanish

    Electricity Market.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 23(3-4): 155-

    181.


[13] Gilbert, Richard, and Justine Hastings. 2005. “Vertical Integration in Gasoline

    Supply: An Empirical Test of Raising Rivals’ Costs.” Journal of Industrial Economics,

    53(4): 469-492.


[14] Green, Richard J. 1999. “The Electricity Contract Market in England and Wales.”

    Journal of Industrial Economics, 47(1): 107-124.
                                                                                  42


[15] Green, Richard J., and David M. Newbery. 1992. “Competition in the British

    Electricity Spot Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 100(5): 929-53.


[16] Hendricks, Kenneth, and R. Preston McAfee. 2006. “A Theory of Bilateral

    Oligopoly.” Unpublished.


[17] Hobbs, Benjamin. 2001. “Linear Complementarity Models of Nash-Cournot Com-

    petition in Bilateral and POOLCO Power Markets.” IEEE Transactions on Power

    Systems, 16(2): 194-202.


[18] Hortaçsu, Ali, and Steven L. Puller. Forthcoming. “Testing Strategic Models

    of Firm Behavior in Restructured Electricity Markets: A Case Study of ERCOT.”

    RAND Journal of Economics.


[19] Joskow, Paul J. 2003. “The Diﬃcult Transition to Competitive Electricity Markets

    in the U.S.” In Electricity Restructuring: Choices and Challenges, ed. James M.

    Griﬀen and Steven L. Puller. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


[20] Joskow, Paul J., and Edward P. Kahn. 2002. “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing

    Behavior in California’s Wholesale Electricity Market During Summer 2000.” Energy

    Journal, 23(4): 1-35.


[21] Klemperer, Paul D., and Margaret A. Meyer. 1989. “Supply Function Equi-

    libria in Oligopoly Under Uncertainty.” Econometrica, 57(6): 1243-77.
                                                                                  43


[22] Kolstad, Charles D., and Lars Mathiesen. 1991. “Computing Cournot-Nash

    Equilibria.” Operations Research, 39(5): 739-48.


[23] Krattenmaker, Thomas G., and Steven C. Salop. 1986. “Competition and

    Cooperation in the Market for Exclusionary Rights.” American Economic Review

    Papers and Proceedings, 76(2): 109-13.


[24] Liski, Matti, and Juan-Pablo Montero. 2006. “Forward Trading and Collusion

    in Oligopoly.” Journal of Economic Theory, 131(1): 212-30.


[25] Mahenc, Philippe, and François Salanié. 2004. “Softening Competition through

    Forward Trading.” Journal of Economic Theory, 116: 282-93.


[26] Mansur, Erin T. 2007. “Upstream Competition and Vertical Integration in Elec-

    tricity Markets.” Journal of Law and Economics, 50(1): 125-56.


[27] Mansur, Erin T. Forthcoming. “Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Mar-

    kets.” Review of Economics and Statistics.


[28] Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 1985. “Estimation and Inference in

    Two-Step Econometric Models.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 3(4):

    88-97.


[29] Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. 1987. “A Simple, Positive Semi-

    definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.”

    Econometrica, 55(3): 703-08.
                                                                                    44


[30] Puller, Steven L. 2007. “Pricing and Firm Conduct in California’s Deregulated

    Electricity Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 75-87.


[31] Rey, Patrick, and Jean Tirole. Forthcoming. “A Primer on Foreclosure.” In Hand-

    book of Industrial Organization, Volume 3, ed. Mark Armstrong and Robert H. Porter.

    New York: Elsevier.


[32] Rudkevich, Aleksandr, Max Duckworth, and Richard Rosen. 1998. “Mod-

    eling Electricity Pricing in a Deregulated Generation Industry: The Potential for

    Oligopoly Pricing in a Poolco.” Energy Journal, 19(3): 19-48.


[33] Schmalensee, Richard, and Bennett W. Golub. 1984. “Estimating Eﬀective

    Concentration in Deregulated Wholesale Electricity Markets.” RAND Journal of Eco-

    nomics, 15(1): 12-26.


[34] Wolak, Frank A. 2000. “An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Hedge Contracts

    on Bidding Behavior in a Competitive Electricity Market.” International Economic

    Journal, 14(2): 1-39.


[35] Wolfram, Catherine D. 1999. Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity

    Spot Market. American Economic Review, 89(4): 805-26.
                                                                                        45


Appendix A: Data

This appendix discusses the data used in our analysis. First we discuss how we measure

the market clearing prices and quantities. Second, we describe our method of measuring a

firm’s vertical arrangements. Next, we outline the sources of data for calculating a firm’s

marginal costs and residual demand functions. Then, we discuss how we construct monthly

piecewise linear approximations of a firm’s marginal cost curves. Finally, we discuss how

we model production from nuclear, cogeneration, and energy-limited resources.


Market Clearing Quantities and Prices


Data on market quantities and prices are available from the ISO websites: www.caiso.com,

www.pjm.com, and www.iso-ne.com. Since the physical component of all electricity trans-

actions is overseen by the system operators, it is relatively straightforward to measure

market volume. We measure energy demand as the metered output of every generation

unit within a system plus the net imports into the system for a given hour. Because of

transmission losses, this measure of demand is somewhat higher than the metered load in

the system. To this quantity we add an adjustment for an operating reserve service called

automated generation control, or AGC. Units providing this service are required to be able

to respond instantaneously to dispatch orders from the system operator. These units are

therefore “held out” from the production process, and the need for this service eﬀectively

increases the demand for generation services. This reserve capacity typically adds about

3 percent to overall demand.
                                                                                         46


   In California, the market price is the day-ahead unconstrained price (UCP) from the

Power Exchange (PX). About 85 percent of California’s volume traded in this market

between 1998 and 2000. There were no day-ahead markets in New England or PJM

during 1999. We use the ISO-NE’s Energy Clearing Price (ECP) for the New England

market price and the PJM market’s real-time Locational Marginal Prices (LMP). Neither

the California PX-UCP or the New England ECP reflects any geographic variation in

response to transmission constraints.


   In contrast, the PJM market uses a nodal pricing system and reports no single “generic”

market-wide price. Under nodal pricing, transmission congestion may result in the mar-

ket having thousands of diﬀerent locational prices at a given moment. As our estimates

of competitive and Cournot equilibria ignore these congestion issues, we want to use a

measure of actual prices that are also not likely to be substantially eﬀected by congestion.

The eﬀect of congestion on average price is unclear ex ante, even though total costs must

increase. We use the hourly load-weighted average nodal price.


Vertical Arrangements and Long-Term Contracts


Data on the contractual arrangements reached by producers is more restricted than data

on spot market transactions. We focus on the large, long-term vertical arrangements

between generation firms and retail companies responsible for serving end-use demand.

These arrangements have, for the most part, been reached with regulatory participation

and have been made public knowledge. For PJM, where all major producers remained
                                                                                                          47


vertically integrated, we calculate the retail obligation by estimating the utilities’ hourly

distribution load and multiplying it by the fraction of retail demand that remained with

that incumbent utility. Monthly retail migration data are available for Pennsylvania, but

were relatively stable during the summer of 1999, so a single firm-level summer average

was used to calculate the percentage of customers retained. A utility’s share of market

demand was calculated by taking the ratio of the utility’s peak demand to the peak of the

overall PJM demand. This ratio was applied to all hours. We therefore assume that the

relative demand of utilities in the system is constant.38

       In New England, we apply the same methodology for the vertically integrated NU.

Wisvest had assumed responsibility for the retail demand of United Illuminating during

1999, so they are treated as eﬀectively integrated with each other. NEG was responsible

for the remaining retail demand of NEES, so their obligation is estimated as the hourly

demand in the NEES system multiplied by its percentage of retained customers. These

estimates of retail obligations as a fraction of system load are given in Table 1.


Data Sources for Marginal Cost and Residual Demand Functions

The California Market

       The California data sources are identical to those used in BBW. As in BBW, hourly

residual demand is derived by subtracting hourly production from imports and fringe pro-

ducers designated as must-take by the California ISO from total hourly demand. The
  38
    Hourly utility level demand data are available for some, but not all utilities in our study. A comparison
of our estimation method to the actual hourly demand of those utilities for which we do have data shows
that the estimation is reasonably accurate.
                                                                                                       48


hourly requirement for regulation—or automated generation control (AGC)—reserves is

added to this energy demand when calculating the demand met by modeled generation.

Thus, by identity, the hourly residual demand is the sum of the actual production from

modeled (non-must-take) generation plus the hourly requirement for AGC. The market

price used in the results is the unconstrained day-ahead price in the PX. Fuel and envi-

ronmental costs are the same as used in BBW.


The New England Market


       In the case of New England, public data from the Energy Information Administration

(EIA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) are utilized. Specifically, we

utilize generation level output data from the EPA’s Continuous Emissions Monitoring

System (CEMS) for the large thermal plants.39 Monthly hydro- and nuclear production is

taken from the EIA’s Form 906.40 Hydroproduction is distributed amongst hours within

a month using a peak-shaving heuristic in which the monthly energy from each firm is

applied to high demand hours subject to a unit’s maximum capacity limits.


       The residual demand is constructed by combining the aggregated hourly production of
  39
      The EPA reports gross thermal output. To obtain net energy production, the gross output of all
modeled plants was reduced to .95 times the reported gross output.
   40
      There were two large pump storage plants in the data set. The Northfield Mountain plant reported
its net and gross energy output. The Bear Swamp plant only reported gross production, which is negative
for a pump storage plant. We assumed an operating eﬃciency 66 percent for the Bear Swamp plant.
That is to say that net production is 2/3 of gross energy consumed. Roughly half of the Florida Power &
Light (FPL) hydrogeneration capacity failed to report production to the EIA in the summer of 1999. To
compensate, we adjusted total hydroproduction from the FPL plants according to the ratio of production
seen from those plants during 1998, for which full data are available. Plants that did report in 1999
comprised 56 percent of total production from all the plants. Total production was derived by applying
this same ratio to the production of reporting plants in 1999. In other words, the production of reporting
plants was multiplied by 1.8 to obtain an estimated total production from all FPL plants during 1999.
                                                                                       49


modeled generation taken from CEMS, the estimated hourly production from nuclear and

hydro units, and the hourly AGC reserve requirement in the ISO-NE system. By identity,

this is equivalent to subtracting the hourly production of imports and small thermal units

from total ISO-NE system demand. The market price used is the hourly ISO-NE system

Energy Clearing Price (ECP). Generation unit characteristics and fuel costs are taken from

the Platts POWERDAT dataset. The data sources on SO2 and NOx permit prices are

discussed below.


The PJM Market


   Like Mansur (2007), we assume that nuclear and hydroelectric generation will not

depend on the competitiveness of the market. In the summer of 1999, nuclear plants

operated near full capacity, so we assume constant production within a month. We use

data on monthly hydroelectric production from EIA Form 759 and hourly bid data from

PJM’s web site. Hydroelectric generation is bid into PJM diﬀerently than other sources

of generation, allowing us to approximate total hydroelectric hourly bids. They bid what

are called “zero-priced” bids. Note that these bids were not binding in 1999, so they may

be inconsistent with actual output. We assume that hourly hydroelectric generation varies

consistently with the scheduled “zero-priced” bids. Hourly production is scaled for each

firm so that total output matches the EIA monthly production. We measure the eﬃciency

rate of pumped storage units using EIA Form 759 data on monthly consumption and net

generation. A firm’s hydroelectric output equals the sum of run of river production and

the implied gross production of the pumped storage.
                                                                                          50


   The PJM web site, www.pjm.com, reports data on load and imports (net of exports).

Generation plant characteristics and fuel prices are the same as in Mansur (2007). We

use the average of two monthly SO2 price indices of permits from the brokerage firms

Cantor Fitzgerald and Fieldston. We use Cantor Fitzgerald data on NOx prices. The NOx

regulation ended in September and the price was approximately $1000 per ton at that

time. We use this average for the entire summer.


Piecewise Linear Approximation


We measure the expected output that would be generated if the unit attempts to produce,

which equals the unit’s capacity times 1 minus the forced outage factor. This is also

known as the derated capacity. For each market, we use the unit-level marginal cost and

derated capacity data to construct a firm’s marginal cost curve that varies daily. For

computational reasons, we approximate this step function with a monthly Piecewise linear

function with five segments. First, we calculate the monthly average marginal cost for

each unit and compare the monthly average marginal cost curves for the fossil units in

each of the three markets in June of 1999. In all three markets, marginal costs of the fossil

units are relatively flat, increasing from $20/MWh to $40/MWh over 90 percent of the

capacity. The cost curves then quickly increase for the remaining capacity.


   Then, for each firm and month, we sort units by marginal cost and calculate the

available operating capacity that is the total derated capacity with average marginal cost

less than or equal to price. For each firm and month, we determine the quintiles of average
                                                                                                       51


marginal cost. We then construct a Piecewise linear cost function with five segments for

each month and firm. The quantity produced for each segment is based on the available

operating capacity at each quintile. Marginal costs of these linear segments are simply

measured by connecting the successive quintiles of costs. The costs are tied to the lowest

and highest measured monthly average marginal costs for each firm and month.


       We do not explicitly represent scheduled maintenance activities. This is in part due

to the fact that maintenance scheduling can be a manifestation of the exercise of market

power and also because these data are not available for PJM and California. The omission

of maintenance schedules is unlikely to impact significantly our results for the summer

months, as these are high-demand periods when few units traditionally perform scheduled

maintenance. This is one reason why we limit our comparisons to summer months.


       In order to measure the goodness-of-fit of this approximation, we use the Piecewise

linear functions to predict the marginal cost of each unit and hour. This fitted marginal

cost is compared with the initial one by regressing the initial marginal cost on the fitted

value. In all three markets, the approximation captures most of the variance of the initial

cost data. In California, the coeﬃcient on the fitted marginal cost is 0.97 and the R2 is

0.93. In New England, the coeﬃcient on the fitted marginal cost is 1.00 and the R2 is

0.95. Finally, in PJM, the coeﬃcient on the fitted marginal cost is 0.98 and the R2 is 0.96.

The goodness-of-fit of the Piecewise linear approximations for the top quartile of marginal

costs are slightly worse.41
  41
     For the top quartile in California, the coeﬃcient is 0.93 (R2 is 0.85). In New England, the coeﬃcient
is 0.72 (R2 is 0.71). In PJM, the coeﬃcient is 0.80 (R2 is 0.86).
                                                                                                        52


Nuclear, Cogeneration, and Energy-Limited Resources


There are several categories of generation for which it is impractical to model explicitly

marginal production costs. Much of this energy is produced by conventional generation

sources, but there is also a substantial amount of production from energy-limited (pri-

marily hydroelectric) resources. Most of this generation is produced by firms considered

to be nonstrategic. Because the production decisions for firms controlling energy-limited

resources are quite diﬀerent from those controlling conventional resources, we treat the

two categories diﬀerently.


    Most production from these conventional nonmodeled sources is controlled by firms

considered to be nonstrategic. Because of this, we include the production from such

capacity in our estimates of the residual demand elasticity faced by the strategic firms

described below. The exception applies to the substantial nuclear capacity retained as

part of large portfolios in some PJM and New England firms.42 While nuclear production

is an extreme inframarginal resource, and unlikely to be strategically withheld from the

market for both economic and technical reasons, the substantial amount of inframarginal

production could likely have a significant impact on the amounts that nuclear firms may

choose to produce from the other plants in their portfolios. We therefore take the hourly
   42
      It should also be noted that a large amount of production in California comes from smaller generation
sources providing power under contract to the three utilities. In one sense, this generation can be thought
of as “controlled” by the utilities, as they have purchased it under contracts left over from the 1980s
and early 1990s. However these contracts are essentially “take-or-pay” contracts, and the utilities have
extremely limited influence over the quantity of such production. Because of this, we include production
from all “must-take” resources, as they are called in California, in our estimates of residual demand for
the California market.
                                                                                                   53


production from nuclear resources as given and apply that production quantity as a zero-

cost resource at the bottom of its owner’s cost function.


       Energy-limited units (i.e., hydroelectric units) present a diﬀerent challenge than other

units in the nonmodeled category since the concern is not over a change in output relative

to observed levels but rather a reallocation over time of the limited energy that is available.

The production cost of hydroelectric units does not reflect a fuel cost but rather a cost

associated with the lost opportunity of using the hydroelectric energy at some later time.

In the case of a hydroelectric firm that is exercising market power, this opportunity cost

would also include a component reflecting that firm’s ability to impact prices in diﬀerent

hours (Bushnell, 2003). Because the overall energy available is fixed, we do not consider

supply from these resources to be price-elastic in the conventional sense and did not include

fringe hydroproduction in our residual demand estimates. Rather, we take the amount of

hydro produced as given for each hour and apply that production to the cost function of

each firm.43




  43
   Specific data on hydroproduction are available for California. For the PJM and New England markets,
monthly hydroproduction was applied using the peak-shaving heuristic described above.
                                                                                                           54


Appendix B: Complementarity Formulation of Cournot-
Nash Equilibrium

We assume that the market demand Qt = at − b ln(pt ), or pt = exp((at − Qt )/b). While

the marginal cost curves of most electricity companies are not strictly linear, they can

be very closely approximated with a piecewise linear function. Let qiT h,j represent the

thermal production of type j from firm i with associated marginal cost c(qiT h,j ) = Kij +

cji qiT h,j where each thermal production type represents a diﬀerent segment along a piecewise
                                                                      T h,j
linear marginal cost curve. The production capacity of each segment, qi,max , is such that

Kij + cji qi,max
           T h,j
                 ≤ Kij+1 , thereby producing a nondecreasing marginal cost curve.

    The thermal capacity of fringe firms is aggregated into a single, competitive fringe

firm, with piecewise linear marginal production cost, where each segment j of thermal

production has a corresponding marginal cost of c(qfT h,j ) = Kfj + cjf qfT h,j .


Equilibrium Conditions

Under the assumptions of piecewise linear marginal costs and linear demand, the first-order

conditions presented in Section 2.A reduce to the following set of mixed linear complemen-

tarity conditions.




(10) For qitT h,j ,∀i 6= f, j, t :
                         µ                     ¶  a −S q 
                                 (qit − qitr )      t    l lt
                    0 ≥    1−                   e     bt
                                                              − Kij − cji qitT h,j − ψjit ⊥ qitT h ≥ 0 ;
                                      bt
                                                                                                        55


(11) For qfTth,j ,∀j, t      :
                                              S      
                                           at − l qlt
                      0 ≥            e         bt
                                                          − Kfj − cjf qfTth,j − ψjf t ⊥ qfTth,j ≥ 0 ;


      For ψjit ,∀i, j, t :           0 ≤ ψjit ⊥ qitT h,j ≤ qit,max
                                                            T h,j
                                                                   ;

where the symbol ⊥ indicates complementarity. The first condition (10) is the standard

condition equating marginal revenue to marginal cost for a Cournot producer. The second

condition, which applies to firms that take prices as given, equates price to marginal cost.

The total quantity, qit , produced by firm i at time t, includes the sum of production from

all thermal segments as well as any “must-run” production from hydro- or nuclear sources.

              must_run           P
      qit = qit              +        qitT h,j
                                 j



    Simultaneously solving for the dual and primal variables {qitT h,j , ψ jit } for all i, j produces

an equilibrium for a single period t. For n producers (including the fringe), J segments to

the thermal marginal cost curve, the above conditions for a single independent time period

t produce 2nJ complementarity conditions for the same number of variables. The system

of equations is therefore a “square” complementarity problem with a solution. Although

the profit function is not strictly concave, it can be shown that profits are pseudoconcave

and strictly concave at the point where the first-order condition (A1) is satisfied. The

solution to this system of equations, therefore, constitutes a Nash-Cournot equilibrium

where each firm has set output at a globally profit-maximizing level, given the output of

the other firms (Charles D. Kolstad and Lars Mathiesen, 1991).
                                                                                     56


   These complementarity conditions are modeled in AMPL, a mathematical program-

ming environment, and solved for using the PATH algorithm (Steven P. Dirkse and

Michael C. Ferris, 1995). We utilized the NEOS server for optimization, a multiinsti-

tution service centered around the Argonne National Laboratory that provides support

for a wide variety of optimization solvers (Joseph Czyzyk, Michael P. Mesnier, and Jorge

J. Moré, 1998). This server allows remote submission of optimization problems (see

http://neos.mcs.anl.gov/neos/).
                                          Figures and Tables

                                                  Price Path in All Markets
          250                       California, New England, and PJM Monthly Averages
                                                                                                  California Price
                                                                                                  New England Price
                200



                                                                                                  PJM Price
Prices in $/MWh
  100      150
          50
          0

                           8

                                    99


                                              9

                                                       00


                                                                 0

                                                                          01


                                                                                    1

                                                                                             02


                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                03


                                                                                                                          3
                       l9




                                          l9




                                                             l0




                                                                                l0




                                                                                                   l0




                                                                                                                      l0
                                n




                                                   n




                                                                         n




                                                                                         n




                                                                                                            n
                      Ju




                                         Ju




                                                            Ju




                                                                               Ju




                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                     Ju
                               Ja




                                                  Ja




                                                                     Ja




                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                           Ja
                      California price is the PX price before December, 2000, and the ISO price afterwards.




                                                            Figure 1:




                                                                     1
                                Prices by Quantity Demanded in California
                                     Actual, Competitive, and Cournot Price Kernels



         100
                                   Actual Price
                                   Actual Price Kernel
                75                 Cournot Price Kernel
                                   Competitive Price Kernel
Prices in $/MWh
       5025
         0




                     0.40                       0.60                 0.80                              1.00
                                     Ratio of Current Demand to Summer Peak Demand
                      We calculate nonparametric regressions using the k−Nearest Neighbor estimator.




                                                         Figure 2:




                                                               2
                              Prices by Quantity Demanded in New England
                                     Actual, Competitive, and Cournot Price Kernels



          1000
                                   Actual Price
                                   Actual Price Kernel
                750                Cournot Price Kernel
                                   Competitive Price Kernel
Prices in $/MWh
      500 250
          0




                       0.40                       0.60                0.80                             1.00
                                     Ratio of Current Demand to Summer Peak Demand
                      We calculate nonparametric regressions using the k−Nearest Neighbor estimator.




                                                         Figure 3:




                                                               3
                                   Prices by Quantity Demanded in PJM
                                    Actual, Competitive, and Cournot Price Kernels



         1000  750
 Prices in $/MWh
250    500
         0




                         0.40                     0.60                0.80                               1.00
                                    Ratio of Current Demand to Summer Peak Demand

                                     Actual Price                             Actual Price Kernel
                                     Cournot Price Kernel                     Competitive Price Kernel
                     We calculate nonparametric regressions using the k−Nearest Neighbor estimator.




                                                        Figure 4:




                                                              4
                               Vertical Arrangements in New England
                                 Actual, Competitive, and Cournot Price Kernels



        250
                               Actual Price
                               Actual Price Kernel
        200                    Cournot Price Kernel
                               Competitive Price Kernel
Prices in $/MWh
  100   50
        0  150




                   0.40                       0.60                0.80                             1.00
                                 Ratio of Current Demand to Summer Peak Demand
                  We calculate nonparametric regressions using the k−Nearest Neighbor estimator.




                                                     Figure 5:




                                                           5
                                       Vertical Arrangements in PJM
                                 Actual, Competitive, and Cournot Price Kernels



        500
                               Actual Price
                               Actual Price Kernel
        400                    Cournot Price Kernel
                               Competitive Price Kernel
Prices in $/MWh
  200   100
        0  300




                      0.40                     0.60                0.80                            1.00
                                 Ratio of Current Demand to Summer Peak Demand
                  We calculate nonparametric regressions using the k−Nearest Neighbor estimator.




                                                     Figure 6:




                                                           6
             Table 1—Firm Characteristics for Each Market: Summer 1999

Panel A: California Firm Characteristics.

                                                        Output   Output    Load    Load

Firm             Fossil   Water Nuclear         Other     Max     Share     Max    Share

PG&E               570     3,878     2,160       793     7,400     0.17   17,676    0.39

AES/Williams      3,921         -           -       -    3,921     0.09        -       -

Reliant           3,698         -           -       -    3,698     0.08        -       -

Duke              3,343         -           -       -    3,343     0.08        -       -

SCE                   -    1,164     2,150          -    3,314     0.08   19,122    0.42

Mirant            3,130         -           -       -    3,130     0.07        -       -

Dynegy/NRG        2,871         -           -       -    2,871     0.06        -       -

Other             6,617    5,620            -   4,267   16,504     0.37    9,059    0.20

Total           24,150    10,662     4,310      5,060   44,181            45,857



Panel B: New England Firm Characteristics.

                                                        Output   Output    Load    Load

Firm             Fossil   Water Nuclear         Other     Max     Share     Max    Share

Northeast         3,250    1,406     2,116       175     6,947     0.27    7,440    0.33

Util.

PG&E N.E.G.       2,736      915            -    165     3,816     0.15    4,440    0.20

Mirant            1,219         -           -     16     1,235     0.05        -       -

Sithe             1,810         -           -       -    1,810     0.07        -       -

FP&L Energy        965       365            -       -    1,330     0.05        -       -
Wisvest             979            -           -           -      979      0.04    1,200   0.05

Other              4,722      1,095       2,495     1,319        9,595     0.37    9,281   0.42

Total            15,681       3,781       4,611     1,675       25,712            22,361



Panel C: PJM Firm Characteristics.

                                                               Output    Output    Load    Load

Firm                   Fossil          Water Nuclear             Max      Share     Max    Share

Public Service

Elec.                      6,760           -       3,510       10,270      0.18    8,947    0.17

PECO                       3,682       1,274       4,534        9,490      0.17    4,551    0.09

GPU, Inc.                  7,478        454        1,513        9,445      0.17    7,602    0.15

PP&L Inc.                  6,102        148        2,304        8,554      0.15    5,120    0.10

Potomac Electric           6,507           -           -        6,507      0.11    5,378    0.10

Baltimore G&E              3,945           -       1,829        5,774      0.10    5,792    0.11

Delmarva P&L               2,458           -           -        2,458      0.04    3,103    0.06

Edison                     2,012           -           -        2,012      0.04        -       -

Atlantic City

Electric                   1,309           -           -        1,309      0.02    2,224    0.04

Other                       428         439            -         867       0.02    8,998    0.17

Total                 40,681           2,315   13,690          56,686             51,715
Table 2—Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of Fringe Supply from June to September,

                                            1999

Dependent variable is hourly fringe supply by market.



                                                                                     3
                          ln(Price)              Price             Price                 Price

California                 5392.4*              124.8*           1890.6*            5164.3*

                            (704.2)             (11.4)            (128.3)            (360.1)

                           [-0.672]           [-0.463]           [-0.642]           [-0.665]



New England                1391.1*               10.8*             308.5*           1006.5*

                            (162.3)                (3.2)           (53.4)            (148.2)

                           [-0.168]           [-0.048]           [-0.113]           [-0.135]



PJM                          860.7*                8.5*            220.2*                687.7*

                            (118.3)                (2.4)           (42.9)            (117.1)

                           [-0.027]           [-0.012]           [-0.023]           [-0.026]



Notes: This table presents 2SLS coefficients for various functional form specifications of

price. Each coefficient represents a separate regression. First we estimate 2SLS and use

the errors to correct for serial correlation by estimating an AR(1) coefficient (ρ). Then we

quasi-difference the data by calculating ∆x = xt – ρ xt-1 for all data. We re-estimate the

2SLS results using these quasi-differenced data. Robust standard errors are given in

parentheses. Significance is marked with (*) at the 5-percent level and (#) at the 10-
percent level. For each regression, we report in brackets the price elasticity of fringe

supply, at the sample averages of price and fringe supply. The regressions include fixed

effects for month of year, day of week, and hour of day. Weather variables for bordering

states are also included and modeled as quadratic functions for cooling degree days

(degrees daily mean below 65° F) and heating degree days (degrees daily mean above

65° F). In the first stages, we regress a given functional form specification of price on the

exogenous variables and an instrument of hourly load (MWh) in each market. The load

variables have the same functional form specification as price. For example, in the first

regression, we regress the log of price on the log of load.
       Table 3—Actual Prices and Estimates of Competitive and Cournot Prices

  Prices by Market and Time of Day (Peak and Off-Peak) During the Summer of 1999



Panel A: Peak Hours (11 am to 8 pm Weekdays).

Variable                     Mean      Median     Standard    Minimum     Maximum

                                                 Deviation

California Actual            43.15       34.52        27.0         17.2         225.0

 Competitive                 35.01       30.88        19.8         24.8         233.8

 Cournot                     45.17       40.19        21.0         25.2         233.8

New England Actual           55.05       33.16        82.9         17.7         753.2

 Competitive                 41.72       35.04        33.9         29.7         333.3

 Cournot                     54.63       40.44        52.0         26.5         454.7

 Cournot n.v.a.             280.47     145.86        298.3         50.3        1000.0

PJM Actual                   97.31       33.17       210.2         11.2         999.0

 Competitive                 35.08       33.27          9.1        20.8          75.6

 Cournot                     87.05       36.00       171.8         22.7        1000.0

 Cournot n.v.a.            1000.00    1000.00           0.0      1000.0        1000.0



Panel B: Off-Peak Hours.

Variable                     Mean      Median     Standard    Minimum     Maximum

                                                 Deviation

California Actual            23.90       24.99          9.9         1.0          96.9

 Competitive                 26.10       27.44          6.4         1.2          50.3
 Cournot               30.00     31.25         9.4       1.2       70.3

New England Actual     29.18     26.61        37.9       1.0     1000.0

 Competitive           31.73     31.14        11.9       4.7      356.9

 Cournot               32.63     30.54        18.7       4.7      481.3

 Cournot n.v.a.        86.16     55.82      105.4        4.7     1000.0

PJM Actual             23.84     18.10        30.9       0.1      677.5

 Competitive           25.42     23.78         6.3      16.4       52.7

 Cournot               32.73     30.00        16.6      15.5      316.7

 Cournot n.v.a.       900.57   1000.00      261.2       31.2     1000.0



Panel C: All Hours.

Variable               Mean    Median    Standard    Minimum   Maximum

                                         Deviation

California Actual      29.69     27.99        19.1       1.0      225.0

 Competitive           28.78     28.60        12.8       1.2      233.8

 Cournot               34.56     33.60        15.6       1.2      233.8

New England Actual     36.96     28.52        56.6       1.0     1000.0

 Competitive           34.73     32.06        21.6       4.7      356.9

 Cournot               39.24     31.95        34.0       4.7      481.3

 Cournot n.v.a.       144.56     67.28      206.0        4.7     1000.0

PJM Actual             45.92     20.99      122.8        0.1      999.0

 Competitive           28.32     26.80         8.5      16.4       75.6

 Cournot               49.06     31.27        98.4      15.5     1000.0
 Cournot n.v.a.              930.45     1000.00        223.1         31.2   1000.0



* Note: There are 2,928 hourly observations: 880 peak and 2,048 off-peak.

Cournot n.v.a. means no vertical arrangements.
                          Table 4—Stability of Vertical Structure

Panel A: Major California Firms

                        Base                  Percent     Change

                       Profits      AES       Reliant       Duke              Mirant      Dynegy

AES/Williams             43.3         5.8        -4.4           -3.0            -3.4        -3.6

Reliant                  46.3        -4.7         5.5           -2.9            -3.3        -3.6

Duke                     28.9        -5.0        -4.4           4.2             -3.4        -3.7

Mirant                   37.7        -4.9        -4.4           -3.0             5.0        -3.7

Dynegy/NRG               48.8        -4.4        -4.0           -2.8            -3.2         5.0



Panel B: Major New England Firms

                        Base                  Percent     Change

                       Profits       NU        PG&E        Mirant              Sithe       FP&L

Northeast Util.         332.5        -0.4        -0.1           -0.3            -0.5        -0.2

PG&E N.E.G.             122.6        -0.4        -0.3           -0.4            -0.8        -0.3

Mirant                   24.3        -0.3         0.0           0.5             -1.2        -0.5

Sithe                    22.6        -0.2         0.0           -0.5             0.6        -0.5

FP&L Energy              32.2        -0.2         0.0           -0.4            -1.0         0.3



Panel C: Major PJM Firms

                           Base             Percent Change

                         Profits   PSEG     PECO        GPU       PP&L         Potomac BG&E

Public Service Elec.      553.8      -1.7      -1.0      -2.3          -2.2        -0.9     -0.3
PECO                     577.7       -1.0      -0.4      -1.4     -1.3        -0.6     -0.2

GPU, Inc.                  522       -1.6      -0.9      -1.7     -2.1        -0.9     -0.3

PP&L Inc.                427.2       -1.4      -0.8      -2.0     -1.1        -0.8     -0.2

Potomac Electric         265.8       -2.2      -1.3      -3.1     -2.9        -1.2     -0.3

Baltimore G&E            399.4       -1.5      -0.8      -2.0     -1.9        -0.9     -0.2



Notes: Percent deviation from the base scenario profits, in millions of dollars earned by

each firm during the Summer of 1999.
   * Bushnell: University of California Energy Institute, Research Director, 2547 Chan-

ning Way, Berkeley, CA 94720-5180 (email: bushnell@haas.berkeley.edu). Mansur: Yale

School of Management and NBER, Associate Professor of Economics, 135 Prospect Street,

P.O. Box 208200, New Haven, CT 06520-8200 (email:          erin.mansur@yale.edu). Sar-

avia: University of California Energy Institute, Research Assistant, 2547 Channing Way,

Berkeley, CA 94720-5180. We thank Soledad Arellano, Severin Borenstein, Joe Bowring,

Judy Chevalier, Phil Haile, Stephen Holland, Jun Ishii, Wally Mullin, Steve Puller, Peter

Schott, Fiona Scott Morton, Raphael Thomadsen, Larry White, Matt White, Frank Wolak,

Catherine Wolfram, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Colby College,

International Industrial Organization Conference, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

New York University, University of California Energy Institute, University of California

at Irvine, University of Toulouse, Wesleyan University, and Yale University for helpful

comments.
