NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS OF INEFFICIENT TECHNOLOGY USE
Paul Beaudry
Patrick Francois
Working Paper 13500
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13500

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

We thank Ashok Kotwal and seminar participants at the UBC macroeconomic workshop for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Paul Beaudry and Patrick Francois. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Economics of Inefficient Technology Use
Paul Beaudry and Patrick Francois
NBER Working Paper No. 13500
October 2007
JEL No. O33
ABSTRACT
The adoption and diffusion of technological knowledge is generally regarded as a key element in a
country's economic success. However, as is the case with most types of information, the transfer of
technological knowledge is likely to be subject to adverse selection problems. In this paper we examine
whether asymmetric information regarding who knows how to run a new technology efficiently can
explain a set of observations regarding within and cross-country patterns of technology diffusion. In
particular, we show how the dynamics of adverse selection in the market for technological knowhow
can explain (1) why inefficient technology use may take over a market even when better practice is
available, (2) why widespread inefficient use may persist unless a critical mass of firms switch to best
practice, (3) why efficient adoption of new technologies is more likely to occur where the existing
technology is already productive, where wages are already relatively high, and where the new technology
is not too great an advance over the old one, and (4) why the international mobility of knowledgeable
individuals does not guarantee the diffusion of best practice technology across countries.

Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Room 997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca
Patrick Francois
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Room 997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z1
francois@interchange.ubc.ca

1

Introduction

It is widely accepted that differences in technological efficiency play an important role in
explaining cross country differences in economic performance. However, it is not the case
that all firms in poor countries are technologically backward in comparison to firms in rich
countries. Instead, poor countries are generally characterized by a very skewed distribution
of productivity across firms, with most having very low productivity, and a very small subset
following what may be called best practice.2 In contrast, rich countries are characterized by
a different distribution, with a higher proportion of firms operating close to best practice.
The fact that some firms in poor countries are capable of following best practice indicates
that it is institutionally possible to do so, and therefore barriers to diffusion of best practice
must, in part, be working within the country. Hence a key question for understanding crosscountry differences in income is understanding why information about best practice does not
always diffuse both within and across economies.
In this paper we examine the process of knowledge diffusion when technologies can be
run inefficiently or can be run according to best practice.3 Our maintained assumption is
that the knowledge required to run a technology efficiently has important tacit elements
which are best transmitted to others by having uninformed individuals working alongside
those with knowledge of best practice. In such a situation, rapid diffusion of technological
knowledge requires the uninformed to be matched with experts so that they can learn best
practice, open new firms, and further contribute to the spread of technological efficiency by
hiring other uninformed individuals. However, such a process of information transmission
will generally be hampered by the fact that trade in knowledge is subject to adverse selection.
In particular, uninformed individuals may be willing to accept lower wages to work alongside
an expert, but such behavior will incite non-experts to falsely claim expertise in order to
2
Banerjee and Duflo (2005) focus on this feature in their handbook survey. It is also evident in the cross
country data presented in Hseih and Klenow (2007) for example.
3
There are already theories that can explain why firms with differing, exogenously given, productivity
levels can coexist – Restuccia and Rogerson (2007), Hseih and Klenow (2007), Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and
Scarpetta (2006). Our focus is on a more primitive feature as we treat a firm’s productivity as its own choice.

2

hire them at these low wages. As uninformed individuals do not know best practice, it is
hard for them to identify which of those claiming to know and use best practice can actually
do so.
We study the resulting dynamic adverse selection problem to see whether it can shed
light on a series of issues.4 In particular, we examine whether adverse selection can explain
why best practice may not diffuse across firms within a country, leaving inefficient technology
use as the dominant mode of production. We also examine whether asymmetric information
about identity of knowledgeable individuals can explain why the diffusion of best practice
is achieved rapidly in some countries and not others. Finally, we explore why international
migration of workers with knowledge of best practice does not always guarantee convergence
across countries.5 Our main finding is that adverse selection in the transmission of best
practice knowledge offers a simple unified explanation to a set of puzzles associated with
cross-country technological outcomes.
The information transmission in our model regarding best practice is a form of “learning
by seeing”. It differs from learning by doing in that the latter implies increasing productivity
in the same task by repetition.6 Learning by seeing, in contrast, involves working as an
unskilled, and perhaps subordinate, worker to a skilled one, so that the skilled one’s practical
knowledge is transmitted.7 Much of the literature that has focused on this type of technology
4

There may be other impediments to such diffusion, for example, liquidity constraints on the part of
workers purchasing the knowledge may play a role. However, the widespread use of apprenticeships, and
apprenticeship like contracts in many LDCs, suggests that liquidity constraints, though often severe, can
be overcome. Despite this, the evidence regarding on-the-job skills transmission in LDCs, which we briefly
consider after the main results, suggests it is generally poorly done. We will argue that this is not because the
problem of knowledge diffusion is insurmountably difficult, but instead because it is an equilibrium outcome
for firms to choose to use technologies inefficiently. These choices then lead to the widespread propagation
of inefficient production methods.
5
This does not suggest that institutional impediments play no role, but instead that the relevant institutional shortcomings seem to affect the diffusion of knowledge within economies’ borders rather than
impediments to the knowledge crossing borders in the first place.
6
Chari and Hopenhayn (1991) provide a formal analysis of this type of knowledge transmission. Their
analysis is primarily concerned with the steady state outcome of such a process, and in marked contrast to the
present, explore an environment free from imperfections in transmission. Beaudry and Francois (2006) focus
more heavily on the dynamics of this process, but again do so in an environment free from imperfections.
7
As Fluitman (1992) notes, apprentices learn primarily by watching their master and being “corrected”when they err. We think that this is an important form of learning when it comes to the diffusion
of new technologies, as suggested by micro case studies of technological laggards in LDCs such as Mckinsey

3

diffusion has been interested in documenting the role of foreign firms in the process. This is
not our primary focus here, so initially we will not differentiate between the sources of the
knowledge. We shall instead assume that the blue-print of a technology is freely available,
but that only a small proportion of the domestic population has the knowledge required to
use the technology efficiently – in an engineering sense. Those that initially know how to run
a technology efficiently could be there because they were trained overseas, or are themselves
from overseas, in any case this is assumed to be given exogenously in the first part of our
analysis.8
We will demonstrate that adverse selection can cause the continued misuse of technology
to prevail as a steady state, and that escaping from such a situation may require a critical
mass of firms to use best practice. We will also show that efficient adoption of new technologies is more likely to occur in countries where the existing technology is already productive,
where wages are already relatively high, and where the new technology does not represent
too great an advance over the old one. We thus unearth an effect which makes poor and low
wage countries – i.e., those most in need of efficiently implementing productivity improving technologies – less able to do so than the rich, where new technologies represent only
incremental improvements on current best practice.
We also explain why so few skilled individuals wish to migrate from rich countries where
their skills are abundant and hence in low demand, to poor countries, where their skills are
scarce. A learning effect counteracts the usual neo-classical reason for migration toward skill
scarce economies. In countries that are in a low-skill steady state, where skill transmission
is not effective, the unskilled are unwilling to pay a high premium for the opportunity to
acquire skills. Consequently, the genuinely skilled, who would be able to effectively teach
are better off remaining in their skill abundant homeland.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section develops the basic model, and analyzes
both the steady states and the transitional dynamics associated with a situation where
Global Institute (2001).
8
Considerable empirical literature has documented that local firms and their managers often get their
start as employees of multinational firms (Katz 1987, Hobday 1995, Hall and Khan 2003). Also, in our earlier
paper we presented further evidence of such diffusion through worker training and relocation.

4

firms can choose between using a technology efficiently, by hiring experts, or inefficiently by
having non-experts fill the skilled positions. Section 3 extends the model by allowing for
a pre-existing inferior technology in which expertise is not needed, and which can also be
chosen as a means of production. The productivity of the pre-existing technology is meant
to capture the initial state of development of an economy, and this extension of the model
allows us to examine how initial conditions affect the diffusion of best practice. Section 4
considers the migration incentives induced by this process of skill formation, and Section 5
concludes.

2

Preferences and Technology

Consider an economy where the population (or labor force) is of constant size and normalized
to 1. At each instant a new cohort of size δ enters and a measure δ of workers dies; with
Rt
the property that −∞ δe−δ(t−s) ds = 1. Each individual is risk neutral and controls one unit
of labor per instant. Let ρ > 0 be the instantaneous discount rate. Discounted expected
lifetime utility for an individual is:
Z
U=

∞

c (t) e−(δ+ρ)t dt,

0

where c (t) denotes consumption. Time is continuous.
There is one good in the economy, and it can be produced in a technologically efficient
manner, or an inefficient manner. Whether the good is produced in an efficient manner depends on whether the manager is an expert (i.e. knows how to run the technology efficiently)
or a non-expert. If an expert (efficient) manager hires L workers, he produces F (1, L) units
of the good. If a non-expert manager hires L workers, he produces F (1 − θ, L) units of the
good.
Individuals in the economy can be of only two types, experts or non-experts. The experts
are individuals that can manage efficiently, and the mass of such individuals in the economy
is denoted by St . Non-experts are individuals that can either supply their labor to the market
in order to be hired as workers, or they can alternatively become inefficient managers. Let us
5

denote by φt the fraction of non-experts that choose to be inefficient managers. This implies
that the quantity of labor supplied to the market as workers is (1 − φt )(1 − St ).
In the above, we are assuming that all experts choose to work as managers. It would
be reasonable to allow experts to potentially supply their labor as workers if they found it
profitable. However, given the restrictions we will later introduce, allowing such a choice
would not change any of our results since experts would always choose to be managers.

2.1

Learning to become an expert

We will assume that at time 0, there are a set S0 > 0 of experts in the economy (which
could be extremely small) and that all subsequent born individuals are born as non-experts.
This set S0 can be thought of a set of individuals that have learned to use the technology
efficiently abroad, or who have learned to use the technology efficiently by investing in R&D.
Initially, we do do not want to focus on the determination of S0 , but instead we want to
ask whether with S0 > 0 the number of experts will grow and always push out inefficient
production when non-experts can learn from experts. In particular, we will assume that
non-experts can become experts by being hired and working alongside an expert manager.
The learning process is stochastic with the instantaneous rate of becoming an expert when
working with an expert being denoted Ω. Knowledge acquisition is assumed binary, that is,
a non-expert working alongside an expert for an instant dt either acquires proficiency with
probability Ωdt, or remains non-expert with probability 1 − Ωdt. In contrast, we assume
that an individual working as a non-expert manager, or an individual working alongside a
non-expert manager, has a zero instantaneous probability of becoming an expert: one must
work alongside an expert to learn.

2.2

Information Structure

The identity of an expert is assumed to be private information in the sense that an individual that becomes an expert recognizes this, but others cannot observe it.9 In principle,
9

Beaudry & Francois (2006) studies the case where being an expert is public knowledge.

6

non-experts would be willing to accept lower wages to work alongside experts versus working
for non-experts managers, however the asymmetry of information will make such separate
treatment impossible and therefore cause the wage paid to workers, denoted w, to be independent of worker type.10

11

This represents the main friction in the model, that is, we

assume that non-experts cannot readily identify experts because they do not know what
characterizes an expert. This leads to an adverse selection problem when deciding whether
to supply labor to a manager: both expert and non-expert managers will want to claim that
they are experts.

2.3

Market Structure

The output and labor markets are assumed to be perfectly competitive, and there is free
entry of managers. That is, any individual can decide at any moment to become a manager
and hire workers on the labor market at wage wt . The net income received by an expert
manager that hires an optimal amount of workers will be denoted RtE and the net income
obtained by an non-expert manager will be denoted RtI .

2.4

Managerial Decisions

The manager’s problem is a simple static problem corresponding to choosing the number of
workers to hire so as to maximize revenue, taking the price of labor as given. The problem
of an expert manager can be stated as follows, where LE
t represents the number of workers
hired by an expert manager,
10

We are also assuming that a worker does not observe other information about a manager, such as his
revenues or the number of employees, since such information could allow the worker to infer the managers
type. However, it is worth noting that the essence of our results is robust to allowing workers to observe
the number of employees hired by a manager. What is crucial to maintain pooling is that workers cannot
observe revenue of managers.
11
This pooling seems likely to be true in many situations. Since workers do not know the exact form of
training they need to receive to become experts, they do not know whether they are receiving training that
is of value, and which can therefore transform them into an expert manager, or whether they are learning
skills that do not correspond to best practice. If firms were able to commit to a training schedule and to
prove they had the knowledge required to train workers, then this would not be the case, and certainly this
is possible in some markets, perhaps through firm reputations. Nonetheless as we discuss after the main
results, there is considerable micro-level evidence from LDCs suggesting that this asymmetric problem is
ubiquitous in the labor market.

7

RtE = max F (1, LE ) − wt LE
LE

The optimization problem for the non-expert manager is identical except for the fact that
the technology under his control is less productive and hence his revenue RtI will be given by
RtI = (1 − θ)RtE

(3)

and LI , which denotes the number of workers hired by a non-expert manager, will satisfy12
LIt = (1 − θ)LE
t .

2.5

(4)

The decision problem of a non-expert

A non-expert must decide each period whether to simply offer his labor time to the market,
or whether to become a manager and hire workers. If he decides to be a manager, he makes
a flow revenue of RtI since he is a non-expert, and he remains a non-expert. In contrast, if
he decides to be a worker, he receives a wage wt and he has a chance to learn to become
an efficient manager. The instantaneous rate at which he becomes an expert is denoted
Ω̃, and this rate is determined in equilibrium depending on the likelihood that he is hired
by an expert manager or a non-expert. Since non-experts may be indifferent between the
two strategies, it is useful to allow them to follow mixed strategies. To this end, let φt
(0 ≤ φ ≤ 1) be the probability that a non-expert chooses to be a manager at time t. Here
we use the same notation to represent the probability that a non-expert chooses to become
a manager and the fraction of non-experts that become managers, since in equilibrium both
will be the same. To solve this decision problem, we use Bellman’s Principle of optimality.
With VtN representing the expected discounted utility associated with currently being a nonexpert, and VtE representing the expected discounted utility associated with being an expert,
Bellman’s principle implies that
12

If we assumed that workers could observe the number of workers hired by the firm, this would require
the non-expert manager set LI = LE if he desires to mimic an efficient manager. Nothing qualitatively
changes.

8

(δ + ρ)VtN =

max φt RtI + (1 − φt )wt + (1 − φt )Ω̃t (VtE − VtN ) + Vt˙N

φt ,0≤φt ≤1

The associated FOC is
(RtI − wt − Ω̃t (VtE − VtN )) = 0

if0 < φt < 1

(5a)

(RtI − wt − Ω̃t (VtE − VtN )) ≤ 0

ifφt = 0

(5b)

(RtI − wt − Ω̃t (VtE − VtN )) ≥ 0

ifφt = 1

(5c)

Which implies that when 0 < φ < 1, V N can be rewritten as
(δ + ρ)VtN = wt + Ω̃t (VtE − VtN ) + Vt˙N
Again using Bellman’s principle, VtE can be written as
(δ + ρ)VtE = RtE + V˙tE
Taking the difference between these two last equations, and denoting by λt the difference
between V E and V N (λt = VtE − VtN ), we get
(δ + ρ)λt = RtE − wt − Ω̃t λt + λ̇t
More generally, for φ either in the interior or at the boundraries, λt will need to satisfy
(δ + ρ)λt = RtE − φt RtI − (1 − φt )wt − (1 − φt )Ω̃t λt + λ̇t

(6)

where φt now represents the optimal values of φ. In addition to (6), λ will need to satisfy
the transversality condition (7).
lim exp−ρt λt = 0

t→∞

9

(7)

In the case where there is an interior solution (0 < φ < 1), the optimality condition
(5) has a simple interpretation. It states that the current loss between being a laborer
versus a manager must be compensated by the expected gain associated with potentially
working alongside an expert, since in this case the gain to becoming an expert is λt and the
probability is Ω̃. Equation (6) also has a simple interpretation, especially in a steady state
situation with λ̇ = 0. For example, when φ < 1 in the steady state (which will always be the
case), λ =

RE −w
,
δ+ρ+Ω̃

which implies that the value of being an expert is simply the actualized

difference between receiving RE and w, where the discount factor incorporates the fact that
a non-expert may become an expert.

2.6

Learning and accumulation dynamics

The dynamic equation governing evolution of experts depends on (1) the fraction of individuals that supply their work time to the labor market (1 − φt )(1 − St ), (2) the probability
S LE

t t
that a laborer is hired by an expert manager ( St LE +(1−S
I =
t )φt L
t

t

St
)
St +(1−St )φt (1−θ)

, and (3) the

rate at which one learns conditional on being hired to work alongside an expert (Ω). Hence,
the dynamics of S is given by
Ṡ = Ω̃t (1 − φt )(1 − St ) − δSt

(8)

where Ω̃t is given by
Ω̃t = Ω

2.7

S t LE
St
t
=Ω
E
I
St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ)
St Lt + (1 − St )φt Lt

(9)

Equilibrium

An Equilibrium for this economy is composed of a sequence of wages and managerial returns
I
{wt , RtI , RtE }, a sequence of allocations {LE
t , Lt , φt , St } and a learning rate Ω̃t , such that:

1) Given {wt , RtI , RtE }, and Ω̃t , φt solves the non-experts decision problem with respect
to occupational choice.
I
E
I
2) Given {wt }, LE
t and Lt solve the managers’ problems, with Rt and Rt being the

resulting revenues for the expert and non-expert manager respectively.
10

3) St and Ω̃t obey equations (8) and (9).
4) The market for workers clears, that is,
I
(1 − φt )(1 − St ) = St LE
t + (1 − St )φt Lt .

(10)

An equilibrium can be obtained by finding a solution to Equations (1) through (10).
Since this is a rather large system of equations, it is helpful to reduce its dimension. To this
end, it is helpful to recognize that in equilibrium wt and RtE satisfy the following marginal
product conditions:13
wt = F2 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt ))

(11)

RtE = F1 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt ))

(12)

Using (11), (12), we can rewrite Equations (5) and (6) as follows:

((1 − θ)F1 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt )) − F2 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt ))
− Ω̃t λt ) = 0

if0 < φt < 1

(13a)

((1 − θ)F1 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt )) − F2 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt ))
− Ω̃t λt ) ≤ 0

ifφt = 0

(13b)

((1 − θ)F1 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt )) − F2 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt ))
− Ω̃t λt ) ≥ 0
13

ifφt = 1

(13c)

To see for example that wt = F2 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt )), start with the fact that
wt = F2 (1 − θ, LIt ). Then use the market clearing condition (10), and equation (4), to solve LIt as a function
φt and St . Finally exploit the homogeneity of degree zero of the marginal production condition to write wt
as given in (11). Similar steps can be used to derive (12).

11

(δ + ρ)λt = F1 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt )) (1 − φt (1 − θ))
− (1 − φt )F2 (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt ))
− (1 − φt )Ω̃t λt + λ̇t

(14)

The problem of finding an equilibrium can now be reduced to finding paths for {λt , St , φt }
that satisfy equations (13), (14) and (8), when (9) is used to replace Ω̃t . To be part of an
equilibrium, this solution must in addition satisfy the transversality condition (7) and be
such that 0 ≤ φt ≤ 1. Since Equation (8) is an intra-temporal condition, it is helpful to
think of this equation as determining φt as a function of λt and St , and thereby noting that
the problem can be thought as a system of two first order differential equations in λt and St .
This observation will allow us to depict the equilibrium using a phase diagram in the λ-S
space, where this space can be divide into two regions: a first region where 0 < φ < 1, and
a second region where φ = 0.14 The equation that delimits the two regions in the λ-S space
is given by
λ=

(1 − θ)F1 (S, (1 − S)) − F2 (S, (1 − S))
Ω

(15)

(1−θ)F1 (S,(1−S))−F2 (S,(1−S))
represents points where 0 < φ
Ω
(1−θ)F1 (S,(1−S))−F2 (S,(1−S))
represents points where φ = 1.15
Ω

The region where λ <
the region where λ ≥

< 1, while

Before characterizing the dynamics of this system, let us begin by briefly examining what
happens if θ = 1. In this case, no one will choose to be an inefficient manager (φt = 0),
since it would produce no output, and therefore the dynamics for S are governed by Ṡ =
Ω(1 − St ) − δSt . This will result is S converging to

Ω
Ω+δ

regardless of the starting value for

S > 0. Since we want experts to prefer to be managers than to be workers along such a
path, we need to have RtE > wt . This is achieved by the following assumption:
14

In equilibrium, φ is never equal to 1 since this is incompatible with market clearing.
2 (S,(1−S))
In the λ − S region where λ < (1−θ)F1 (S,(1−S))−F
, equation (8) uniquely defines φ as a function
Ω
of S and λ.
15

12

Ω
δ
Ω
δ
Assumption (1) : F1 ( Ω+δ
, Ω+δ
) > F2 ( Ω+δ
, Ω+δ
)

The dynamics for this case can be easily represented in the λ − S space since the pair of
equations representing equilibrium dynamics reduces to
λ̇t = F1 (St , (1 − St )) − F2 (St , (1 − St )) − (Ω + δ + ρ)λt

Ṡ = Ω(1 − St ) − δSt
The phase diagram for this system is depicted in Figure 1. In this figure, we have
represented the λ̇ = 0 locus (which is downward sloping) and the Ṡ = locus (which is
vertical). As can be seen, the equilibrium path is a saddle that converges to the tuple
Ω
t ))−F2 (St ,(1−St ))
{ F1 (St ,(1−S(Ω+δ+ρ)
, Ω+δ
}.

The question we want to address is when, if ever, will the equilibrium of our economy
converge to this tuple when θ < 1, that is, will the equilibrium outcome converge to φ = 0
when running the technology using a non-expert manager produces positive output. If the
economy converges to this outcome, we will say that it converges to a situation of efficient
technology use. It should not be surprising that our economy with θ < 1 will not always
converge to a situation of efficient technology use, since it possible that using the technology
inefficiently is actually a first best outcome when θ is sufficiently small. In order to best
delimit the effect of adverse selection on equilibrium outcomes, it is appropriate to focus our
attention on the set of θs for which it would be socially optimal to converge to the efficient
use of technology. This set is given under Assumption 2.16
Assumption 2: θ > θ∗ , where θ∗ is defined by


Ω
δ
Ω
δ
ΩF1 Ω+δ
, Ω+δ
(δ + ρ) F2 Ω+δ
, Ω+δ
+
= max
F (S ∗ (1 − θ∗ ) , 1 − S ∗ ) .
∗
S
δ+ρ+Ω
δ+ρ+Ω
16

The first best outcome for this economy is defined as the sequence {ct , St , φt } that maximizes discounted
consumption subject to the resource constraint ct ≤ F (St + (1 − St )φt (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φt )) and the
accumulation equation for S. In Beaudry and Francois (2006), it is shown that Assumption 2 is necessary
and sufficient for the first best to converge to the efficient use of technology.

13

Assumption 2 shall be imposed throughout the remainder of the paper as it makes sense
to restrict analysis to situations where it would be optimal to converge to the efficient use
of technology in the absence of adverse selection.17
The first question we address is whether, with θ∗ < θ < 1, our economy will ever converge
to the efficient use of technology or whether adverse selection will always prevent the economy
from reaching this outcome. Proposition 1 provides a partial answer to this question.
Proposition 1: There exists a θ̄ > θ∗ , such that if 1 > θ > θ̄, then the equilibrium
outcome of the economy converges to the efficient use of technology. θ̄ is defined by θ̄ =
1−

F2 ( Ω
,1)
δ
.
F1 ( Ω
,1)
δ

Proposition 1 indicates that if a non-expert is sufficiently inefficient when acting as a
manager (θ sufficiently large), then the economy will converge to the efficient use of technology even if workers cannot distinguish an expert manager from whom they can learn, from
an inefficient one from whom they have nothing to learn. A typical example of the equilibrium dynamics for λ and S in this case is depicted in Figure 2. In this Figure, we have
superimposed the locus of points which delimit the region where φ = 0 and where φ > 0,
this line is denoted by φ = 0. Points below this line are points where φt > 0, while points
above the line are ones where φt = 0. An important element in this Figure, in contrast to
later cases we will cover, is that the φ = 0 line crosses the X axis at a value of S <

Ω
.
Ω+δ

It is

worth noting that once the system enters into the region where φt = 0, it exhibits dynamics
identical to that shown in Figure 1.
Proposition 1 indicates that the presence of private information regarding the identity
of managers is not fatal with respect to an economy progressively eliminating inefficient
production techniques with efficient production techniques. The main force driving this
result arises from the fact that when θ is sufficiently large, the incentive for a non-expert
to become a manager is quite low and therefore most workers are being hired by experts,
which allows them to learn and displace inefficient managers. An interesting aspect that can
17

In Beaudry and Francois (2006) it is shown that, in the absence of private information regarding the
identity of expert managers, the Walrasian equilibrium corresponds to the first best outcome as defined here.

14

be seen in Figure 2 is that, for low values of S, the value of becoming an expert generally
increases with the greater supply of experts. This reflects the fact that the adverse selection
problem is weakening as S increases and thereby allows experts to make higher revenues as
the supply of S increases.18
In light of Proposition 1, the natural follow up question is whether the absence of public
information on the quality of managers can stop the economy from converging to the efficient
use of technology, or whether such an informational asymmetry only affects transitional
dynamics. Proposition 2 provides a partial answer.
Proposition 2: There exists a θ, θ∗ < θ < θ̄, such that if θ∗ < θ < θ, then the unique
steady state equilibrium outcome is characterized by S = 0. Moreover, this steady state is
ρ+δ
locally stable. With θ being defined as θ = θ̄( Ω+ρ+δ
).

Proposition 2 indicates that the absence of symmetric information regarding the quality
of managers can stop the economy from using a technology inefficiently in the long run even if
it would be socially optimal to converge to efficient use. Proposition 2 even goes further and
indicates that the outcome in this case will be for best practice to be displaced completely
by inefficient use of the technology. This is a case of the “bad driving out the good”. The
reason for this result is that with θ not too large, there will be many non-experts deciding to
be managers and hence most workers will be hired by such managers, learn nothing, and not
help in the diffusion of knowledge required for efficient use. Instead some of these workers
will go on to become inefficient managers themselves and perpetuate inefficient technology
use. At the same time, the experts will only be hiring a small group of workers and this
group is not large enough to allow growth in S. The dynamics for λ and S in this case are
illustrated in Figure 3. As we can see from the figure, even if the economy starts with a
large set of experts, the adverse selection problem will cause this set to dwindle over time
and converge to zero.
Notice in Figure 3 that the φ = 0 line crosses the x-axis at a value for S that is greater
18

If the quality of managers where public information, the value of being a expert (λ) would never increase
as the result of an increase in the supply of experts.

15

that

Ω
.
δ+Ω

This leads to a different shape of the Ṡ = 0 curve, with a downward portion

appearing in the region where φ > 0. Moreover, at S =
φ = 0 line is above
with S =

Ω
δ+Ω

F1 ( Ω
,1)−F2 ( Ω
,1)
δ
δ
δ+ρ+Ω

Ω
,
δ+Ω

the value of λ implied by the

. It is this last characteristic which makes a steady state

impossible.

Propositions 1 and 2, cover cases where either θ is quite high or quite low, and it is
because of these extremes that we obtain very different results. The case that remains to be
studied is when θ is between these two extremes, that is, θ < θ < θ̄. Proposition 3 provides
a first step in this direction.
Proposition 3: For θ < θ < θ̄, there are three equilibrium steady states and these correh
i−1

Ω
δ
1
δ
spond to cases where either S = 0, S = Ω+δ
,
or S = S H , with S H = 1−µ
+
+
1
+
µ
Ω
1−θ
Ω


F2 ( Ω
,1
δ )
and µ = (δ+ρ)
. Moreover, if S0 is close to zero, then there is an equilib1
−
θ
−
θΩ
,1
F1 ( Ω
δ )
Ω
rium that converges to S = 0; and if S0 is close to Ω+δ
, then there is an equilibrium that
converges to S =

Ω
.
Ω+δ

Figure 4 illustrates the three steady states mentioned in the Proposition.19 As can be
seen in the Figure, in addition to the steady state equilibrium with efficient use of technology,
and the steady state equilibrium with no experts, there is a third steady state in which both
efficient and inefficient use co-exist. We will refer to this equilibrium as the heterogeneous
steady state equilibrium. In this third steady state, experts manage to hire a sufficient
number of workers so as to ensure their replacement, but they do not hire a sufficient number
to allow the number of experts to keep growing and take over the market. The Proposition
further indicates that the behavior of the economy in this case is related to initial conditions,
in that both the efficient use steady state and the inefficient use steady state are locally
(saddle path) stable. However, the proposition is silent on the nature of dynamics for S close
to the heterogeneous steady state equilibrium. The common configuration, whereby the two
stable steady states would be interspersed by an unstable one, does not necessarily hold
19

In comparison to Figure 3, note that the value of λ implied by the φ = 0 line at S =

smaller than

Ω
F1 ( Ω
δ ,1)−F1 ( δ ,1)

Ω+δ+ρ

.

16

Ω
Ω+δ

is positive but

here. A necessary condition for the heterogeneous steady state equilibrium to be unstable
is provided in the appendix. Via numerical simulations, we have not been able to find any
cases where this equilibrium is stable. Moreover, the following proposition presents a simple
sufficient condition, which is far stronger than necessary, under which the heterogeneous
equilibrium is unstable. We will persist with it from hereon.
Proposition 4: If ρ < Ω, then for θ < θ < θ̄, the steady state where S = S H (the
heterogeneous steady state) is locally unstable, and this equilibrium exhibits hysteresis.
Figure 4 depicts the equilibrium dynamics for the case where ρ < Ω and θ < θ < θ̄. The
configuration presented in this figure has a rather standard structure for a system with three
steady states. In this case, the long run properties of the economy depend on the starting
values. If the economy starts with S < S H , then it converges to the steady state where the
technology is used inefficiently everywhere (no-experts). In contrast, if the economy starts
with S > S H , then it converges to a situation where there is efficient use of the technology.
In other words, the economy exhibits hysteresis, with the outcome at S =

Ω
Ω+δ

being Pareto

superior to the case where S = 0.20 The economic forces causing hysteresis follow quite
naturally from our previous discussion. For low levels of S0 , many non-experts choose to
become managers and produce inefficiently. For this reason workers are not willing to accept
low wages for working alongside a (randomly assigned) manager since they know that they
are unlikely to become experts. Hence, experts do not hire enough workers to ensure their
replacement and the expert managers gradually disappear. In contrast, when S0 is high,
non-experts find it attractive to supply their time to the market, as opposed to becoming
inefficient managers, as they expect a substantial possibility of becoming expert. This allows
experts to hire sufficient laborers to favor replacement and growth of experts. Obviously,
this dependency of the long run equilibrium outcome on the initial level of S points to the
importance of understanding the determinants of S0 , and this will be discussed in a later
section. If we think of S0 as being a quantity that could be manipulable by policy, the
20

The Pareto superiority follows from Assumption 2.

17

results of Proposition 4 suggests that favoring a small amount S0 may not be sufficient to
generate the efficient use of a technology, it may instead be necessary to favor (subsidize) a
substantial entry of S0 into an economy if one wants to guarantee efficient use in the long
run.
Propositions 1 to 4 describe the equilibrium outcomes that arise in the presence of adverse
selection, while under Assumption 2, the efficient outcome is to have the economy converge
to the efficient use of technology in all these cases. A question that arises in such a situation
is whether the equilibrium outcomes described in these Propositions are second best in the
sense that a social planner facing the same asymmetry of information as individuals would
choose the same allocations. The answer to this question is no: the equilibrium outcomes
are not constrained socially efficient.21 In general, a social planner would want to favor
worker training by subsidizing employment in jobs paying wage wt . This would have the
effect of reducing the number of inefficient managers and thereby mitigating the adverse
selection problem. As a result the economy would move more quickly toward the efficient
use of technology.

2.8

Discussion

Dynamic processes resembling those suggested here seem to be at play in the recent Indian
industrial renewal. Two sectors which seem particularly good examples of the dynamics we
see in the model, with dramatically different implications, are the software and automotive
industries, as described by the McKinsey Global Institute (2001) report.
2.8.1

Automotives

McKinseys distinguish between post-liberalization firms in the Indian automotive industry
who were operating close to best-practice technology, and others who were well below developed country productivity levels. In some case, this is even though they used a relatively
21

Given the asymmetry of information, a social planner could still attain the first best by promising to
pay all individuals the same amount. In such a case, individuals would have no incentive to lie about there
identity thereby allowing the best to be implemented.

18

modern technology. The report identified a significant cause of productivity difference to be
organizational inefficiencies and poorly trained workers. Though the report comments on
the average low levels of education amongst workers in the sector, it was generally optimistic
about the potential of on-the-job learning to overcome this. According to McKinseys, most
of the skills required to mimic best-practice could be learned “on the job”, suggesting the
mechanisms studied here should come into play.
The plants investigated seemed to exhibit markedly different strategies that lined up well
with the taxonomy of strategies we have studied here. McKinseys identified a set of inefficient
firms making extensive use of “trainees”; young individuals with little experience. The report
identified the low skills and high turnover of such individuals as main contributors to the
observed low productivity levels. Though these trainees were, indeed, learning something,
the knowledge transmitted from these low productivity firms was itself of questionable value.
These plants thus seem to correspond with the firms using the “non-expert” strategy
in our model. At the same time, the report also notes that the newer high productivity
firms were simultaneously training workers (in best-practice methods) too. With regards to
these plants, the report’s authors were optimistic that the shortcomings identified would be
temporary given the continuously improving performance indicators in those firms. Their
plants seem to be engaged in active diffusion of new methods, with companies reporting that
Indian workers sent to Japan to learn methods (such as Kaizen circles) had begun to match
the productivity levels of their Japanese counterparts. The report notes, as we would expect
if transitioning to the expert steady state, that the low productivity of these newer firms
was likely to be a transient phenomenon, as they had not yet had sufficient time to train
enough of their workers in the new technology.22
22

Foreigness is often observable, and one may think that this is sufficient to allow foreign firms to be
able to overcome the asymmetric information problem that is key here. However, this would only be true
if foreign firms themselves have no incentive to misstate their training capabilities. But they too would
like to benefit from hiring workers at low wages with the promise of diffusing best practice methods, even
when they are not doing so. In fact, Stolovich and Ngoa-Nguele (2001) list as one of the 3 main reasons for
poor on-the-job training in developing countries the fact that foreign firms do not take the training of LDC
employees seriously, since they do not aim to use their plants in LDCs for highly skilled processes. Given
such concerns, the simple fact that a plant is a subsidiary of a foreign company does not ensure training in
cutting-edge methods will ensue.

19

According to McKinseys, the co-existence of both firm types made overall productivity
in the sector low. Our model would predict such co-existence in transition. It would also
suggest, however, uncertainty as to the steady state to which the industry is converging.
The uncertainty arises from the relative rates of skill acquisition in both firm types, and
reflects the possibility of hysteresis in the vicinity of the S H steady state. If the rate of
skill acquisition in the best practice firms is high enough, then these will eventually come to
dominate the industry. Overall productivity levels should converge on world best practice
as the economy is on a trajectory heading towards S =

Ω
.
Ω+δ

However, this is by no means

guaranteed. As the report suggests that the low productivity firms are also surviving and
perpetuating their low productivity methods and skills through their own “trainees” . In
contrast with the optimistic scenario, if the low productivity firms are relatively abundant,
the industry is on a trajectory heading towards the S = 0 steady state.
2.8.2

Software

The Indian software sector provides another example seeming to fit the model. However,
in light of our findings here it seems there is reason for more optimism. On p.528 of their
report, McKinsey’s notes that the sector is characterized by low productivity overall, with
this primarily due to the low cost of entry level programmers in India. Two important
reasons for the productivity differences between software companies and US best practice
were differences in organization and the relatively low ratio of senior resources to junior
programmers in India. Organizational efficiency was low because of high employee attrition
rates that were driven by the intense demand for software professionals in the expanding
industry.
This is consistent with what we should expect in an industry converging towards full use of
technology with experts – intensive training (a high ratio of unskilled workers working in the
new technology) and high turnover, as many leave and impart their skills learned elsewhere.
A factor suggesting that the Indian software industry is converging to an equilibrium like
S=

Ω
,
Ω+δ

is the pattern of wage changes. Consistent with the early stages of convergence to

20

this equilibrium in our model, the shadow value of expertise is rising even as more experts
are coming on line. The authors of the McKinsey’s report note (on p.536) that while average
wages grew by 25% for programmers overall, wages of senior programmers grew by 60%.
This is precisely as our model would predict for an industry converging on the steady-state
with expert use of the technology. It is, moreover, inconsistent with the path of convergence
to a S = 0 steady-state where technology is used inefficiently. It is also inconsistent with
what would be predicted in a standard neo-classical framework where a decline in returns
to expertise would be expected as expertise becomes more widespread.

3

The propagation of efficient technology use

In the previous section we analyzed a situation where an economy’s allocation problem was
restricted to a choice between running a technology in an efficient or inefficient manner. In
this setup, individuals did not have any alternative use of their time besides working with
this technology. In this section we extend our analysis to the case where individuals have
an additional choice in terms of an outside option w̄. We want to examine how such an
outside option interacts with the decision to run the technology in an efficient or inefficient
manner. There are at least two closely related reasons to look at this issue. First, we would
like to know whether being poor (or initially technologically behind), in terms of having a
lower outside option, favors the diffusion of efficient technology use or whether it hinders it.
A priori, it is not clear whether a low outside option would favor or hinder the spread of
efficient technology use, since a lower outside option makes the gains to adopting an efficient
technology greater, but it could also exacerbate the adverse selection problem. In this case
the outside option can be thought as representing the wage level associated with an older
technology in use in the economy, and we can think of the technology F (·) as being a newly
available technology which can be run in an inefficient or efficient manner.
Answering how the level of an outside option affects technology use will offer insight
regarding whether there is a complementarity aspect to efficiently using a technology, that
is, whether the spread of efficient technology use in one generation of technology, through
21

its effect on the reservation value of time, could help the spread of efficient use in another
generation. Alternatively, instead of different generations of technology, we can think of w̄
as representing the value of time in another industry. By examining how changes in w̄ affects
the diffusion of technological knowledge, we can potentially shed light on the issue of positive
or negative spillovers between sectors, whereby the efficient use of technology in one sector
could feedback on the diffusion process in another sector though the effect on reservation
wages.
To examine how the presence of an outside option affects the allocation process between
efficiently and inefficiently run firms, we need to add to the household’s problem an additional decision margin. Let φ1t represent the fraction of non-experts who decide to become
inefficient managers, and let φ2t represent the fraction of non-experts who choose the outside option w̄. This leaves (1 − φ1t − φ2t ) of non experts who supply their work time to
managers of the technology F (·) as workers. As before, the fraction φ1 and φ2 can also
be interpreted as the probabilities that govern a non-expert decision problem. Bellman’s
principle of optimality implies that the value of being a non-expert at time t will satisfy:
(δ + ρ)VtN = max φ1t RtI + (1 − φ1t − φ2t )wt + φ2t w̄ + (1 − φ1t − φ2t )Ω̃t (VtE − VtN ) + Vt˙N
φ1t ,φ2t

The associated FOCs are
(RtI − wt − Ω̃t λt ) = 0

if0 < φt < 1

(16a)

(RtI − wt − Ω̃t λt ) ≤ 0

ifφt = 0

(16b)

(RtI − wt − Ω̃t λt ) ≥ 0

ifφt = 1

(16c)

and
(w̄ − wt − Ω̃t λt )(1 − φ2t )φ2t = 0

(17)

Using the fact that the value function for an expert satisfies (δ + ρ)VtE = RtE + V̇tE , λ
will need to satisfy
22

(δ + ρ)λt = RtE − φ1t RtI − (1 − φ1t − φ2t )wt − φ2t w̄ − (1 − φ1t − φ2t )Ω̃t λt + λ̇t

(18)

where φ1t and φ2t are optimal values. Given that in equilibrium RtE = F1 (St + (1 − St )φ1t (1 −
θ), (1 − St )(1 − φ1t − φ2t ), 1), wt = F2 (St + (1 − St )φ1t (1 − θ), (1 − St )(1 − φ1t − φ2t )) and
that RtE = RtI (1 − θ), finding an equilibrium for the economy with an outside option can
be reduced to finding a tuple {St , φ1t , φ2t , λt }, with 1 < φit ≤ 1, that satisfy equations (16),
(17), (18), the transversality condition (7), the accumulation equation for St given by
Ṡ = Ω̃t (1 − φ1t − φ2t )(1 − St ) − δSt

(19)

t
where Ω̃t satisfies Ω̃t = Ω St +(1−SSt )φ
1t (1−θ)

In analyzing the case with an outside option, we again want to focus on a situation
where it would be socially optimal to converge toward using the technology F (·) efficiently,
with workers abandoning the outside option in favor of the new technology. In addition to
Assumption 2, the condition that guarantees that it would be socially desirable to converge
toward using F (·) in a efficient manner is given by Assumption 4.
Assumption 4:


Ω
Ω
δ
δ
ΩF1 Ω+δ
(δ + ρ) F2 Ω+δ
, Ω+δ
, Ω+δ
w̄ <
+
δ+ρ+Ω
δ+ρ+Ω
As in the case without an outside option, it can be shown that if θ ≥ θ̄, the economy
converges to the efficient use of the technology, and if θ ≤ θ then the economy converges to
a situation where S = 0. Note that in this case, θ̄ and θ take on the same values as in the
case without the outside option. The situation of interest is when θ < θ < θ̄, that is, how
does the outside option affect outcomes when there are three steady states. Proposition 5
highlights the role payed by the outside option in favoring convergence to the efficient use
of technology.

23

Proposition 5: If the outside option w̄ > ŵ = (1 − θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1) , then even if θ < θ < θ̄,
the economy will converge to the steady state equilibrium characterized by S =

Ω
,
Ω+δ

φ1t =

φ2t = 0, that is, the economy converges to the efficient use of the technology.
The interesting aspect of Proposition 5 is that it indicates that a higher outside option
favors convergence to the efficient use of technology. In particular, if θ < θ < θ̄, we saw in
Proposition 4 that for S0 not too large, the economy would converge to S = 0 if w̄ = 0.
In contrast, Proposition 5 indicates that this will not happen if w̄ is sufficiently high. The
reason that the outside option matters is that it affects φ1t . In particular, at the point where
a non-expert is indifferent between becoming a manager, exercising his outside option, or
supplying his time as a laborer, an increase in the outside option leads to a greater exit
of non-experts from management than from the supply of laborers, and hence this reduces
the adverse selection problem and allows experts to increase their hiring, thereby favoring
growth in efficient technology use. Mechanically, what the outside option is doing is that it is
eliminating the middle steady state depicted in Figure 4. A typical equilibrium configuration
for a case where w̄ ≥ ŵ is illustrated in Figure 5.
Proposition 6 offers a counterpart to Proposition 5 by showing that if the outside option is
not sufficiently high, then the economy will not converge to the efficient use of the technology.
Proposition 6: If w̄ < ŵ, θ < θ < θ̄, and S0 < S H , then the economy will not converge
to the efficient use of the technology.
Propositions 5 and 6 demonstrate that the diffusion of efficient technology use can depend
on the level of productivity in a backup or incumbent technology. In other words, these
proposition suggest a type of complementarity in efficient technology use. If a society uses
one technology efficiently, this is likely to favor the efficient use of another technology, either
in another sector or in the same sector later in time. This suggests that high wages favor
high productivity.
It is interesting to compare this implication of the model with the discussion in the
McKinsey’s report on Indian software. The authors of that report argue that “low wages is
24

the single largest factor contributing to low productivity...”(McKinseys 2001, p.11 Software
section). The mechanism they point to bears similiarity with that explored here. They argue
that this is because the low wages allow firms to enter using unskilled labor and survive even
though they are not following efficient practice. This is because the very low wage for
unskilled labor, makes these firms able to compete with the firms following the “efficient”
strategy.
When θ < θ̄, we now know that the economy may converge to a situation with S = 0 (that
is, a situation with no experts), either when w̄ < ŵ or when θ < θ. If this is the case, it is of
interest to know whether the final outcome involves non-experts working inefficiently with
the new technology F (·), or if instead everyone maintains the old technology captured by the
outside option w̄. The answer to this question depends on whether the outside option w̄ is
greater or less that maxφ F ((1−θ)φ, (1−φ)), that is, on whether the inefficiently managed new
technology is more or less productive that the outside option. If w̄ > maxφ F ((1−θ)φ, (1−φ)),
then in the absence of experts it is optimal to remain with the old technology and this will be
the equilibrium outcome. Conversely when w̄ < maxφ F ((1−θ)φ, (1−φ)), then with S = 0 it
is optimal to drop the outside option and produce inefficiently with the new technology, and
again this will be the equilibrium outcome. Hence the model implies that adverse selection in
the diffusion of management skills may be why an economy may not adopt a new technology
or may adopt it, but use it in an inefficient manner.

3.1

Discussion

Are our findings consistent with micro level accounts of the technology diffusion process in
LDCs? We argue here that such studies suggest that on-the-job skills acquisition plays a
major role in improving worker know-how, but is poorly done. This is particularly true in the
economies with lowest existing productivity, i.e., those of sub-Saharan Africa, as is consistent
with our findings above. Moreover, there is some evidence that precisely the impediments
arising from information asymmetries that are the focus of our theory seem to play a key
role in limiting diffusion.

25

Numerous large scale overviews attest to the important role played by skills that are
learned on the job: In an African context, Banji (2004); in East-Asian countries, (De Ferranti
et. Al. p.119); in Latin American countries (Batra (2002) quoted in De Ferranti et.Al.
p.120). More detailed micro-level studies corroborate these overviews. For example, Ciceon
(2001, p.122 of De Ferranti et. al) found, in a cross-industry sample of Mexican firms, that
about two thirds of training was provided in-house, which De Ferranti et. al. argue is in line
with numbers reported elsewhere in Latin America. Biggs Shah and Srivastava (1995), in
their comprehensive survey of modern enterprises in three sub-Saharan African economies,
found skills shortages to be a key impediment to productivity – with difficulties in workplace
transmission playing a prominent role. Stolovich and Ngoa-Nguele (2001) document both the
importance of on-the-job learning, and the numerous shortcomings in the way such learning
is implemented, especially in African countries. They report that: Instructors are poorly
trained; or not experienced. Funds and training materials are not contributed; Training
developers and managers rarely possess the competencies to fulfill their roles; Needs are rarely
systematically assessed; Training practices are loosely structured, or entirely unstructured,
and limited, short-term goals drive training activities.
In many countries apprenticeships correspond well with the implicit on-the-job learning
agreement we have studied here. In Africa, these are the dominant form of learning in
small and medium firms (Banji 2004). This relatively simple contract (training, in return
for reduced wages, and perhaps a fee) has the ability to overcome the liquidity constraints
workers may face in paying for skills. Apprenticeships are ubiquitous in small and medium
sized enterprises in much of Africa. For example, Adams and Johanson (2004 p.131) note
that in West Africa it is not uncommon to find more apprentices than regular wage employees
in informal firms. They have also increased in importance. Haan and Serriere (2002, 50,57
133) note that, in Senegal, apprenticeships grew from 40% of the informal sector workforce in
1980 to 70% in 1995. In Benin, the number of traditional apprenticeships increased by more
than 10% per year between 1979 and 1992. In Cameroon, apprenticeships have enrollments
of over 200,000 compared with total public training of 14,000. In Ghana 80 to 90% of all basic

26

skills training comes from traditional or informal apprenticeships (Atchoarena and Delluc
2001 p.225).
Almost all studies of workplace training in African countries emphasize the poor performance of firms on the in-house training dimension; see Stolovich and Ngoa-Nguele (2001,
p.461). What are the causes of this? For the smaller enterprises, which are the largest
employers, the problems seem to arise due to the informal and unstructured nature of the
traditional learning relationship. Adams and Johanson (p.135) suggest that the informal sector masters themselves lack awareness of the shortcomings in their own skills. Even where
they understand that in order to transmit better skills to their apprentices, they would have
to upgrade their own, they do not. The authors suggest that information symmetries play a
key role:
“Entrepreneurs (master craftsmen) who have upgraded their skills often are
not able to increase their prices in order to reflect their improved product. .....
The incentives for new training amongst suppliers is weak given the lack of demand and the risks involved in pioneering new training.” p.135
This, in words, seems to correspond with the consequences of the adverse selection problem we have studied. Since there is no way for the training provider to credibly signal the
quality of the skills he will impart, it is impossible to charge for it. Adams and Johanson
note that even when contracts can be written to ensure some training is provided, problems
arise with respect to quality:
“Even when such contracts can be devised, the informal manner in which
some skills are imparted on the job will make it difficult to monitor training and
enforce contracts, leaving the risk of underinvestment”
Since future wages will capitalize the value of the skills, the firms should be able to obtain
worker effort cheaply. But again, the impossibility of contracting seems to thwart these
efforts.
27

“.. difficulties in monitoring the training commitments in the enterprises and
the potential variance between wages paid in current and in future employment
can produce underinvestments in general skills training.” p.29.
Adams and Johanson explicitly blame this state of affairs on the lack of objective quantifiable characteristics in the training agreement:
“One of the major shortcomings of traditional apprenticeship training is the
lack of quality assurance, through either monitoring the process or applying objective end of training assessments.” p.146.
It is interesting to note that where governments have attempted to improve this process
of on-the-job related knowledge diffusion they have focused on overcoming the asymmetric
information problem that we study. Some governments have attempted to set up external
(to the firm) accreditation agencies. The National Vocation Training Institute in Ghana introduced competency based testing of apprentices. South Africa subsidized “Learnerships”,
structured workplace learning programs offering a qualification upon completion. Informal sector associations have also attempted upgrading by certifying skills and sometimes
providing supplementary training and common examinations in Ghana, Kenya, Cameroon,
Tanzania and Zimbabwe; see Adams and Johanson (p. 138)., and Haan and Serriere (p.151)
for similar initiatives in Senegal and Benin.
By means of subsidies to training, overseeing bodies have also attempted to improve the
content and form of training. Providers receive transfers for training in return for oversight
bodies establishing some degree of influence over content. Payroll levies of this form have
been used to reimburse employers for the costs of on-the-job training in many European
countries, and also in Singapore, Malaysia, Morocco, Turkey and a host of Latin American
countries. Others have used matching grants schemes towards similar ends: Japan, Korea,
Singapore, Germany, Holland and Scandinavia; see De Ferranti et. al. p.129 for details.
In summary, this literature suggests that on-the-job skills are an important accompaniment to the use of productive technologies, and to increasing productivity. But even though
28

such skills are valuable, the fact that they must be imparted in-house, in largely unstructured
and informal workplace settings, gives rise to transactions problems. As we have emphasized, a key problem seems to be that individuals willing to “buy” the skills are unsure as
to what they are buying, and cannot easily monitor the training transaction. Consequently,
individuals willing to “sell” the skills can have very weak incentives to deliver training of
quality. As our theoretical model has shown, this can lead economies to either implement
new technologies inefficiently, or to maintain in use old technologies that are less efficient
than freely available new ones. This is particularly evident in the poorest economies of subSaharan Africa where traditional means of workplace learning that correspond roughly to
apprenticeships, have been seen to entrench inefficient production methods.

4

Migration incentives and the determinants of S0

Up to now, we have treated S0 as exogenously given. In this section we briefly discuss the
implications of allowing S0 = 0, and consider the incentives for foreign experts to migrate,
and thereby potentially ignite a process of diffusion of technological knowhow. In particular,
consider the situation where the foreign expert is paid F1 ( Ωδ , 1) in his home country, that
is, he is assumed to come from an economy which has converged to the efficient use of the
technology. In this case, we will say that the foreign expert has an incentive to migrate if
the flow revenue he could make by temporarily reallocating is greater than F1 ( Ωδ , 1). In an
economy with S0 = 0, the allocation of non-experts between management and labor will
be such that RI = w. In other terms, the share of non experts, denoted φ(S0 =0) , working
as managers when S0 = 0 will be determined by (1 − θ)F1 (φ(S0 =0) (1 − θ), 1 − φ(S0 =0) ) =
F2 (φ(S0 =0) , 1 − φ(S0 =0) ). So a foreign expert will want to migrate if F1 (φ(S0 =0) (1 − θ), 1 −
φ(S0 =0) ) > F1 ( Ωδ , 1). Proposition 7 provides a characterization of when foreign experts would
want to migrate to an economy with no experts.
Proposition 7: An economy with S0 = 0 will be attractive to migration by foreign experts
if θ > θ̄, or if θ < θ ≤ θ̄ and w > ŵ. Otherwise, foreign experts would not have an incentive
29

to migrate.

23

The first aspect to note from Proposition 7 is that migration incentives arise precisely
when the economy will converge to efficient use when S0 > 0. Hence, for situations where θ >
θ̄ or where θ < θ ≤ θ̄ and w > ŵ, it is reasonable to expect the efficient use of technology to
prevail in the presence of unhindered international migration.24 In contrast, if neither of these
conditions are met, the inefficient use of the technology captured in previous propositions
appears as a robust equilibrium outcome. Accordingly, an economy stuck in a situation
with no experts would generally need some form of intervention if efficient technology use
is to diffuse. However, such an intervention would not necessarily need be in the form of
subsidies, but instead could take the form of a policy aimed primarily at coordinating the
inflow of a critical mass of experts. For example, if θ < θ ≤ θ̄, then for it to be attractive
to foreign experts to migrate, it must simply be the case that S > SH ; for in this situation
RE > F1 ( Ωδ , 1).25 If foreigners expect that there would be an inflow of a critical mass of
experts greater than S H , this would be sufficient to create the incentive for the inflow.

5

Conclusion

When skills that are key to successfully implementing technologies must be learned on-thejob, and when such learning cannot be fully contracted over, firms can profit by providing
poor training to their workers. The evidence suggests that, in many developing economies,
such training is indeed performed quite poorly, and this process of skill diffusion is weak. We
believe that this has the potential to explain some part of the persistently low productivity
observed in many less developed economies.
23

In this discussion we are assuming that foreign experts are not better that domestic experts in identifying
themselves as experts. These individuals have the same incentives to misstate, and the record of foreign
firms – as mentioned in footnote 21 – does not suggest they should be considered differently.
24
Instead of focusing on incentives for foreign experts to migrate, we could have focused on incentives for
domestic residents to go abroad to learn the relevant skills. However, in such a case we would still want
to ensure that such newly trained individuals have an incentive to return to their country of origin, which
corresponds to having incentives for foreign experts to migrate.
25
From the steady state conditions defining defining the heterogeneous steady state with S = SH , RE =
Ω
F1 ( δ , 1) and hence at S = S H foreign experts would be exactly indifferent between migrating of not.

30

The model here suggests that, in the presence of such problems, economies may not converge to full-scale implementation of more productive technologies, even where it is efficient
to do so. These economies may be subject to hysteresis, where small scale implementation
of efficient use will fail whereas larger scale use would have been successful. Technologies
will be more likely to be used efficiently where they do not represent too great a departure
over existing production methods. Paradoxically, economies with weak existing technologies,
where opportunity costs are low, will be those most likely to fail in implementing widespread
efficient technology use.
The model also provides an explanation for the relatively small observed flows of skilled
individuals from economies where their skills are abundant (rich countries) to economies
where their skills are scarce and needed (the poor). This works counter to the standard
neo-classical effect favoring scarcity. Here, skilled individuals reap equilibrium returns from
their role in diffusing knowledge to the unskilled. When the poor countries are also the ones
in which this process of knowledge diffusion is performed badly due to the presence of firms
who provide substandard training, the incentives for the skilled to migrate will be weak.
These considerations suggest remedial policies. Firstly, the level of on-the-job learning
undertaken in a decentralized economy will not, generally, correspond with the optimal
second best (information constrained) choices of a planner. There is a case for subsidizing
such on-the-job learning. Secondly, though it is an equilibrium for economies to perform
such training poorly, we show that it need not be an inherent characteristic of the country.
If proper training in modern technologies is widespread enough, or if such training can be
effectively subsidized (even for only a limited period) then an economy can move out of an
inefficient equilibrium to one in which it uses technologies at a par with world best practice.
The paper suggests a set of key institutions and policies that facilitate this process. These
would be those that help in increasing the diffusion of expertise relative to non-expert and
poorly structured training. These include organizations monitoring the content of instruction
on-the-job, subsidies to training in return for curriculum compliance, adjudication agencies
designed to test the competency of trainees, and organizations that monitor and accredit

31

those providing the training. The developing world sees many examples of such organizations
and institutions, and the present paper suggests that their relative successes may play a role
in understanding some part of cross-country productivity differences.

32

Appendix: Proofs.
The following 4 lemmas will be useful to prove Propositions 1-4. These lemmas will
describe properties of the steady states for for the dynamic system defined by equations (8),
(13),(14) and the transversality condition (7). A steady state for this system is a triplet
λ, S, φ that satisfies the following equations.
0 = Ω̃(1 − φ)(1 − S) − δS

(A1)

S + (1 − S)φt (1 − θ)
S + (1 − S)φ(1 − θ)
, 1) (1 − φ(1 − θ)) − (1 − φ)F2 (
, 1)
(1 − S)(1 − φ)
(1 − S)(1 − φ)
− (1 − φ)Ω̃λ
(A2)

(δ + ρ)λ = F1 (

(1−θ)F1 (

S + (1 − S)φ(1 − θ)
S + (1 − S)φ(1 − θ)
, 1)−F2 (
, 1) = Ω̃λ
(1 − S)(1 − φ)
(1 − S)(1 − φ)

(1 − θ)F1 (

S + (1 − S)φ(1 − θ)
S + (1 − S)φ(1 − θ)
, 1) − F2 (
, 1) ≤ Ω̃λ
(1 − S)(1 − φ)
(1 − S)(1 − φ)

if 0 < φ < 1

if φ = 0

(A3)

(A4)

where Ω̃ is given by
Ω̃ = Ω

S
S + (1 − S)φ(1 − θ)

0≤φ≤1

(A5)

(A6)

In the above, the case with φ = 1 is disregarded since it is never part of an equilibrium.
Lemma 1: The system of equation A1-A6 admits the solution φ = 0, S =
λ=

F1 ( Ω
,1)−F2 ( Ω
,1)
δ
δ
δ+Ω+ρ

Ω
δ+Ω

and

iff θ ≥ θ. This is the unique solution to the system with φ = 0. Moreover,

this solution is a locally (saddle path) stable steady state of the dynamic system defined by
Equations 8, 13, 14.
33

Ω
δ+ρ

Proof: With φ = 0, S =

and λ =

F1 ( Ω
,1)−F2 ( Ω
,1)
δ
δ
δ+Ω+ρ

is clearly the unique solution to

A1 and A2. Therefore, what needs to be checked is that A4 is satisfied at this solution.
Evaluating A4 at this solution gives a restriction on θ which corresponds exactly to the
condition θ ≥ θ.
The linearized dynamic equations for S and λ evaluated at this solution takes the form:
Ṡ = −(Ω + δ)(St − S ss )
F1 ( Ωδ , 1) − F2 ( Ωδ , 1)
λ̇ = −(
)(St − S ss ) + (δ + ρ + Ω)(λ − λss )
(1 − S ss )2
where S ss and λss represent the steady state values.
This system has one root greater than zero and one root smaller than zero, and hence it
is locally (saddle path) stable.
Lemma 2: The system of equations A1-A6 admits only one solution with S = 0,
moreover this solution is a steady state of the dynamic system given by equations 8, 13, 14.
If θ > θ̄, this steady state is unstable, if θ < θ̄ this steady state is locally (saddle path)
stable.
Proof: Let z be defined by (1−)F1 (z, 1) = F2 (z, 1). The S = 0, φ =
θF1 (

φ(1−θ)
,1)
1−φ

δ+ρ

z
,
z+1−θ

λ =

is the only solution of A1-A6 with S=0. The linearized dynamic equation for S

and λ, evaluated at this steady state, takes the form:
Ṡ = (

λ̇ = −(

Ω(1 − φss )
− δ)(St − S ss )
ss
φ (1 − θ)

φ
θF11 ( 1−φ
, 1)

(1 −

φss )2

)(St − S ss ) + (δ + ρ)(λ − λss )

If θ > θ̄, then this system has two roots greater than zero and therefore is unstable. If
θ < θ̄, then this system has one root greater than zero and one less than zero and hence the
dynamic system is locally (saddle path) stable.
34

Lemma 3: The system of equations A1, A2 A3 admits only one solution with S 6= 0. This
solution will have 0 < φ < 1 and 0 < S <

Ω
Ω+δ

iff θ < θ < θ̄.

Proof: With S 6= 0, the system of equations A1-A3 can be solved explicitly for the unique
solution. This solution is given by
S = SH =

φ=

1
1−µ
(
µ

1+

δ
(1−θ)+1
Ω

(1−θ)

δ
(1
Ω

λ=

) + (1 + Ωδ )

1
− θ)(1 +

µ
)
1−µ

θF1 ( Ωδ , 1)
δ+ρ

where
F2 ( Ωδ , 1)
δ+ρ
)(1 − θ −
)
µ=(
θΩ
F1 ( Ωδ , 1)
For this solution to be such that 0 < µ < 1 and 0 < S <

Ω
,
δ+Ω

it must be the case that

0 < µ < 1. The condition 0 < µ < 1 is equivalent to the condition θ < θ < θ̄.
Lemma 4: θ > θ∗
Proof: The definition of θ combined with the definition of θ∗ given in Assumption 2
implies
Ω
(1 − θ)F1 ( , 1) = max F (φ(1 − θ∗ ), 1 − φ)
φ
δ
At this maximum denoted by φ∗ necessarily: (1 − φ∗ )F1 (φ∗ (1 − θ∗ ), 1 − φ∗ ) = F2 (φ∗ (1 −
θ∗ ), 1 − φ∗ ). Also from the definition of θ, we know that
Ω
Ω
(1 − θ)F1 ( , 1) > F2 ( , 1)
δ
δ
It then follows from the above that:
Ω
F2 ( , 1) < F2 (φ∗ (1 − θ∗ ), 1 − φ∗ )
δ
35

and the converse is necessarily true for the first argument:
Ω
F1 ( , 1) > F1 (φ∗ (1 − θ∗ ), 1 − φ∗ )
δ
Multiplying both sides of this inequality by (1 − θ∗ ) and using the first equality above then
implies that
Ω
max F (φ(1 − θ∗ ), 1 − φ) < (1 − θ∗ )F1 ( , 1)
φ
δ
Combining the first and last equation, we get
θ > θ∗ .
Proof of Proposition 1: Lemma 1 implies that there is one steady state with S =

Ω
,
Ω+δ

and that this steady state is (saddle path) stable. Lemma 2 implies that there is one steady
state with S = 0, and this steady state is unstable. Finally, Lemma 3 implies that there are
no other steady states. Hence, Lemmas 1 2 and 3 imply that efficient technology use is the
only stable steady state outcome when θ > θ̄, and finally Lemma 4 implies that θ̄ > θ∗ since
θ̄ > θ.
Proof of Proposition 2: Lemmas 1 2 and 3 imply that S = 0 is the only steady state
when θ < θ. Moreover, Lemma 2 implies that this steady state in locally stable. Finally
Lemma 4 implies that θ > θ∗ .
Proof of Proposition 3: Lemmas 1 2 and 3 imply that there are three steady states to
the dynamic system when when θ < θ < θ̄. Moreover, Lemma 1 and Lemma 3 imply that
both the steady state with S = 0 and the one with S =

Ω
Ω+δ

are locally stable.

Proof of Proposition 4: Lemma 3 implies that the dynamic system defined by equations 8, 13a and 14 has a steady state with 0 < S <

Ω
Ω+δ

denoted S H , and 0 < φ < 1. The

dynamic system is:
λ̇ = (δ + ρ) λt − θF1 (ψt , 1)
S
Ṡ = Ω − δS,
ψ
36

where ψ =

S+(1−S)φ(1−θ)
,
(1−φ)(1−S)

and where φ is implicitly defined as a function of S and λ by


(1−θ)
Ωλ 1 + ψ
ΩλS
=
(1 − θ) F1 (ψt , 1) − F2 (ψt , 1) =
.
A7
(1 − θ) (1 − S) ψ
(1 − θ) (1−S) + 1
S

Furthermore, from Lemma 3, the steady heterogeneous steady state has ψ =



δ
1
δ
+
+
1
+
, where
Ω δ, S = 1/ 1−µ
µ
Ω
1−θ
Ω
!


F2 Ωδ , 1
δ+ρ

µ=
1−θ−
A8
θΩ
F1 Ωδ , 1
.
Linearizing this system yields:
  
 
(δ + ρ) − θF11 (ψ, 1) ψλ −θF11 ψS
λ
λ̇
=
.
S
ΩS
−
ψ
Ω
−
ψ
S
Ṡ
ψ2 λ
ψ2 S
The eigenvalues of this system are the γ solving:


ΩS
ΩS
2
γ − (δ + ρ) − θF11 ψλ − 2 ψS γ − (δ + ρ) 2 ψS = 0.
ψ
ψ
For this dynamic system to be unstable it is necessary and sufficient that the γ solving this
equation are both positive. This will be the case if the following two conditions hold:
ψS < 0
(δ + ρ) − θF11 ψλ −

ΩS
ψS > 0
ψ2

The terms ψλ , ψS above are determined by totally differentiating (A7):


λΩ (1 − θ)
(1 − θ) F11 (ψ, 1) − F12 (ψ, 1) +

  dψ
(1−S)
2
ψ 1 + S (1 − θ)


  


 
1−θ
Ω 1 + 1−θ
λΩ
1
+
ψ
ψ
(1 − θ) 
 dλ + 
= 

 dS.


2
S2
1 + (1−S)
(1 − θ)
1 + (1−S)
(1
−
θ)
S
S
Also, in this steady state:


(1 − S)
1 1−θ
(1 − θ) + 1 =
+1
S
µ
ψ
µ
δ
1
µθ
⇒
= +
−
.
S
Ω 1−θ 1−θ
37

A10

A9

Part A. ψS < 0
λΩ(1−θ)
(1−S)
ψ 2 (1+ S (1−θ))

at ψ = Ωδ .


(1−θ)
λΩ(1+ ψ )
d
d
This is equivalent to showing that dψ [(1 − θ) F1 (ψ, 1) − F2 (ψ, 1)] < dψ
at
(1−S)
It is necessary to show that (1 − θ) F11 (ψ, 1) − F12 (ψ, 1) < −

1+

S

(1−θ)

ψ = Ωδ .
We know that, at ψ =

S
1−S

<

Ω
,
δ

it must be the case that (1 − θ) F1 (ψ) − F2 (ψ) > λΩ.

This is necessary from 0 < φ < 1. We also know from (A7) that, at ψ = Ωδ (1 − θ) F1 (ψ, 1) −
(1−θ)
Ωλ(1+ ψ )
F2 (ψ, 1) =
, and from Lemma 3 that this is the only point at which these two
(1−S)
(1−θ)

S

+1

curves cross. It necessarily follows then that the curve (1 − θ) F1 (ψ, 1) − F2 (ψ, 1) crosses
(1−θ)
Ωλ(1+ ψ )
from above at ψ = Ωδ . That is, since they are both negatively sloped, that
(1−S)
(1−θ) S +1


(1−θ)
λΩ(1+ ψ )
d
d
, which implies that ψS < 0.
[(1 − θ) F1 (ψ, 1) − F2 (ψ, 1)] < dψ
(1−S)
dψ
1+

Part B (δ + ρ) − θF11 ψλ −

ΩS
ψ
ψ2 S

S

(1−θ)

>0

Using (A9) we re-write the relevant condition as:
 




1 1−θ
λΩ (1 − θ)
Ωµ λΩ (1 − θ)
1−θ
(δ + ρ)
+ 1 ((1 − θ) F11 − F21 ) +
+
.
< θF11 Ω 1 +
2
µ
ψ
ψ
ψ
S
ψ2
A sufficient condition for this is: (δ + ρ) µ1 (1 − θ) F11 − θF11 Ω < 0, and

Ωµ
S

> δ + ρ.

Since F11 < 0, the first condition becomes: (δ + ρ) µ1 (1 − θ) − θΩ > 0, which follows
immediately from the definition of µ in (A8).
Using (A10) the second condition rearranges to: µθ < 1 −

ρ
Ω

(1 − θ) . Since 0 < µ < 1 in

this steady state, then a sufficient condition for this to hold is that ρ < Ω.
Proofs for Section 3
The following 3 lemmas, which will mirror Lemmas 1-3, will be useful to prove Propositions 5 and 6. These lemmas will describe properties of the steady states for the dynamic
system defined by equations (16), (17),(18) and (19). A steady state for this system is a
tuple λ, S, φ1 , φ2 that satisfies the following equations.
0 = Ω̃(1 − φ1 − φ2 )(1 − S) − δS

(δ + ρ)λ = F1 (

(A11)

S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
, 1)(1 − φ1 (1 − θ)) − (1 − φ1 − φ2 )F2 (
, 1)
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )
38

− φ2 w̄ − (1 − φ1 φ2 )Ω̃λ

(A12)

(1−θ)F1 (

S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
, 1)−F2 (
, 1) = Ω̃λ
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )

if 0 < φ1 < 1

(1−θ)F1 (

S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
, 1)−F2 (
, 1) ≤ Ω̃λ
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )

if φ1 = 0

w̄ − F2 (

S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
, 1) = Ω̃λ
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )

w̄ − F2 (

S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)
, 1) ≤ Ω̃λ
(1 − S)(1 − φ1 − φ2 )
0 ≤ φ1 ≤ 1,

≤ φ2 ≤ 1,

0 ≤ φ1 + φ2 ≤ 1

if 0 < φ2 ≤ 1

if φ2 = 0

(A13)

(A14)

(A15)

(A16)

(A17)

(A18)

where Ω̃ is given by
Ω̃ = Ω

S
S + (1 − S)φ1 (1 − θ)

(A19)

In the above, the case with φ1 = 1 is disregarded since it is never part of an equilibrium.
1 (1−θ)
Also, when φ2 = 1, the definition of a the equilibrium implies that w̄ −F2 ( S+(1−S)φ
, 1) =
(1−S)(1−φ1 −φ2 )

Ω̃λ
Lemma 5: The system of equation A11-A19 admits the solution φ1 = 0, φ2 = 0, S =
and λ =

F1 ( Ω
,1)−F2 ( Ω
,1)
δ
δ
δ+Ω+ρ

Ω
δ+ρ

iff θ ≥ θ. This is the unique solution to the system with φ1 = φ2 = 0.

Moreover, this solution is a locally (saddle path) stable steady state of the dynamic system
defined by Equations (16),(17),(18) and (19).
Proof: Most of Lemma 5 follows directly from Lemma 1, execept that it must be verified
that Equation (A16) is satisfied, that is,
F1 ( Ωδ , 1) − F2 ( Ωδ , 1)
Ω
w̄ − F2 ( , 1) ≤ Ω
δ
δ+Ω+ρ
39

This condition corresponds to Assumption 4.
Lemma 6A: If w̄ < F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ), where z defined by F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ) = F2 (z, 1), then
the system of equations (A11)-(A19) admits a unique solution with S = 0, and this solution
takes the form φ1 =

z
,
1+z−θ

φ2 = 0, λ =

δ +ρ. Moreover, this solution is a locally (saddle path) stable steady state of the dynamic
system defined by Equations (16)-(19) if θ < θ̄, and it is an unstable steady state if θ > θ̄.
Proof: From Lemma 2, we know that this solution is the unique solution that satisfies
(A11)-(14), (A17) and (A19). The solution also satisfies (A16) since w̄ < F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ) =
F2 (z, 1). Hence it is the unique solution with S = 0 when w̄ < F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ). The fact that
this solution is a stable steady state of the dynamic system when θ < θ̄, and is an unstable
steady state when θ > θ̄, also follows from Lemma 2.
Lemma 6B: If w̄ > F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ), then the system of equations (A11)-(A19) admits a
unique solution with S = 0, and this solution takes the form φ1 = 0, φ2 = 1, λ =

θw̄
.26
(1−θ)(δ+ρ)

Moreover, this solution is a (saddle path) sable steady state of the dynamic system defined
by Equations (16)-(19) if w̄ < F1 ( Ωδ , 1)(1 − θ), otherwise it is unstable.
Proof:With S = 0 and w̄ 6= F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ), then (A13)-(A17) imply that either φ2 = 0
and 0 < φ1 or the converse φ1 = 0 and 0 < φ2 . If φ2 = 0, the the only potential solution
is that given in Lemma 2. But this solution only satisfies (A16) if w̄ < F1 (z, 1)(1 − θ),
hence the solution must have φ1 = 0 and φ2 = 1. λ =

θw̄
(1−θ)(δ+ρ)

is equivalent to stating

φ1 (1−θ)
that F1 ( (1−φ
= w̄), hence this solution satisfies (A11)-(A19). Note that in this solution
1 −φ2 )

Ω̃ 6= 0.
The linearized dynamics around this steady state, takes the form:
Ω
Ṡ = ( ) − δ(St − S ss )
Z̃
θ w̄
The solution is unique in terms on of φ1 and φ2 , but λ can vary between 0 and (1−θ)(δ+ρ)
and still
satisfy (A11)-(A19) by having (A14) hold with strict inequality. However these additional steady states
implies prices that do not satisfy the definition of qn equilibrium given in the text.
26

40

λ̇ = (δ + ρ)(λ − λss )
where Z̃ is defined by (1 − θ)F1 (Z̃, 1) = w̄.
When θ < θ̄ and w̄ < F1 ( Ωδ , 1)(1 − θ), then Z̃ > Ωδ , and the system has one root smaller
than zero and one root greater than zero. Otherwise, Z̃ < Ωδ , and both roots are positive.
Lemma 7: The system of Equations (A11)-(A19) admits a solution with 0 < S <

Ω
Ω+δ

iff θ < θ < θ̄. Moreover this solution is unique, and it is an unstable steady state of the
dynamic system given by Equations (16)-(19).
Proof: Let us begin by showing that when w̄ 6= (1 − θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1) then the only potential
configuration for a solution with 0 < S <
0<S<

Ω
,
Ω+δ

Ω
Ω+δ

is to have 0 < φ1 < 1, and φ2 = 0. With

Equation (A11) and (A18) imply that

S+(1−S)φ1 (1−θ)
(1−S)(1−φ1 −φ2 )

=

Ω
δ

and that φ2 < 1. If

φ1 = 0. Then from Equation (A12) and (A15), we know that (Ω+δ+ρ)λ = F1 ( Ωδ , 1)−F2 ( Ωδ , 1)
and that w̄(Ω + δ + ρ) = ΩF1 ( Ωδ , 1) + (δ + ρ)F2 ( Ωδ , 1), but this last condition is ruled out
by Assumption 4. Finally, from Equations (A13) and (A15), we see that 0 < φ1 < 0 and
0 < φ2 < 0 is only possible when w̄ =
(1-θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1), hence the only potential configuration is φ2 = 0 and 0 < φ1 < 1. Then
note that the only potential solution (A11)-(A13) with φ2 = 0 and 0 < S <

Ω
δ+Ω

is the one

described in Lemma 3. From Lemma 3, we know that this solution exits, is unique and will
satisfy (A16), only in the case where w̄ < (1 − θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1).
For the non-generic case where w̄ = (1 − θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1), the there is an indeterminacy in the
determination of φ1 and φ2 . Any combination of φ1 and φ2 that satisfy

S+(1−S)φ1 (1−θ)
(1−S)(1−φ1 −φ2 )

=

Ω
δ

can be part of a solution where S and λ remain defined as in Lemma 3.
The stability properties of this steady state follow from Proposition 4.
Proof of Proposition 5: Lemmas 5, 6 and 7 imply that efficient technology use is the
only stable steady state equilibrium when θ < θ < θ̄, and w̄ > (1 − θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1).

41

Proof of Proposition 6: From Lemmas 5, 6, and ,7, we know that under the conditions
of the proposition, there are three steady states. The steady state with S = 0 and S =

Ω
Ω+δ

are saddle path stable buy Lemmas 5 and 6, while the steady state with S between these
two values in unstable by Lemma 7.
Proof of Proposition 7: Migration to a country with S = will be attractive if
φ1 (1−θ)
) > F1 ( Ωδ ) when evaluated at S = 0. This is equivalent to the condition
F1 ( (1−φ
1 −φ2 )
φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

<

Ω
δ

when evaluated at S = 0. There are five cases to be considered.

Case 1) θ < θ̄ and w̄ < F1 (Z, 1).
Lemma 6A implies that

φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

evaluated at S = 0 is equal to Z defined by (1 −

θ)F1 (Z, 1) = F2 (Z, 1). From the definition of θ̄ we know that F2 ( Ωδ , 1) > (1 − θ)F1 ( Ωδ , 1).
Together these two conditions imply that Z >

Ω
δ

and hence that

φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

> Ωδ at S = 0.

Case 2) θ < θ̄and F1 (Z, 1) ≤ w̄ < F1 ( Ωδ , 1).
Lemma 6B implies that

φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

evaluated at S = 0is equal to Z̃defined by (1 −

θ)F1 (Z̃, 1) = w̄. This implies that F1 (Z̃, 1) < F1 ( Ωδ , 1)hence that

φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

> Ωδ at S = 0.

Case 3) θ < θ̄and w̄ ≥ F1 ( Ωδ , 1).
Lemma 6B implies that

φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

evaluated at S = 0is equal to Z̃defined by (1 −

θ)F1 (Z̃, 1) = w̄. This implies that F1 (Z̃, 1) ≤ F1 ( Ωδ , 1)hence that
Case 4) θ ≥ θ̄and F1 (Z, 1) < w̄.

42

φ1 (1−θ)
(1−φ1 −φ2 )

≤ Ωδ at S = 0.

References:
Adams, A.V. and R.K. Johanson (2004) Skills Development in Sub-Saharan Africa, World
Bank, Washington DC.
Atchoarena, D. and Delluc, A. (2001) Revisiting Technical and Vocational Education
in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Update on Trends, Innovations, and Challenges. International
Institute for Educational Planning: Paris.
Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo (2005) Growth theory through the lens of development economics, Handbook of Development Economics, Vol 1A Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp473-552.
Banji, O-O (2004) Learning, Knowledge and Skills: Implications for Firm Level Performance in African Industry, International Journal of Technology Management and Sustainable
Development, 3, 2, 91-113.
Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2006) Reallocation and Productivity
Growth: The FAQs, mimeo, University of Amsterdam.
Batra, G. (2002) Training, Technology and Firm Level Competitiveness – Evidence from
the World Business Environment Survey for Latin American and the Caribbean, World Bank
Backround Paper, Washington, D.C.
Beaudry, P. and P. Francois (2006) Managerial skill acquisition and the theory of economic development, NBER working paper W11451.
Biggs,T. M. Shah and P. Srivastava (1995) Technological Capabilities and Learning in
African Enterprises, World Bank Technical Paper 288.
Chari V.V. and H. Hopenhayn (1991) Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Diffusion
of New Technology, Journal of Political Economy, 99, 6, 1142-1165.
Ciceon (Centro de Investigation sobre Economia Laboral y Gestion del Conocimento)(2001)
The Incidence of Training in Mexico, World Bank Background Paper, Washington, D.C.
De Ferranti, D., G.E. Perry, I. Gill, J.L. Guasch, W.F. Maloney, Sanchez-Paramo, C. and
Schady N. (2003) Closing the Gap in Education and Technology, World Bank, Washington
DC.
Fluitman, F. (1992) Traditional Apprenticeship in West Africa: Recent Evidence and

43

Policy Options. Discussion Paper No. 34. Geneva: ILO.
Haan, H. C. and Serriere, N. (2002) Training for Work in the Informal Sector: Fresh
Evidence from West Africa, ILO Training Center, Turin.
Hall, B. H., and B. Khan. (2003) Adoption of New Technology. NBER working paper
9730.
Hobday, M. (1995) Innovation in East Asia: the challenge to Japan. Aldershot, London.
Hsieh, C-T and P. Klenow (2007) Relative prices and relative prosperity, American Economic Review, June.
Katz, J. M. (1987) Technology creation in Latin American manufacturing industries. St.
Martin’s Press, New York.
Lucas (1990) Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol 80 (2) pp. 92-96.
McKinsey Global Institute (2001) India: The Growth Imperative. Report, McKinsey
Global Institute.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2007) Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with
heterogeneous plants, NBER working paper W13018.
Stolovich, H.D and D. Ngoa-Nguele (2001) Structured On-the-job Training in Developing
Nations, Advances in Developing Human Resources, 3, 461-470.

44

Figure 1
ṡ=0

λ
6

6
6


λ̇ = 0


?
?

s

-

O

Figure 2
ṡ=0

λ
6

6

6
-



6
-

λ̇ = 0
λ̇ = 0
?



φ=0

?
-

O

1

s

Figure 3
ṡ=0

λ
6

6
6



λ̇ = 0


φ=0

?

-

O

s

Figure 4
λ
λ̇
6= 0

ṡ=0
6

6
-

6
-



6

-

λ̇ = 0

?


?

φ=0
-

O

s

2

Figure 5
λ
λ̇
6= 0

ṡ=0

6
-

6

6
-



?

λ̇ = 0


?

φ1 =0

φ2 =0
-

O

3

s

