                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     EXCHANGE HATES AND TAXES


                          John H. Makin



                      Working Paper No. 1350




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 198k




Support from the Suntory Foundation and the National Science
Foundation Grant No. SES—81l2687 is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBERtS research programs in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and Taxation and projects
in Government Budget and Productivity (World Econoiuy). Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper /11350
                                                           May 1984



                               Exchange Rates and Taxes

                                       ABSTRACT


         This paper demonstrates that different rates of taxation on interest

income and exchange gains may bias results of hypothesis testing regarding

critical aspects of exchange rate behavior. Two problems are discussed

specifically. First, it is shown that omission of tax considerations may

hi qç   fsf-c   nf t-h iirwnverd in   rcczi- niri   I-v -nndi i--Inn f-nyrti r-cnt-nr,t- nf

a "risk premium" hypothesis, conditional on exchange market efficiency.

Second it is shown that a rational solution for the exchange rate condi—

tions the relationship between an exchange rate and its determinants on

two regimes: (1) tax rates on interest income and foreign exchange gains

and losses at home and abroad and (2) the degree of foreign exchange

market intervention and sterilization of its effects on the monetary base

practiced by central banks.



Until August 30, 1984                     After September 1, 1984

John H. Nakin                             John H. Nakin, Director
Department of Economics, DK—30            Fiscal Policy Studies Program
University of Washington                  American Enterprise Institute
Seattle, WA 98195                         1150 Seventeenth St. N.W.
                                          Washington, DC. 20036
(206) 543—5945
                                           (202) 862—6414
                              IL. Introduction


     Empirical studies of   exchange rate behavior during the first decade of
'floating' have suggested that exchange rates behave much like 'prices' in

other asset markets: they are hard to 'explain' inside sample periods and

virtually impossible to predict outside sample periods. These problems

have been examined by, among others, Makin (1982) and by Meese and Rogoff

(1983). The former examines theoretical bases for exchange rate

forecasting difficulties and shows how policy—regime changes may be partly

responsible while the latter shows that the out—of—sample performance of a

broad class of empirical exchange rate models fails to yield any

improvement over the random walk model. Among the culprits suggested by

Meese and Rogoff to explain such dismal performance are money demand

specifications, volatile time—varying risk premiums, volatile long run real

exchange rates and poor measurement of inflationary expectations.

     This paper examines the possibility that another culprit may be

lurking in the structure that underlies exchange rate equations: tax

asymmetries. Specifically, the possibility exists, first examined by Levi

(1977), that different rates of taxation on interest income and exchange

gains may bias results of hypothesis testing regarding critical aspects of

exchange rate behavior.

     Two examples are considered in this paper. First, it is shown that

tests of the uncovered interest parity condition——nominal interest

differential equals the expected change in the exchange rate——may be biased

by omission of tax considerations. Such tests in turn carry important

implications for a number of theoretical and policy issues. Significant

deviations from uncovered interest parity are consistent with either

foreign exchange market inefficiency, time varying risk premiums or both.



                                        1
In turn the existence of varying risk premiums is consistent with imperfect

substitutability between assets denominated in different currencies and,

tbereby—--given risk aversion—---with a significant effect on exchange rates

of   sterilized intervention.1
      The second   implication of tax treatment of interest income and

exchange gains for empirical investigation of exchange rate behavior

concerns estimation of exchange rate equations per se. Inclusion of an

after—tax uncovered interest parity equation among the structural equations

employed to derive a reduced—form expression for the equilibrium exchange

rate embeds marginal tax rates——which may vary over tIme——In the

coefficients that measure the impact upon the exchange rate of actual and

expected changes in the variables that in turn determine the exchange rate.

Therefore, empirical specifications of exchange rate equations which assume

constant coefficients over some sample period may prove inadequate if

effective marginal tax rates on interest income and exchange gains vary

either absolutely or relative to each other over the sample period. Such

possible variation in tax rates is also suggestive of a reason for poor

post—sample performance of many exchange rate equations. In short a fiscal

version of the 'Lucas critique' may apply to exchange rate equations.

However, changes in effective marginal tax rates may be strictly exogenous

and thereby suggestive of a means to improve the fit of exchange rate

equations while testing an hypothesized impact from observable changes in

tax rates on estimated coefficients in an exchange rate equation.

      Viewed broadly, there are really two non—contradictory approaches to

improving the fit of exchange rate equations emerging from the extensive

and often innovative empirical investigations of exchange rate behavior

over the past decade.2 One is an 'omitted variables' approach related to

examination of residuals of uncovered interest parity, purchasing power


                                      2
parity and, possibly, money demand equations while the other—--related to

possible changes in tax rates as well as to possible changes in
intervention    and/or sterilization policy (see Makin (1981, 1982,    1983))——

amounts to an     hypothesis that reduced—form coefficients in exchange rate
equations   may vary over time. Empirical tests under both approaches may be

biased by failing to specify uncovered interest parity in after—tax terms.

This    paper identifies such possible biases and suggests some possible ways

to eliminate them.

        At the outset it should be made clear that the aim here is not to

suggest that 'taxes are everything' or that all prior work that ignores tax

considerations is invalid. That is not the case and, as we shall see, the

evidence that after—tax covered interest parity always differs from before—

tax covered interest parity is mixed at best. Rather the aim of this paper

is more modest:       to add to the list of possible reasons for poor empirical

performance of exchange rate equations the need to consider changes over

time in effective marginal tax rates on interest income and exchange gains.


               I.L!   Investiaations   of Uncovered Intere*t Parity


        Investigations like Loopesko (1983) of possible realized profits from

uncovered positions in assets denominated in different currencies jointly

test two hypotheses: efficiency of foreign exchange markets and absence of

a systematic risk premium or, equivalently, perfect substitutability among

assets denominated in different currencies. It is shown here that tests of

theefficiency—perfect substitutes (hereafter epa) joint hypothesis are
conditional on the ratio of marginal tax rates applied to foreign exchange
gains   versus ordinary income. If those rates differ, examination of before




                                            3
tax realized profits from uncovered positions will be biased toward

rejection of the eps joint hypothesis.

        First we derive an after—tax covered interest parity equation from

which can be derived an expression for realized profits on uncovered

positions that enables empirical testing of the eps joint hypothesis.

After—tax covered interest parity for country 1 investors is written as:3


(1)         (1 +         i1 t ) = (1   +
                                           i2 t )(l—t)(Ft/S)(l---rk)

where:                    nominal interest rate in country 1 at time t.
                 t

                     = nominal interest rate in country 2 at time t.

            Ft =      forward      exchange rate: currency 1 price of currency 2 at
                          time t for delivery at t+1 (one year ahead.)

            St            spot exchange rate at time t.

                     =   marginal      tax rate on interest income in country 1.

                     =   marginal      tax rate on exchange gains in country 1.


Taking logs of both sides of (1) and rearranging terms gives:


            i1 — i2 =
(2)
              t    t
where       ln(1+i)             i for small i.

                     =    log   of the forward rate at time t.

                     =    log   of the spot rate at time t.

                     (l_Tk) >
                     (1—i)
                                -Oasr
                                <
                                      -.
Equation (2) says simply that if the tax on exchange gains k is less than
the tax on interest income then the interest differential between countries

1 and 2 will exceed the exchange gain or loss. Obviously if                        c, the




                                                        4
considerations washout and before and after—tax covered interest parity

conditions are identical.

     In most cases, the tax on exchange gains is below the income tax rate.

See Peat, Marwick, Mitchell and Co. (1979) for a full discussion. For U.S.

corporations r1 = 0.30 for positions held more than 12 months while =

0.48 so that = 1.35.   In practice actual marginal income tax rates for

corporations as well as households may be lower and may vary considerably

over time. (See Tanzi (1982) and Estrella and Fuhrer (1983)).

     Traditionally, deviations from covered interest parity expressed by

equation (2) have been attributed to political risk and/or portfolio

balance considerations.4 Some current studies such as Ito (1983) have

found results for Japan—U.S. which are generally consistent with = 1.0

during the 1975—80 period and consistent with < 1.0 thereafter.       < 1.0

is consistent with r > rk, contrary to expectations based on the U.S. tax

code. In contrast, Katz (1983) reports results for the United States and

seven industrial countries which suggest    > 1.0 over the short run which

is another odd result, since usually short run exchange gains are taxed at

the same rate as interest income. Katz's results may be due partly to

measurement error since he in effect uses expected inflation differentials

to measure expected depreciation——thereby hypothesizing satisfaction of

purchasing power parity——and then estimates what amounts to an uncovered

interest parity equation. In sum, empirical evidence on    is inconclusive

at this stage and probably deserves closer examinaiton with prior

hypotheses modified to reflect the realities of the tax code.

    Equation (2) can be employed to derive an expression for realized

profits on uncovered 'foreign asset positions.   If assets denominated in

currencies 1 and 2 are imperfect substitutes, a risk premium, RPt0,



                                      5
separates the log of the forward rate,                 from the log of the expected

spot rate——at time t for time t+1, Se+l.


'3)         t_t S
           f —
                t+1 +RPe

Likewise, a forecast error, e, separates the actual spot rate at time t+1

from tS t+i•


(4)        S1 =

Substituting   from (3) and (4) into (2) gives:


               —
                   i2   =
                            [St+i—S   +   e       +


An expresion for pre—tax realized profits, xt (the residual of uncovered

interest parity) is given by subtracting the actual percent change in the

exchange rate from both sides of (5):


                                          =                     +
(6)       xt (i1—i2) — (S+i—S)                    (—1)(S+i—S)       [8t+RPet).

      It is clear from equation (6) that pre and after—tax realized profits

are identical only if l with tkr. Otherwise x is an upwardly biased

measure of realized profits or losses resulting in a bias toward rejection

of the eps joint hypothesis.5 Given 3 > 1 a rise in the spot rate creates

an upwardly biased measure of true (after—tax) profits while a fall in the

spot rate overstates true losses.


        III. Ipact of T*xes on Obaervablo Exchan*e Rate Behavior


      Here a rational expression for the equilibrium exchange rate is

derived from a simple structure including money demand equations in two

countries, purchasing power parity (which can be expanded to allow for

'real' exchange rate changes) and the after—tax, expanded uncovered


                                              6
 interest parity equation (5).        We also allow for official exchange market

 intervention and presence or absence of sterilization of effects of

 intervention on the monetary base.

      The solution to the two country model after some algebra and iterative

substitution is a parametizod expression for the exchange rate in ternis of:

relative (exogenous portions of) money supplies, relative real output, a

risk premium term that allows for consideration of assets that are

imperfect substitutes and 'real' exchange rate changes. Parameters which

determine the exchange rate in terms of current actual and expected future

values of these variables include the income and interest elasticities of

money demand in each country, degree of sterilization and intervention in

each country and——of particular significance for the investigation proposed

here——tax rates on interest income and foreign exchange gains and losses in

each country.

      The model can be estimated by specifying a time series process to

determine future expected behavior of exogenous variables, Following

BjJson (1979) and Makjn (1981, 1983), for example, one can define growth of

exogenous   variables      (log first differences) as an AR—i process.

      A basic solution employing the procedure just outlined, following

Makin (1981, 1983) is obtained as follows. Based on log linear money

demand equations in countries '1' and '2,' purchasing power parity and

deviations therefrom ('real' exchange rate changes) an expression for the

log of the spot exchange rate may be written as


(7)                    =      — ay + dz + b(i1 i2 ) + Ut

where:

             =   log   of spot exchange rate (currency 1 price of currency 2).



                                             7
            = log        of exogenous portion of monetary base in country 1 less

                    log of exogenous portion of monetary base in country 2.
            =      log   of real income in country 1 less log of real income in

                    country 2.

      z        =    vector   of disturbances which systematically cause deviations

                    from purchasing power parity.

      ih(h—l,Z) =        the nominal interest rate in country h.
      u             =   disturbance term in money demand equation for country 1
                         less same term for country 2.

      a             = income elastIcity of money demand In country 1 (set equal

                         to that in country 2).

      b                  interest elasticity of money demand in countries 1 and 2.

                         (Note:   'a' and 'b' can be allowed to differ across

                                  countries.)

                    = a term capturing sterilization and intervention behavior

                         in countries 1 and 2.      (4'O with free floating and no

                         intervention in foreign exchange markets.           See Makin

                         (1981) for full derivation.)


      Substituting from (4) and (5) into (7) for i1 —

terms gives:
                                                                 i   and rearranging




                =                 e
(8)                                   +
                                                    (det_aZt+dzt_bRPet+ut)


Substituting iteratively to solve for se+1 equation (8) becomes:

                =
                    1+b-              1+b-      tt+j



                                                8
                     ah3    j            e
                                               +       db     j       e

               jO
                                +
                                     t t+j             1+b-       t       t+1


           +
               • +- RP
               J=o
                     b232            e
                                         t+1


where                           --   0 as j -÷
            1+b—

     Equation (5) describes the spot exchange rate as being determined——in
a manner set by parameters and tax rates——by current actual and expected

future values of the set of exogenous variables, de, , z and RP° defined

above.

     A primary conclusion from the discussion of exchange rate
determination summarized in equation (5) is the implied effect on the

exchange rate of current and prospective policies regarding intervention,

sterilization and tax rates applied to interest earnings and to foreign

exchange gains and losses. Announcement of expected future changes in such

policies will change the current equilibrium spot rate in the forward—

looking foreign exchange market even if current and prospective values

exognous variables remain unchanged.

     Of   particular interest in view of the forward—looking nature of the
asset markets    in which exchange rates are determined is the exact nature of

the impact upon exchange rates of changes in                      =                         The
                                                                          [(l—rk)/(l—r)l.
essential point emerges from examination of equation (8). As                           rises——

given >1——the term describing the impact on the exchange rate of current,

actual changes in exogenous variables [l/(l+b—4)} unambiguously falls in

value while the current impact on the exchange rate of expected future

shocks rises.6 In other words, tax policy which taxes interest income at

higher rates than it does exchange gains may result in more volatile


                                                   9
exchange rates, particularly if changes in expectations about future values

of exchange rate determinants are larger than changes in current actual

values of the same determinants. Amplification or dampening by tax policy

of exchange rate effects of changes in the more volatile——expected future——

portion of exchange rate determinants may occur over time as effective

marginal tax rates vary over time or across countries as tax treatment of

interest income versus exchange gains varies, from country to country.7

     A corollary to these propositions about the effects of tax rate

changes on exchange rate volatility concerns a serious implied problem for

estimation of exchange rate equations. In particular, sample periods that

span changes in tax rates and/or changes in intervention or sterilization

policies will produce poor fits since the true values of coefficients

attached to exogenous variables will vary with such changes. Estimation

procedures may be called for that allow coefficients in the exchange rate

equation to vary over time. A time series on effective marginal tax rates

amounts, in this context, to a time series on 'regime changes' required to

identify an equation incorporating rational expectations. It would also be

necessary to control for changes in intervention and/or sterilization

policy under this procedure.


              J      Preliminary Tests: Variable Coefficients in
                        Estimated Excbane Rate Equations


     The   model derived in Section III suggests that coefficients describing

the impact on the exchange rate of the explanatory variables in equation

(9) will vary     over time   as tax rates and steril ization/intervention p01 icy

changes    over   time. It will therefore be necessary to obtain detailing

information on effective marginal tax rates over time as well as on any

major changes in sterilization/intervention policy at major central banks


                                          10
since the advent of 'floating' in March of 1973. In particular, it would

be necessary first to identify sample periods during which, say, American

and 'foreign' sterilization/intervention policy remained reasonably stable

as a background against which to test prior hypotheses about the effects of

tax rate changes.

        The task of identifying episodes of stable sterilization and

intervention policy may be eased somewhat by the efforts of the Working

Group on Exchange Market Intervention established at Versailles in June,

1982.     Since early 1981 American policy has been particularly stable with

virtually no intervention undertaken except, apparently, after the

President was shot and on a very limited basis after mid—1983. Under such

circumstances it is only necessary to identify sharp changes in
sterilization/intervention policy by other major central banks in order to

control for 'non—tax' sources of regime changes.       If, for example, it were

possible to document a period of stable sterilization/intervention policy

by Japan or Germany that coincided with a period of little American

official intervention in exchange markets, the conditions necessary to test

hypotheses about the exchange—rate—equation—coefficient effects of tax rate

changes would be largely met.

        With   sample period selection to control for sterilization/intervention
policy changes completed, examination of the effect of tax rate changes
requires time series on effective marginal tax rates on interest income and
exchange gains in countries on both sides of a bilateral exchange market:
in particular, American and 'other' country tax rates in order to examine

tax effects on the dollar price of major currencies. Most desirable would

be a country where both interest income and exchange gains are taxed at the

same rate and where a relatively straightforward tax code results——barring



                                         11
exogenously legislated changes which could be identified and allowed for——

in fairly constant effective marginal tax rates over time. Japan is such a

country, and it possesses the added attraction of focussing attention on

the key yen—dollar rate which some feel has behaved strangely at times.

Germany may also fulfill these objectives and conditions.

     Controlling for official intervention and non—United States tax

policy, it then becomes possible to examine the impact on exchange rate

behavior——by way of effects on the coefficients specified in equation (9)——

of changes over time in effective, American, marginal, tax rates on

interest income. This is made possible by two factors. Tax rates on

realized exchange gains for positions held over a year have been constant

at 30 percent.8 Specific time series oneffective marginal tax rates on

interest income have been calculated by Tanzi (1982). Taken together these

are sufficient to identify prior hypotheses on the movement over time of

coefficients in equation (9).

     Preliminary results of estimating equation (9) for the yen—dollar

exchange rate fail to contradict the hypothesis that the true value of its

coefficients ought to vary over time. It is too soon, however, to say

anything definite about the exact manner in which the coefficients vary

over time or whether such variation is consistent with that suggested by

the actual behavior over time of effective U.S. marginal tax rates.

Further examination of the yen—dollar rate and the DM—dollar rate is

underway.


                                Concluding Remarks


     Beyond the intrinsically difficult nature of problems associated with

estimating equations determining asset prices in forward—looking markets,

many barriers to successful identification of reasonable stable exchange


                                       12
rate equations remain. All of the unresolved questions surrounding a

formidable list of problems——specification of money demand equations, real

exchange rate movements, time—varying risk premia, market efficiency——

remain to plague exchange rate equations even before addressing problems

tied to regime changes linked to changes in intervention policy or

effective marginal tax rates. Enumeration of these difficulties amounts to

no more than another way of saying that the dismal performance of exchange

rate equations whch leave some or all of such problems nnaddressed——ably

documented by Meese and Rogoff (1983)——sbould come as no surprise.

     Overall, the discussion presented here suggests that a good deal of

'work remains to be done on estimating exchange rate equations that allow

for in—sample structural shifts. Changes over time in effective tax

rates——evident from time series data for such rates in the tT.S.—---suggest

that allowing for such changes may improve the fit of exchange rate

equations. Encouraging results of such tests for interest rate behavior

have already appeared in Peek and Wilcox (1983).




                                     13
                                   FOOThOTES


1.   See Henderson et al. (1984) for a discussion of evidence on imperfect
     substitutability. On    efficiency and related hypotheses see Hansen and

     Hodrick (1980).

2.   For an excellent 'review of the troops' see the volumes edited by

     Frenkel (1983) and Hawkins, Levich and Wihlborg (1982).

3.   If country 2 has an asymmetric tax treatment of exchange gains and

     interest income then equation (1) may hold without satisfying covered

     interest parity for country 2. This case is examined for Canada and

     the United States by Levi (1977).          Such asymmetry raises the

     possibility of simultaneous two way capital flows and also raises an

     interesting question of bow long run equilibrium is achieved. For now

     we assume that countries 1 and 2 have symmetric tax systems so that

     equation (1) describes covered interest parity for both or,
     alternatively that country 1 is so large relative to country 2 that it

     dominates markets sufficiently to preclude significant deviations from

     equation (1).

4.   See Aliber (1973, 1975) and Frenkel and Levich (1975).

5.   Loopesko (1983)reports strong rejection of the eps joint hypothesis

     based on tests using pre—tax daily data for six currencies against the

     11.8. dollar drawn from the 1975—81 sample period. Loopesko regresses

     pre—tax realized profits on lagged realized profits, cumulated

     intervention——no distinction appears to have been made between

     sterilized and unsterilized intervention—--anI lagged spot rates. If

     interventionwere non—sterilized an impact on exchange rates would

     result even given perfect substitutability among assets denominated in

     different currencies.


                                       14
6.   [he impact of a rise in       on sensitivity of exchange rates to expected

     future shocks is most easily seen by simply notinq that if           8>1 the

     effect o+ ta'. considerations, in effect, to raise b in [b/ (1+b— ) 3.

     Ignoring the       term d/db[b/(1+b)] =   (1i(1+b)2]   which is unambiguously

     positie.       Effects of tax asymmetries Ofl exchange rate behavior are

     more fully discussed in kon (1984).

7.   Large economies which tax long run realized exchange gains at capital

     gains rates below income tax rates include the United States, Canada

     and   Sreat 8ritain.      Most other countries tax exchange qains like

     interest earnings,       as ordinary income.           For more detail    see

     International Monetary Fund Working Paper FD/83/3 and SM/83/113.

8.   Since during the postwar period, effective marginal tax rates on

     ordinary income——applicable to realized short term exchange gains——

     have exceeded 30 percent in the United States, it seems likely that

     most 4irms would avoid realizing short term gains.           The result would

     be to make the constant 30 percent rate that most typically applied to

     exchange gai ns.




                                       15
                                           REFERENCES


Alibor, R.L.       (1973).         The Interest Parity Theorem: A Reinterpretation,'

     Journal of Political Economy (November/December 1973): 1451—59.

       1975).          Exchange Risk           Pol i ti cal Risk and In'iestor Demand   for
     External      Currency Deposits, Joual of Money1 Credit and Banking

      (May, 1975):         1l1—80.

Bilson, John FO. (1979).                  'Recent Developments in Monetary Models of

     Exchange Rate Determination. IMF Staff Pacers (June, 1979): 201—23.

Estrella, A. and J.C. Fuhrer (1983).                  Average Marginal Tax Rates for U.S.

     Household Interest and Dividend Income 1954—1980, ' NBER Working Paper

     No.    1201, September 1983.

Frenkel ,   J.A.       and R.M. Levich           (1975).      'Covered Interest Arbitrage:

     Unexploited Profits?' Journal of Political Economy (April, 1975):

     325—38.

Frenkel ,       J.A.   ,
                            ed.      (1983).       Exchange     Rates   and   Internation

     Maoongpj, University of Chicago F'ress, Chicago and London.

Hansen, L.P. and R.J. Hodrick (1980).                  'Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal

     Predictors of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,' Journai of

     Political Economy (October): 829—53.

Haxkins, R.G., R.M.               Levich and C.6. Wihlborg, eds. (1983). I          tn:
      tionalizatio          of Financial Markets and National Ecgç PojJcy, JAI

      F'ress, Greenwich, Conn.

Henderson, D., D. Danker, R. Haas, S. Symansky and R. Tryon (1984).                 'Small

     Empirical Models of Exchange Market Intervention:                    A Review of the

      Literature,' Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,

      Washington, D.C. (January).
)On,     Y.   (1984).      'The    Effects   of Tax Asymmetry on Foreign Exchange Rates,

        University of Washington, Working Paper, March.

Ito,     1.      (1983).     'Capital Controls and Covered Interest Parity,          NUER

        Working Paper No. 1187          (August).
Katz, H.       (1983).       The Impact of Taxation on International Capital Flows——

        Some Empirical Estimations,' International Monetary Fund DM183181,
        November 30,       1983.

Levi,     M.D. (1977).        'Taxation and 'Abnormal' International Capital Flows,'
        Journal of Political Economy (June): 635-4k.
Loopesko,        8.     (1983).     'Relationships Among Exchange Rates, Intervention,

        and Interest Rates:           An Empiricl Investigation,' Board of Governors

        of the Federal Reserve System, Staff Studies No. 133 (November).

Hakin,        J.H.      (1981).       'Exchange Rate Behavior Under Full Monetary

        Equilibrium:         An Empirical Analysis,' NBER, Working Paper No. 47
        (March).

        (1982). 'Determinants of the Yen—Dollar Exchange Rate: The Course of

        the United States and Japanese Policies' in Policy

        the Jaanese Economy, ed. K. Yamamura, University of Washington Press,
        Seattle.

         (1983).        'Techniques and Success in Forecasting Exchange Rates:

        Should        It Be Done?       Does It Matter; The Long and Short of        It,'

                                             1DB and Finance, Vol.       3,   pp. 149—80,

        JAI F'ress, Greenwich, Conn.

         (l983a).        'A Fiscal Framework for Analysis of Interest Rate Behavior

        in Open Economies,' April, 1983, unpublished manuscript.




                                                 17
Neese, R.         arid   .    F:oqoff (1983).         Empirical Exchanqe Rate Models of the

        Seventies:            Are Any Fit to Survive?'           Journal   of International

        Economics 14:         3—24.

Feat, Marwick1 Mitchell and Co.                 (1979). Tax Treatment of Exchange Gains

        and Losses in Selected Countries, Peat, Marwick, Mitchell and Co.,

        Paris.

Peek,     J.     and     J.   Wilcox (1983).          'The Postwar Stability of the Fisher



                                                                                 ct
        Effect, Journal of                  (September,      1983):   1111—24.

Tanzi ,    V.     (1982). I8
        1929—1978, unpublished, International Monetary Fund.




                                                 18
