                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE VALUE OF SCARCE WATER:
            MEASURING THE INEFFICIENCY OF MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS

                                           Erin T. Mansur
                                         Sheila M. Olmstead

                                        Working Paper 13513
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13513


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




For comments and guidance, we are grateful to Patrick Bayer, Nathaniel Keohane, Sharon Oster, Robert
Stavins, Christopher Timmins, and seminar participants at Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Columbia, Camp
Resources, the California Occasional Workshop on Environmental Economics, and the University
of Maryland. The authors, alone, are responsible for any errors. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Erin T. Mansur and Sheila M. Olmstead. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Scarce Water: Measuring the Inefficiency of Municipal Regulations
Erin T. Mansur and Sheila M. Olmstead
NBER Working Paper No. 13513
October 2007
JEL No. L51,L95,Q25,Q28,Q58

                                            ABSTRACT

Rather than allowing water prices to reflect scarcity rents during periods of drought-induced excess
demand, policy makers have mandated command-and-control approaches, like the curtailment of certain
uses, primarily outdoor watering. Using unique panel data on residential end-uses of water, we examine
the welfare implications of typical drought policies. Using price variation across and within markets,
we identify end-use specific price elasticities. Our results suggest that current policies target water
uses that households, themselves, are most willing to forgo. Nevertheless, we find that use restrictions
have costly welfare implications, primarily due to household heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay for
scarce water.

Erin T. Mansur
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
erin.mansur@yale.edu

Sheila M. Olmstead
Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies
Sage Hall, 205 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
sheila.olmstead@yale.edu
1. Introduction

Competitive markets are the most efficient avenues through which to allocate scarce resources to

their highest-valued uses, under the standard assumptions. Yet, many important resources

traditionally have not been managed through markets. Prominent examples include space on

public roadways and airport runways, water supply, some telecommunications networks,

electricity transmission and distribution, and, until recently, broadcast space on the

electromagnetic spectrum and electricity generation. These goods and services have been heavily

regulated, for a variety of reasons, with allocation and pricing (if any) controlled by public

authorities. Where markets are not employed to allocate scarce resources, the potential welfare

gains from a market-based approach can be estimated.

        We assess the potential welfare gains, and possible distributional outcomes, from

switching from non-market to market-based regulation of municipal water supply during periods

of drought.1 During droughts, municipal water restrictions focus almost exclusively on the

residential sector, rather than on commercial and industrial water users.2 Rather than allowing

prices to reflect scarcity rents during periods of excess demand, policy makers have mandated

the curtailment of certain uses, primarily outdoor watering, requiring the same limitations on

consumption of all households. If indoor demand is not perfectly inelastic, or if households are

heterogeneous in willingness-to-pay for water under conditions of scarcity, a price-based

approach to drought policy has a theoretical welfare advantage over the current approach. The

welfare gains of a price-based approach could come from both substitution across uses within a

household, and substitution across households.


1
  Between January 1997 and June 2007, moderate to extreme drought conditions affected, on average, 20 percent of
the contiguous United States. This 10-year average masks a great deal of variation; in June 2007, 41 percent of the
contiguous United States was experiencing moderate to extreme drought (National Climatic Data Center 2007).
2
  Of municipal water consumption, one-half to two-thirds is residential (Dixon et al. 1996, Gleick et al. 2003).


                                                         1
       Using unique panel data on residential end-uses of water for 1,082 households in 11

urban areas in the United States and Canada, we examine the implications of the current

approach to urban drought. Using price variation across and within markets, we identify price

elasticities specific to indoor and outdoor water demand. Our econometric approach presents a

substantial challenge, in that: (1) sixty percent of sample households face increasing-block

prices, creating piecewise linear budget constraints under which demand and marginal price are

systematically correlated; and (2) outdoor water use is censored at zero – households do not use

water outdoors every day.

       We use these estimates to determine whether current policies target the water uses that

households, themselves, would reduce in response to price increases. We find that outdoor

watering restrictions do mimic household reactions to price increases, on average, as outdoor use

is much more price elastic than indoor use. However, the real advantage of market-based

approaches lies in their accommodation of heterogeneous marginal benefits. During periods of

scarcity, in which regulators impose identical frequency of outdoor watering, shadow prices for

the marginal unit of water may vary greatly among households.

       We divide households into four groups, based on income and lot size, and estimate

separate end-use elasticities by group to assess the degree of household heterogeneity in these

markets. We estimate shadow prices for water among all customers under four drought policy

scenarios of increasing stringency. We then estimate utility-level market-clearing prices for these

drought policy scenarios. Under a typical drought policy, one that limits outdoor watering to two

days per week, estimated shadow prices are, on average, 178 percent higher than the current

average marginal water price in these markets, while market-clearing prices are 118 percent

higher than current prices.



                                                2
          Note that the analysis does not consider whether water prices, in general, are set at

efficient levels – only whether the particular policy instruments used to constrain use during a

drought minimize the costs of achieving consumption reductions of a given magnitude. The

market-based approach we simulate would re-allocate consumption during a drought so as to

maximize the net benefits of the drought-constrained water supply. In this context, the questions

we address are “second-order” questions, if current prices depart significantly from efficient

levels.

          However, our results have important implications for municipal policies. The welfare

gains from allowing substitution across uses within the average household during an average

summer drought amount to about $27. Allowing substitution across households, as well as

within, welfare gains from a price-based approach are approximately $81 per household, about

25 percent of average annual household expenditures on water in our sample. These direct

welfare gains would also come with potential savings in enforcement and monitoring costs –

volumetric metering and billing systems are already in place for water consumption in most

North American cities, while command-and-control approaches currently require direct

observation of individual households’ outdoor consumption.

          Switching to a price-based policy also would have consequences for allocation. Drought

prices would enable those customers who are the least price sensitive, the wealthy consumers

with large lots, to reduce consumption much less than poor households with small lots, who may

stop using outdoor water entirely, even under modest drought conditions. The distributional

consequences of these changes depend on the assignment of water rights. If utilities retain these

rights, their profits would rise by an estimated $158 per customer. Households would be worse

off by $77, on average. Rebates to consumers could make everyone better off.



                                                3
        The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we discuss some simple theory and the

related literature. Section 3 examines the econometric models, and Section 4 presents the data. In

Section 5, we show our price elasticity estimates for various end uses and consumer groups.

Section 6 discusses the economic consequences of current regulatory policies and distributional

impacts of switching to a price-based allocation mechanism. In Section 7, we conclude.



2. Theory and Related Literature

2.1. Markets and Social Welfare in General

The questions addressed in this paper arise from the general theoretical literature on the

conditions under which gains in social welfare are possible through the introduction of markets

for managing scarcity (Weitzman 1977, Suen 1990, Newell and Stavins 2003). Studies have

produced theoretical and empirical estimates of the gains from increasing the influence of

markets on: the distribution of space in the broadcast spectrum (Melody 1980, McMillan 1994);

traffic congestion on roadways (Winston 1985, Kraus 1989, Small and Yan 2001, Parry and

Bento 2002) and at airports (Daniel 2001, Pels and Verhof 2004); electricity generation (Gilbert

et al. 1996, De Vany and Walls 1999, Kleit and Terrell 2001); and water supply across sectors

(Howe et al. 1986, Hearne and Easter 1997). The gains from price-based approaches to resource

allocation in these cases derive largely from heterogeneity in marginal benefits across potential

consumers.3




3
  A related, prolific literature has focused on welfare comparisons of market-based and command-and-control
approaches to environmental policy (Pigou 1920, Crocker 1966, Dales 1968, Montgomery 1972, Baumol and Oates
1988, Tietenberg 1995). The gains from market-based approaches in the case of pollution control policies derive
from cost heterogeneity among regulated firms. The advantage of market-based policies over prescriptive policies
for pollution control has been demonstrated empirically for the regulation of lead in gasoline (Kerr and Maré 1997),
sulfur dioxide in power plant emissions (Burtraw et al. 1998), and many other applications.


                                                         4
       In the literature on the economics of pollution control, analysts have focused on

distributional outcomes where pollutants are non-uniformly mixed, creating variation in the

marginal social benefits to different parties of market-based policies (i.e., some get more “clean

air” than others). In the smaller, general resource allocation literature, distributional concerns

arise from a related issue – the fact that high-value consumers of the good or service will

purchase more, and low-value consumers less, if allocation occurs through prices. This is the

advantage of a market; it is the source of welfare gains. But under certain conditions, like

rationing during wartime, or in the aftermath of a natural disaster, willingness-to-pay, and its

close associate, ability to pay, may seem to be unjust allocation criteria.

       Weitzman (1977) describes goods and services for which this is the case as a “class of

commodities whose just distribution to those having the greatest need,” (emphasis added) as

distinguished from want or preference, “is viewed by society as a desirable end in itself.” Within

this formulation of the problem, the price system turns out to be the more effective way to

allocate “needs” when preferences are heterogeneous or income distribution egalitarian;

rationing is more effective under the opposite conditions.

       Water for residential consumption is an example of a good, some portion of which may

fall within Weitzman’s need-based commodity regime (drinking, bathing, cooking), and some

portion of which would not (swimming pools, lawns, hot tubs). The standard approach to

allocating water under conditions of scarcity, wisely, restricts these less necessary uses, not basic

needs. Yet, the standard approach does not recognize heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay for

these uses, and thus is likely to result in welfare losses, when compared with management

through prices.




                                                  5
2.2. Theoretical Gains from Drought Pricing

The current approach to drought management ensures that a citywide required demand reduction

will be achieved by uniformly restricting outdoor uses. The theoretical welfare gains from price-

based municipal water regulation come from possible substitution within and across households.

First, prices allow households to choose end-use consumption as they see fit, given their own

preferences and ability to pay (i.e., households could substitute some indoor for outdoor

reductions). Thus, if indoor demand is anything but perfectly inelastic, the current approach

creates a deadweight loss (DWL).

           We describe this DWL in Figure 1, which maps stylistic demand curves for indoor and

outdoor water use against a required demand reduction (on the horizontal axis).4 The outdoor

reduction mandated under the current approach ( ∆Qreg ) creates a shadow price for outdoor

consumption ( λ ) that is higher than the current marginal price ( P ). Under a market-clearing

price ( P* ), some of the citywide required reduction would take place indoors, and this wedge

would disappear. All else equal, the less elastic indoor demand, the smaller the welfare losses

will be from the current approach.

           Additional welfare losses from the current approach come from disallowing substitution

across households. Household willingness to pay for marginal units of water may be

heterogeneous, even within the same type of use. Mutually beneficial trades could be made

between households with strong and weak preferences for outdoor consumption. Putting this all

together, the DWL from non-market regulation has three components: some households consume

too much outdoors, some consume too little outdoors, and everyone consumes too much indoors.




4
    We assume that supply, in the short-run situation of drought, is perfectly inelastic.


                                                              6
       Figure 2 describes households with the same indoor demand curve, but different

preferences with respect to outdoor demand. Here we assume that indoor demand is the least

elastic portion of demand (C), and that for outdoor demand, there is a group of relatively elastic

households (A), and a group of somewhat less elastic households (B). If households are

heterogeneous, outdoor regulations not only drive a wedge between outdoor shadow prices and

current marginal prices, but, since they are the same for all households, they also create variation

in outdoor shadow prices across households. A market-clearing price would realize all potential

gains from trade, eliminating the shaded DWL triangles.

2.3. Price and Non-price Water Regulation

To date, few studies have addressed municipal drought policies in this framework. Collinge

(1994) proposes a theoretical water entitlement transfer system similar to the municipal-level

price-based approach we analyze empirically. One experimental economics study simulates

water consumption from a common pool, and predicts that customer heterogeneity will generate

welfare losses from command-and-control water conservation policies (Krause et al. 2003).

Neither of these analyses estimates the magnitude of potential welfare gains, nor do they explore

distributional implications in any depth. Renwick and Archibald (1998) estimate water demand

elasticities by income quartile in Santa Barbara, California, and use these estimates to compare

the distributional implications of price and non-price water conservation policies, but do not

consider welfare impacts.

       A few studies have empirically estimated the impacts of non-price conservation programs

on aggregate residential water demand, sometimes jointly with price elasticities (Michelsen et al.

1998, Corral 1997). Such studies analyze city-level demand across cities, constructing indices of

the relative stringency of residential demand management programs. This approach impedes the



                                                 7
direct comparison of the costs of specific non-price programs with hypothetical price increases to

achieve the required level of reduction in aggregate water use.5 We know of only one case in

which such a comparison has been made. Timmins (2003) compares a mandatory low-flow

appliance regulation with a modest water tax, using aggregate consumption data from 13

groundwater-dependent California cities. Under all but the least realistic of assumptions, he finds

the tax to be more cost-effective than the technology standard in reducing groundwater aquifer

lift-height in the long run.

         In part, the dearth of studies analyzing the welfare impacts of type-of-use restrictions in

the residential sector is attributable to a variety of methodological challenges. Few data reliably

disaggregate residential water consumption into its component uses. In addition, the presence of

non-linear prices and the censoring of outdoor demand at zero complicate econometric analyses

of this type. In our choice of econometric models, we draw on a well-developed literature on the

price elasticity of residential water demand to meet these challenges.

         Of the hundreds of water price elasticity studies published since 1960, a few are related

closely to our current work.6 One end-use water demand study has been performed, including

estimates of price elasticity for specific uses of water (Mayer et al. 1998). This study was the

first to use data that reliably separate household water consumption into its component end uses.

We use the same data, but ask different questions, and account for price endogeneity.7

         Most U.S. water utilities charge non-linear tariffs to residential customers. These price

schedules typically require a structural approach to obtain unbiased estimates of price elasticity


5
   Not all studies of non-price demand management are able to detect an impact of such programs on residential
demand. One study of draconian outdoor watering restrictions in Corpus Christi, Texas, during a drought of record
in summer 1996 found no impact of the restrictions on residential consumption (Schultz et al. 1997).
6
   Meta-analyses suggest that the central tendency of short-run elasticity estimates over the past four decades is about
-0.3, and of long-run estimates about -0.6 (Espey et al. 1997, Dalhuisen et al. 2004).
7
  In estimating demand elasticities, Mayer et al. (1998) use average prices, not marginal prices. Ours is the first
application of end-use demand estimation to treat non-linear prices in a simultaneous equations framework.


                                                           8
and other model parameters. In the case of increasing-block prices, marginal price and the

quantity consumed are positively correlated. Econometric techniques that treat piecewise-linear

budget constraints in a manner consistent with utility theory derive from studies of the wage

elasticity of labor supply under progressive income taxation (Burtless and Hausman 1978), and

have benefited greatly from the generalizations of Hanemann (1984) and Moffitt (1986, 1990).

Five structural models of water demand under non-linear prices have been estimated: Hewitt and

Hanemann (1995), Rietveld et al. (1997), Pint (1999), Olmstead (2007), and Olmstead et al.

(2007). We use the parameter estimates from Olmstead et al. (2007) to construct our price

instruments, building on their approach to ask and answer policy-relevant questions regarding

droughts, non-price demand management, and hypothetical price-based approaches.



3. Econometric Models

For the estimation of end-use demand, in our case a pair of partial demand equations for indoor

and outdoor consumption, the likelihood function in a structural approach would be complicated.

The likelihood function for such models is constructed in part by using the block “cutoffs” (the

quantities at which marginal price increases), based on total billing period water consumption, to

determine the probabilities of consumption at all possible locations along the household’s budget

constraint (linear segments and kink points). The likelihood function, in our case, would include

a total demand equation, which would determine marginal price, and separate end-use demand

equations for indoor and outdoor consumption.

       We develop an alternative approach here, due to the availability of water demand

parameter estimates from an existing study using the same data (Olmstead et al. 2007). From the

structural model, we derive the probability for each household of consuming at each possible



                                                9
marginal price on each day. Probabilities are calculated as functions of the structural parameter

estimates, the data, and characteristics of each household’s water price structure (number and

magnitude of marginal and infra-marginal prices, as well as block cutoffs). We use these

probabilities to estimate an expected marginal price, the sum of the products of marginal prices,

times the probabilities of facing those prices.8 Price instruments are then calculated as the

seasonal average, by household, of these daily probability-weighted prices. Appendix A

describes the estimation of these price instruments in greater detail.

        We begin with a test of the validity of our identification strategy by examining a model of

total daily water demand, using probability-weighted marginal prices as instruments. Using the

same data as Olmstead et al. (2007), we replicate their results for total water demand, since we

know those estimates to be unbiased.9

        The equation for this total demand function is (1), in which wtotal is total daily water

demand for household i on day t, p is the marginal water price for which we instrument, Ỹ is

virtual income, Z is a vector of daily and seasonal weather variables, and H is a vector of

household characteristics.10 The error structure comprises θ , a household heterogeneity

parameter, and ν , the residual.

                        ln wtotal it = α ln pit + µ ln Y i + δ Z it + β H i + θi + ν it .               (1)

Or, in matrix notation:

                                        ln w total = X ' γ total + ν total                              (2)

8
   Kink point probabilities are, on average, 5 percent for two-block price structures, and they range from 1 to 3
percent, on average, for four-block price structures. We divide the kink probabilities evenly (for each household
day) between the marginal prices on either side of the kink.
9
   Identification is possible because the estimated probabilities used to create the price instruments incorporate
variation in price structures (number and magnitude of prices and block cutoffs), characteristics not incorporated in
the second stage of our demand estimation.
10
   Virtual income is annual household income, plus the difference between total water expenditures if the household
had purchased all units at the marginal price, and actual total expenditures. This standard technique treats the
implicit “subsidy” of the infra-marginal prices as lump-sum income transfers, and is originally due to Hall (1973).


                                                            10
        Having tested the usefulness of the price instruments, we proceed with the estimation of

end-use models. We adopt different models for indoor and outdoor demand, due to the fact that

about half of outdoor demand observations are equal to zero (and we observe no such censoring

of indoor demand). The indoor demand equation, identical to (2), except for the different

dependent variable, is represented in (3).

                                         ln w in = X ' γ in + ν in                                  (3)

For outdoor demand, we estimate a Tobit model, described in (4).

                                            w *out = X ' γ out + ν out
                                                      ⎪⎧ w out it if w out it > 0
                                                           *          *
                                                                                                    (4)
                                           wout it   =⎨
                                                       ⎪⎩0 otherwise

Dealing with endogenous prices in the Tobit framework involves one extra step to obtain

unbiased estimates (Newey 1987). In the first stage, we estimate fitted prices as functions of the

price instruments and all of the exogenous covariates. In the second stage, we include both the

fitted prices and the residuals from the fitted price equation as independent variables.



4. Data

Daily demand data are drawn from 1,082 households, randomly selected from billing databases

in 11 urban areas across the United States and Canada, served by 16 water utilities. Observed

households are detached, single-family homes, with no apartments or other multi-family housing

in the sample.11 Table 1 provides descriptive statistics.

        Households were observed for two periods of two weeks each, once in an arid season,

and once in a wet season. Total demand was disaggregated into its indoor and outdoor

11
   Households were randomly sampled from single-family homes within utility customer databases. Sampling
procedures, response rates, and statistical tests for selection are described in Mayer et al. (1998), Appendix A.


                                                           11
components using magnetic sensors attached to water meters. These sensors recorded water

pulses through the meter, converting flow data into a flow trace, which detects the “flow

signatures” of individual residential appliances and fixtures (Mayer et al. 1998). We add together

consumption from all indoor fixtures (primarily toilets, clothes washers, showers, and faucets) to

obtain indoor demand, and consumption from all outdoor uses (irrigation and pools) to obtain

outdoor demand.12 Leaks and unknown uses are included in total demand, but are not modeled

explicitly as either indoor or outdoor consumption.13

        Water demand varies by season, but only for outdoor use. Outdoor water demand in an

arid season is, on average, five times outdoor demand during a wet season. In addition, the

fraction of observations using any water outdoors, at all, is 0.42 – the reason for choosing a

censored regression model.

        In our tests of consumer heterogeneity, we divide the sample into four subgroups, based

on income and lot size. Income is our best available proxy for ability to pay, and lot size is our

best available proxy for preferences for the services that households derive from outdoor water

consumption (such as lawns, gardens, pools, and looking better than the neighbors). We expect

that wealthier consumers and those with larger lots will be less price sensitive. Those with both

incomes and lot sizes above the medians ($55,000 per year, and 9,000 ft2, respectively) are

categorized as “rich, big lot” households; those with both incomes and lot sizes below the

medians are categorized as “poor, small lot” households; and so on for the two groups in

between. In the absence of any drought policy these groups divide total sample water



12
   The listed indoor uses comprise 94 percent of indoor consumption, on average. Remaining indoor uses include
evaporative cooling, dishwashers, bathtubs, water treatment, hot tubs, and humidifiers.
13
   Leaks comprise approximately 6 percent of total consumption, and unknown uses approximately 1 percent. In
outdoor use, we can distinguish between water consumption for swimming pools from that for all other outdoor
uses. We cannot distinguish among irrigation, car-washing, and washing of sidewalks and driveways, but these uses
are all typically regulated or prohibited by drought policies.


                                                       12
consumption as follows: rich, big lot (43 percent); rich, small lot (23 percent); poor, big lot (15

percent); poor, small lot (19 percent).

         The households in the sample face either uniform marginal prices (39 percent); or two-

tier (44 percent) or four-tier (17 percent) increasing block prices.14 Given cross-sectional

variation and changes over time, the data contain 26 price structures and 47 different marginal

prices, ranging from zero to just under $5 per thousand gallons. Average total expenditures on

water in the sample, including fixed charges, are $326 per year, or about 0.47 percent of average

annual household income.

         Price variation in the sample is primarily in the city cross-section. If we regress the

natural log of observed marginal prices on our set of regional dummies, we obtain an R-squared

of 0.34. Regressing prices on city fixed effects results in an R-squared of 0.75, on household

fixed effects, 0.94, and on our price instruments, 0.88. Table 1 demonstrates that the mean of our

price instrument, p , is equal to the mean of observed marginal water prices, and the standard

deviation is slightly smaller.15 Data on household characteristics, including information on

annual income, family size, square footage and age of homes, lot size, number of bathrooms, and

the presence of evaporative cooling were gathered by survey.16 We control for season (arid vs.

wet), as well as daily weather variables, including maximum daily temperature, and


14
   About one-third of households in the United States face increasing-block prices. Thus, these price structures are
over-sampled in the data. This matters for elasticity estimates only if elasticity varies across price structures – an
unresolved empirical question (Olmstead et al. 2007).
15
   For some sample utilities, marginal wastewater charges are assessed on current water consumption. In addition,
some sample utilities benchmark water use during the wet season as a basis for volumetric wastewater charges
assessed the following year. For households observed during these periods (and there are some in the data), effective
marginal water prices should include some function of the present value of expected future wastewater charges
associated with current use. We do not do this here; marginal wastewater charges are excluded from the present
analysis.
16
   Evaporative cooling, common in arid climates, substitutes water for electricity in the provision of air conditioning.
Less than 10 percent of sample households have evaporative coolers, but 43 percent of sample households in
Phoenix have them, and about one-third of households in Tempe and Scottsdale. Households with evaporative
cooling use, on average, 35 percent more water than households without.


                                                          13
evapotranspiration less effective rainfall (0.6 times total rainfall). Finally, we construct regional

fixed effects to control for long-run climate variation not absorbed by the daily and seasonal

weather variables.17



5. Results

5.1. End-Use Price Elasticity

We begin by estimating a total water demand model as in (2), using our 2SLS approach. Table 2

reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from two such models. The first column

contains estimates from Olmstead et al. (2007), for the purpose of comparison. The second

column reports estimates from a 2SLS random-effects model for panel data, in which the

independent variables in the demand function are identical to those in Olmstead et al. (2007).

This model generates parameter estimates that are similar to those from the structural model,

with an important exception – the price elasticity estimate is not significantly different from zero.

        In the third column of Table 2, we group the city-level fixed effects from “test model 1”

into regional fixed effects. This model captures exogenous sources of geographic and climatic

variation, leaving enough price variation to identify a price elasticity. With regional fixed effects,

we obtain estimates that are very close to those from the structural model with, unsurprisingly,

somewhat less precision. The price elasticity estimate is -0.36, and strongly significant. We use

test model 2, a 2SLS random-effects model with regional fixed effects, as our point of departure

for the rest of the analysis.



17
  Regions are as follows: (1) Southern California (Las Virgenes Municipal Water District, City of San Diego,
Walnut Valley Water District, and City of Lompoc); (2) Arizona and Colorado (Phoenix, Tempe, Scottsdale, and
Denver); (3) Northern (City of Seattle Public Utilities, Highline Water District, City of Bellevue Utilities,
Northshore Utility District, Eugene Water and Electric Board, Regional Municipality of Waterloo, Ontario); and (4)
Florida (City of Tampa Utilities).


                                                       14
         We then separate total demand into indoor and outdoor consumption and estimate the

models given in (3) and (4). In Table 3, we report the full set of parameter estimates and standard

errors (with the exception of regional fixed effects) for indoor and outdoor demand models, both

annually and by season.

         Indoor use appears to be influenced by income, family size, and evaporative cooling.

Outdoor demand parameters are all significant, with the exception of home age. Many significant

outdoor demand parameters would seem to be drivers of indoor, rather than outdoor consumption

(for example, the number of bathrooms). It may be that these variables are correlated with

omitted variables that represent preferences for outdoor water consumption.

         Table 4 summarizes the results of these models with respect to price, the parameter of

interest, and reports elasticities, rather than price coefficient estimates, for the outdoor models.18

The partial demand models reveal striking variation in elasticity across uses and, for outdoor use,

across seasons. None of the indoor elasticity estimates are significantly different from zero (the

estimates are very small in magnitude, as well). Outdoor demand in the wet season is the most

price elastic (-1.18), and is still quite responsive to price in the arid season (-0.74). In fact,

essentially all of the strong seasonal variation we observe in total water consumption is

attributable to outdoor use.19

         Results reported in Table 4 might suggest that regulators’ focus on outdoor consumption

as a target of command-and-control water conservation policies provides a good first

approximation to a price-based approach. Indeed, outdoor uses are the uses that households,



18
   The Tobit price coefficients are not elasticities – see the notes to Table 4 for the calculation of Tobit elasticities.
For these estimates, we calculate the Tobit model allowing different coefficients on price for the arid and wet
seasons.
19
   We have no information on available substitutes for municipal tap water in outdoor uses, which might include
groundwater wells or public surface water sources. To the extent that these substitutes are available in the sample,
our outdoor elasticity estimates are greater in magnitude than they would be in the absence of substitutes.


                                                           15
themselves, would choose to cut back the most in response to a price increase. But an important

cost of the prescriptive approach derives from the heterogeneity of regulated entities – in this

case, households. If households are heterogeneous in their preferences for outdoor consumption,

across-the-board outdoor water use restrictions will ignore that heterogeneity, generating welfare

losses relative to a price-based approach.

5.2. Consumer Heterogeneity

To test whether households are, in fact, heterogeneous in their preferences for water

consumption, we divide the sample into four sub-groups, based on income and lot size.20 We

estimate separate elasticities for the four groups. Results, reported in Table 5, indicate a high

degree of heterogeneity. For all customer groups, the price elasticity of indoor demand is

insignificantly different from zero. Households presumed to have the strongest preferences for

outdoor water consumption, the “rich, big lot” group, exhibit the least elastic outdoor demand (-

0.48). Those presumed to have the weakest preferences for outdoor consumption, the “poor,

small lot” group, exhibit the most elastic outdoor demand (-0.87). The two middle groups appear

to be about equally price elastic.21

5.3. Robustness

We test the robustness of our elasticity estimates by exploring a number of other model

specifications. These include demand functions with household fixed effects and functions with

city fixed effects (rather than regional fixed effects). We also examine a model that collapses the

daily variation in household demand, obtaining parameter estimates from regressions of




20
   We define these heterogeneous groups based on sample median income and lot size, and test an alternative
definition of city-specific median lot size as a robustness check (see Appendix B).
21
   F-tests find “rich, big lot” to differ significantly from “rich small,” “poor big,” and “poor small” (P-values are
0.01, 0.02, and 0.01, respectively). The other categories do not differ significantly from each other.


                                                        16
aggregate seasonal household demand on the covariates of interest. We find our results to be

qualitatively robust to these alternative models and others. See Appendix B for details.



6. Simulations and Discussion

In this section, we describe our drought policy simulations and estimate shadow and market-

clearing prices. We then examine the potential welfare gains from and distributional implications

of using prices to regulate municipal drought.

6.1. Simulating Drought Policy

Traditional regulations typically limit the number of days in a week that households may use

water outdoors, whether for watering lawns, washing automobiles, or filling swimming pools.

During the most recent multi-year, statewide drought in California, 1987-1992, between 65 and

80 percent of urban water utilities implemented outdoor watering restrictions. Most of these were

mandatory, but not well enforced (Dixon et al. 1996). The stringency of these type-of-use

restrictions (and their enforcement) varies greatly. A common policy is to limit outdoor watering

to two days a week. We examine the implications of this policy, as well as limits of three, one,

and zero days per week.

           Households’ willingness to pay for the marginal unit of water should increase with

drought policy stringency. To calculate these shadow prices ( λit ), we estimate the constrained

level of expected consumption for each household under each policy, and then “back up” along

that household’s demand curve – using equation (4) – to obtain their willingness-to-pay for the

marginal unit of water.22 Some households are unconstrained by the policies; their probability of

watering on a given day is less than or equal to the probability imposed by the watering


22
     We estimate shadow prices using the outdoor price coefficient underlying the elasticity in Table 5.


                                                            17
restrictions. For constrained households, we calculate the difference in their expected quantity

demanded in the unrestricted and restricted scenarios.

        For example, for a twice-per-week watering policy, the restricted probability of watering

is 2/7 (assuming full compliance). So a household with a probability of watering greater than 2/7

is constrained, and will have a resulting decrease in expected quantity demanded, E (∆woutit ) , as

in (5). Let:

                  prob = Pr( X ' γ out + ν out > 0)

                    out = E ( X ' γ out + ν out | X ' γ out + ν out > 0)
                  w cond


Then for each household day:
                                          ⎧          2                       2
                                          ⎪( probit − ) * woutit if probit >
                                                           cond
                           E (∆woutit ) = ⎨          7                       7                      (5)
                                          ⎪⎩0 otherwise

We estimate E (∆woutit ) for the arid days only, and for the four drought policies described above.

Caveats

We face a choice of simulating utilities’ stated policies, or simulating the actual results of their

stated policies, and we choose the former. This gives rise to two important issues. First, our

analysis assumes that the necessary aggregate (utility-wide) demand reduction is that which

would be achieved under full compliance with the various drought policies. We could easily add

a probability of compliance that is less than one to the analysis, but doing so would be equivalent

to simulating different drought policies than those we select.23 It is likely that compliance will be

higher under a price-based policy than under the current prescriptive approach.24 Nevertheless,


23
   If non-compliance is punished with a fine, some of the benefits of drought pricing may be realized under the
command-and-control policy, depending on the magnitude of the fine.
24
   “Cheating” in the market context would require that households figure out how to consume piped water outdoors
off-meter, and in the current context can easily be accomplished by watering at night, or in some other way that
avoids observation by utility staff or vengeful neighbors.


                                                           18
were utilities to estimate market-clearing prices, they might want to charge slightly higher prices,

anticipating less than full compliance, depending on the importance of meeting the demand

reduction.25

         Second, we assume conditional outdoor demand is unchanged under the simulated

drought policies – households water less frequently, in compliance with the policy, but the same

amount per watering as they did in the absence of regulation. Most municipal drought ordinances

forbid allowing water to run off of residential properties onto sidewalks and streets, making it

unlikely that households would over-water in response to reduced allowable watering frequency.

Nonetheless, if conditional demand were to increase under the drought policies we simulate, it

would decrease the aggregate demand reduction achieved. Thus, like full compliance, our

assumption regarding conditional demand could be altered simply by simulating different

drought policies than those we choose. Were we to deal with both of these issues by simulating a

set of percentage aggregate demand reductions, rather than allowable frequency of watering, we

would lose an important benefit of our current approach. The apportionment of aggregate

reductions across households would be arbitrary, whereas now it is based upon a household’s

probability of watering, calculated using the data and parameter estimates.

         Finally, note that we do not simulate the impact on demand and welfare of an actual

drought – we make no changes to evapotranspiration, rainfall, or maximum daily temperature.

Simulating an actual drought would increase the welfare impact of moving to a price-based

approach, due to the reduced availability of a substitute (rain), but not by much. Even a 25

percent increase in our weather variable that describes outdoor watering needs (weath) would


25
  This is always the case with a market approach based on prices, rather than quantities (Weitzman 1973). While a
quantity instrument (like tradable permits) would be preferable in cases where utilities had very strict quantity
constraints, such as the threat of violation of a treaty over shared water resources, the transactions costs involved in
establishing a household-level trading regime would likely be prohibitive.


                                                          19
increase consumption by less than one percent.26 In addition, the characteristics of a drought vary

significantly across sample cities, depending not on weather variables, alone, but also reservoir

capacity and other characteristics. Simulating drought, and not just drought policy, in this wide

cross-section of North American cities would be somewhat arbitrary.

6.2. Shadow Prices

The evidence of heterogeneity among households from Section 5.2 suggests that, when outdoor

water consumption is restricted by drought policy, shadow prices for the marginal unit of water

will vary significantly. Variation in shadow prices would indicate potential gains from trade. For

example, a price-based approach would lead to smaller reductions in outdoor consumption by the

least elastic groups, larger reductions by the most elastic groups, and, perhaps, small reductions

in indoor use by all groups (Figure 2). Based on the separate elasticity estimates for our

household sub-groups, we calculate shadow prices (by household-day) and market-clearing

prices (by utility) under drought policies of varying stringency.

        Table 6 reports shadow prices for the arid season. In the most extreme policy, when no

watering is allowed, our nonlinear functional form implies an infinite shadow price for all

customers. We assume that the willingness-to-pay is at most $50 per thousand gallons. The most

common policy (of allowing outdoor watering two days per week) has an average shadow price

of $4.98 per thousand gallons. Note that this is almost three times the average price consumers

actually pay ($1.79).

        As we would expect, shadow prices increase with the stringency of the drought policy.

Furthermore, the standard deviation of shadow prices across all customers is increasing in

drought policy stringency. These standard deviations reflect the potential benefits from


26
   Our calculation is based on the sample average and coefficient estimate for weath reported in Tables 1 and 2,
respectively. Note the substantial variation in weath; a 25 percent increase is not out-of-sample.


                                                      20
establishing a price-based policy. For example, Figure 3 provides histograms of shadow prices in

two cities given a policy limiting outdoor watering to two days a week.27 Even in cities with

relatively small standard deviations in shadow prices (like Eugene, Oregon), we see there is a lot

of variation and that shadow prices tend to be right-skewed. There are some households with

much higher shadow prices than the average. Under drought pricing, all households will

consume such that shadow prices are equal; all gains from trade will be realized.

6.3. Market-clearing Prices

We then construct market-clearing prices under drought policies of varying stringency. Here we

assume that each utility’s goal is simply to save the aggregate quantity of water it would save by

implementing each type of drought policy, no matter how that aggregate water consumption

reduction is achieved. The aggregate water savings implied by each drought policy is the sum

over the E (∆woutit ) in (5), for all households within a utility. From the households’ perspective,

these savings could be achieved indoors, outdoors, or by purchasing “credits” from another

household.28,    29
                      We then identify the market-clearing price for that aggregate reduction,

constraining households to non-negative consumption.30

         In Figure 3, the solid vertical lines denote the market-clearing prices for two cities.

Differences in average shadow and market prices are created by the skewness of shadow prices


27
   We chose two cities (Eugene, Oregon, and San Diego, California) that provide examples with low and average
amounts of variation in shadow prices, respectively.
28
   An actual tradable credit system would likely be infeasible due to large transactions costs. However, with no
uncertainty, a regulator could equivalently set a higher price so as to clear the market.
29
   Price coefficients for indoor and outdoor demand underlying the indoor and outdoor elasticities reported in Table
5 are used for estimation of shadow and market prices. While indoor elasticity estimates in our models are not
significantly different from zero, not all indoor uses are perfectly inelastic. In separate demand equations for indoor
uses, we find that showers and clothes-washing each have elasticities of about –0.22 (significant at .05), using Tobit
models for both due to censoring. The other indoor uses have demand curves that are approximately vertical. Given
evidence of some price-responsiveness indoors, and the small likelihood that utilities would or could regulate
specific indoor uses, we use our overall indoor elasticity estimates in the welfare analysis.
30
   Market-clearing prices are estimated for the irrigation season, assuming that drought regulations are implemented
primarily during arid months.


                                                         21
and magnified by their variation. In Eugene, where there was relatively little shadow price

variation, the market-clearing price is close to the average of the shadow prices. In San Diego,

we see a larger difference between the shadow prices and the market price.

        The last column of Table 6 reports market-clearing prices across all cities. Like the

shadow prices, market-clearing prices increase monotonically with the stringency of watering

restrictions. Within a utility, there is a common price. While not as large as the variation within

shadow prices, we still find that market-clearing prices vary substantially across utilities. For the

most common drought policy, the average market-clearing price is $3.90 per thousand gallons, or

slightly more than twice the current mean marginal price.

6.4. Welfare Implications

The management of water scarcity through residential outdoor watering restrictions results in

substantial welfare losses, given the observed heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay. Welfare losses

calculated in this context (with a reduced-form model, and Marshallian demand curves) should

be considered very rough estimates. Nonetheless, we do calculate them.31

        For each utility, we simulate the welfare effects of a two-day per week watering policy

over a 180-day drought-struck irrigation season. Deadweight losses (DWL) under the current

regime represent the estimated benefit to the average household of introducing drought pricing.32

First, if we assume households are homogeneous and allow them to substitute some indoor for

outdoor reductions, the average DWL is $26.90 per household.33 Next, we allow substitution

across households. Table 7 summarizes our findings on a per household basis. Estimated DWL

ranges from $1.71 per household, in the service area of Seattle Public Utilities, to $437 per

31
   We estimate deadweight loss by integrating demand curves, as discussed in Table 7.
32
   Presumably, if we included multi-family homes in a market-based policy, gains from trade would be somewhat
larger. Their inclusion would add their (currently unregulated) indoor use to the “common pool” which, if sensitive
to price increases, would be an additional source of reductions to support increases in higher-valued uses.
33
   This average DWL is estimated using the coefficients reported in Table 3.


                                                        22
household, in the service area of Las Virgenes Municipal Water District. The variation in DWL

from the current regulations is attributable, in part, to the standard deviation of shadow prices, a

strong indicator of potential gains from trade. In our sample, society would be better off by about

$81 per household through the introduction of drought pricing.

       The discussion of price-based approaches is largely hypothetical under the current

regulatory structure. Estimated market-clearing prices are greater than current average marginal

prices in all of these markets, in some cases by very large magnitudes. If they are also higher

than average costs, prices this high would be impossible to implement without significant rebates

of some form, as we discuss in Section 6.5.

       In addition, we face the standard worry about the welfare effects of a theoretical first-best

policy in a second-best setting (Lipsey and Lancaster 1956, Harberger 1974). Ours is a partial

equilibrium analysis, thus spillovers (no pun intended) to other markets from changes in water

expenditures as a result of a policy change may be a concern, as it is in the well-known

theoretical and empirical studies of environmental taxation in a second-best setting (Sandmo

1975, Goulder et al. 1999, Goulder and Williams 2003).

       In our case, the distortions of greatest concern are within water markets, themselves. In

most cases, marginal water prices are well below the marginal social cost of water supply

(Hanemann 1997, Timmins 2003). Applying a price-based approach to drought policy will result

in higher marginal prices for all households (even if total expenditures fall for some households

through lump-sum transfers). To the extent that price-based drought management results in more

households paying something closer to marginal social cost, the pre-existing distortion does not




                                                23
change the basic nature of our results.34 However, if marginal prices in the sample are well below

marginal social cost, the welfare impacts of moving to drought pricing may pale in comparison

to the impacts of moving to marginal social cost pricing, period. This is an important area for

further research, but it is beyond the scope of this analysis.

6.5. Distributional Implications

While the shift from outdoor watering restrictions to a price-based municipal drought policy

would be welfare-improving in all markets, the distributional implications of shifting regulatory

approaches depend on the allocation of property rights. Prices would re-distribute scarce water

such that those with high willingness-to-pay for water consumption outdoors would consume

more than they do under outdoor use restrictions, and those with low willingness-to-pay would

consume less.

         Figure 4 describes the movement of water consumption across income/lot size groups

that would be brought about by the shift from prescriptive to price-based allocation of water

during periods of scarcity. For the purpose of exposition, we choose a two-day per week

watering policy, and the market-clearing price that would generate the equivalent level of

aggregate demand reduction. The consumption share of rich, big lot households would grow

substantially, primarily as a result of consumption reduction by poor, small lot households, and

to a smaller extent by the other groups. Hence, drought pricing would result in a water allocation

that would “soak the rich.”

         Under drought pricing, relative to the traditional approach, the consumption share of the

least elastic group (at least for outdoor uses), the rich, big lot households, would rise from 35 to

48 percent; the consumption share for the most elastic group, the poor, small lot households,

34
  An increase in the marginal price of municipal water supply will generate an increase in the consumption of
substitutes. Where groundwater is a viable substitute for municipal tap water, spatial and intertemporal externalities
may result (or increase, where they are already present).


                                                         24
would fall from 23 to 16 percent, with smaller reductions in consumption shares by the

remaining two groups. Absolute consumption falls quite drastically among all groups under both

types of drought policies.

           Given the changes in consumption shares induced by moving from the current approach

to drought pricing, the largest DWL under the current approach is experienced by the rich, big lot

households (Table 8). But a more meaningful number to households is the change in surplus. We

calculate the average changes in producers’ surplus (PS) and consumers’ surplus (CS), as well as

the average change in CS by group that would result from the adoption of a price-based

approach. On average, consumers in each group are worse off under drought pricing, primarily

because current average marginal prices do not reflect scarcity, and are thus below current

shadow prices. Thus, consumers would not support this efficiency-improving change without a

rebate. The average PS, $158 per household, would be used for this purpose, as utilities in the

United States are usually restricted to zero (or very small) profits.35 Households’ minimum

willingness to accept payment to support the policy would equal their average change in CS.

Within lot size, a price-based system without rebates would be regressive.

           A progressive price-based approach can always be designed through the use of transfers.

In the present case, this could occur through the utility billing process. Should utilities seek to

address distributional concerns through the water supply system, rebates could be delivered

based on income. Low-income households could receive sums greater than their minimum

willingness-to-accept, since the average PS exceeds the average CS by the size of the average re-

captured DWL. Market-based policies need not be regressive.




35
     Note that the sum of changes in average CS and PS equal the average DWL, by definition.


                                                         25
7. Conclusions

Using unique panel data on residential end-uses of water, we examine the welfare implications of

traditional municipal drought policies. Using price variation across and within markets, we

identify price elasticities for indoor and outdoor consumption. Outdoor uses are more elastic than

indoor uses, suggesting that current policies target those water uses households, themselves, are

most willing to forgo. Nevertheless, we find that use restrictions have substantial welfare

implications, primarily due to household heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay for water under

conditions of scarcity.

        Heterogeneity is often ignored in economic analyses, which proceed from the viewpoint

of the “representative consumer.” For heavily regulated goods, estimating the welfare gains from

introducing markets requires the opposite starting point—it is precisely the variation in marginal

benefits that opens up potential gains from trade within non-market allocations. While we find

that there is some potential for substitution within households across end-uses, most of the

welfare gains from a price-based approach result from the variation across households in values

for scarce water.

        Of all the currently regulated markets in which alternative price-based policies have been

proposed, municipal water markets may be the easiest in which to imagine actually introducing a

price-based approach, even one that involves lump sum transfers to achieve equity goals.

Household water use is metered, and monitored by utility staff for the purpose of billing and

collection.36 Were such a system to be implemented, a municipality would have the rare

opportunity to affect an actual Pareto improvement, in which gains not only exceed losses, but

no household is made worse off.

36
  This is quite unlike the case of market-based pollution regulation, which requires the installation of continuous
emissions monitoring infrastructure (for tradable permits), or the case of congestion pricing, which requires a new
system with which regulators can track consumers’ use of priced roadways.


                                                        26
          If concern about “everyone doing their part” during a drought is the reason for the current

predominance of command-and-control, rather than market-based approaches to the management

of scarce water resources, economists’ discussion of potential lump sum transfers and actual

Pareto improvements may fall on deaf ears. There is irony in this. In the long run, command-and-

control regulations provide no incentive for the invention, innovation, and diffusion of water

conserving technologies (outdoors or indoors). Water priced below marginal social cost, drought

or no drought, also results in inefficient land-use patterns, like the establishment of large, lawn-

covered lots and thirsty non-native plant species where water is scarce. Further investigation of

the welfare gains from water marketing, both within and across sectors, is an important area for

further research.



Appendix A. Estimation of Price Instruments

The water demand function (A.1) is in exponential form, where w is total daily water demand,

Z is a matrix of seasonal and daily weather conditions, X is a matrix of household

characteristics, p is the marginal water price, Y is virtual income, η is a measure of household

heterogeneity, ε is optimization or perception error; and δ , β , α , and µ are parameters.37

                                                              µ
                                         w = e Zδ e X β pα Y eη eε                                      (A.1)

                                     µ
          Let wk (.) = e Zδ e X β pkα Y k , or optimal consumption in block k . Then, conditional demand
                 *




under a two-tier increasing-block price structure, in which w1 is the kink point, can be

represented as in (A.2), and conditional price as in (A.3).


37
     The structural model includes two additional parameters,     ση   and   σε .   Our 2SLS approach does not allow
separate identification of the two error variances. We use the structural estimate of    σ η to calculate block and kink
probabilities in (A.5).


                                                         27
                               ⎧ * η ε                                    w1
                               ⎪ w1 (.)e e           if       0 < eη ≤    *
                               ⎪                                         w1 (.)
                               ⎪⎪                            w1           w
                           w = ⎨ w1eε                if      *
                                                                   < eη ≤ * 1         (A.2)
                                ⎪                           w1 (.)       w2 (.)
                                ⎪ * η ε                           w1
                                ⎪ w2 (.)e e          if           *
                                                                        < eη
                                ⎪⎩                               w2 (.)

                                  ⎧                                     w1
                                  ⎪ p1    if                0 < eη ≤    *
                                  ⎪                                    w1 (.)
                                  ⎪⎪                       w1           w
                              p = ⎨indet. if               *
                                                                 < eη ≤ * 1           (A.3)
                                   ⎪                      w1 (.)       w2 (.)
                                   ⎪                           w1
                                   ⎪ p2   if                   *
                                                                     < eη
                                   ⎪⎩                         w2 (.)

Consumption only occurs at the kink point if the consumer maximizes utility for choices that are

                                                                   *              *
unavailable at all (pk,Yk), so for kink observations, w1 (.) > w1 and w2 (.) < w1 .

        From the conditional price equation, we derive a daily probability-weighted price (A.4).

Our price instrument is the seasonal average, by household, of p . Errors are assumed to be

independent and normally distributed. Thus, eη ∼ LN ( µeη , σ eη ) , and integrations in (A.5) are

over the probability density function of this lognormal distribution.

                         p = Pr A ∗ p1 + Pr B ∗ (.5 p1 + .5 p2 ) + Pr C ∗ p2          (A.4)



                                  Where:
                                            w1
                                           w1* (.)

                                  Pr A =      ∫
                                              0
                                                     f (eη )deη
                                                                                      (A.5)
                                              ∞
                                  Pr C =      ∫
                                             w1
                                                     f (eη )deη
                                           w*2 (.)

                                  and Pr B = 1 − Pr A − Pr C



                                                            28
Appendix B. Robustness of Estimation

The ideal data for this analysis would include a longer time-series component. Essentially, we

have two price observations per household. For this reason, we cannot estimate a model with

household fixed effects (FEs), or even city FEs, without reducing price variation so substantially

as to prevent reasonable interpretation of parameter estimates, provided we are able to estimate

effects, at all, that are significantly different from zero (recall that about 94 percent of variation

in sample prices can be explained by household FEs, alone).

        The best way we can control for household heterogeneity in this context without losing

too many degrees of freedom is to include a household random effect in the models, as we have

done. Hausman tests in most cases reject the null hypothesis that the random effects model is

consistent and efficient. However, where we reject random effects, we do so largely because the

estimates are more precise than they are in the models in which the Hausman test does not reject

the null.

        As tests of robustness, we estimate models with household and city FEs, as well as those

using aggregate data. For the latter, we collapse daily observations to seasonal observations,

creating two demand observations per household, and obtain estimates from regressions of

aggregate seasonal household demand on the covariates.

        The household fixed effects (FE) model generates an upward-sloping indoor demand

function, though the price coefficient is insignificant; this is likely an artifact of the small amount

of price variation available to estimate the indoor elasticity. This is true both for the

homogeneous demand functions, and for those allowing household heterogeneity. The incidental

parameters problem prevents us from estimating maximum likelihood outdoor models with

household FEs.



                                                  29
       Table B.1. reports results of the city FE and aggregate demand models for homogeneous

households. With city FEs, indoor demand is upward-sloping (though the elasticity is also

insignificant), and the magnitude of the outdoor elasticity is much smaller than the magnitude of

the outdoor elasticity with regional FEs. For this sample, the inclusion of city FEs substantially

reduces price variation and results in noisy estimates of price elasticities. Fixed effects of an even

finer level, that of utilities, might control for residential water conservation programs—and other

utility policies—unlike either the regional or city FEs. The inclusion of regional fixed effects

does control for long-run climate variation but cannot capture utility-specific heterogeneity.

       The aggregate demand models of indoor and outdoor consumption provide estimates that

are very similar to their daily counterparts. That our models are robust to this seasonal

specification is encouraging. However, the daily water demand models are preferable in that they

provide more detailed information regarding the impact of daily weather conditions on water

consumption.

       We run this same set of robustness checks (household FEs, city FEs, and aggregate data)

on our estimates of elasticity across heterogeneous consumer groups, reported in Table B.2.

Surprisingly, the city FE models are able to identify outdoor demand elasticities for each

consumer group – they are approximately equal, in statistical terms. Results by group using

aggregate data differ slightly from our daily models. Using aggregate data, the difference

between the “rich, big lot” households and the other groups is more pronounced. The estimates

for the remaining three groups are not significantly different from each other.

       Finally, we also test an alternative definition of household heterogeneity. The logic of the

sample-level definition of heterogeneity is that wealthy households in one city are more like

households of similar income elsewhere than those of lower income within a city, and that lot



                                                 30
size primarily reflects preferences for outdoor water-intensive activities and services. However,

differences in land values across cities suggest that an alternative model would consider lot size

heterogeneity relative to city medians, rather than the sample median. We estimate elasticities for

household groups using city median lot size and sample median income, and report results in the

last column of Table B.2. Elasticities are somewhat less different across groups under this

specification. The average DWL in this case is about $34 per household. In general, we find the

demand models, in aggregate and by group, to be robust to the alternative specifications tested.




                                                31
References

Baumol, William J. and Wallace E. Oates. 1988. The Theory of Environmental Policy, Second
   Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Burtless, Gary and Jerry A. Hausman. 1978. The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply: Evaluating
   the Gary Income Maintenance Experiment. Journal of Political Economy 86: 1101-1130.
Burtraw, Dallas, Alan Krupnick, Erin Mansur, David Austin, and Deirdre Farrell. 1998. The
   Costs and Benefits of Reducing Air Pollution Related to Acid Rain. Contemporary Economic
   Policy 16: 379-400.
Collinge, Robert A. 1994. Transferable Rate Entitlements: The Overlooked Opportunity in
   Municipal Water Pricing. Public Finance Quarterly 22: 46-64.
Corral, Leonardo R. 1997. Price and Non-Price Influence in Urban Water Conservation. Ph.D.
   diss. University of California at Berkeley.
Crocker, Thomas D. 1966. “The Structuring of Atmospheric Pollution Control Systems.” In The
   Economics of Air Pollution, ed. H. Wolozin, 61-86. New York: Norton.
Dales, John H. 1968. Pollution, Property and Prices. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Dalhuisen, Jasper M., Raymond J. G. M. Florax, Henri L. F. de Groot, and Peter Nijkamp. 2003.
   Price and Income Elasticities of Residential Water Demand: A Meta-analysis. Land
   Economics 79: 292-308.
Daniel, Joseph I. 2001. Distributional Consequences of Airport Congestion Pricing. Journal of
   Urban Economics 50: 230-258.
De Vany, Arthur S. and W. David Walls. 1999. Price Dynamics in a Network of Decentralized
   Power Markets. Journal of Regulatory Economics 15: 123-40.
Dixon, Lloyd S., Nancy Y. Moore, and Ellen M. Pint. 1996. Drought Management Policies and
   Economic Effects in Urban Areas of California, 1987-1992. Santa Monica: RAND.
Espey, Molly, James A. Espey, and W. Douglass Shaw. 1997. Price Elasticity of Residential
   Demand for Water: A Meta-analysis. Water Resources Research 33: 1369-1374.
Gilbert, Richard, Edward Kahn, and Matt White. 1996. “The Efficiency of Market Coordination:
   Evidence from Wholesale Electric Power Pools.” In Networks, infrastructure, and the new
   task for regulation, eds. W. Sichel and D. L. Alexander, 37-58. Ann Arbor: University of
   Michigan Press.
Gleick, Peter H., Dana Haasz, Christine Henges-Jeck, Veena Srinivasan, Gary Wolff, Katherine
   Kao Cushing, and Amardip Mann. 2003. Waste Not, Want Not: The Potential for Urban
   Water Conservation in California. Oakland, CA: Pacific Institute.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W. H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw. 1999.
   The Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a Second-
   best Setting. Journal of Public Economics 72: 329-360.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Roberton C. Williams III. 2003. The Substantial Bias from Ignoring
   General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden, and a Practical Solution. Journal
   of Political Economy 111: 898-927.


                                              32
Hall, Robert E. 1973. “Wages, Income and Hours of Work in the U.S. Labor Force.” In Income
   Maintenance and Labor Supply, ed. G. G. Cain and H. W. Watts, 102-159. Chicago: Rand
   McNally College Publishing Company.
Hanemann, W. Michael. 1984. Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand.
   Econometrica 52: 541-561.
Hanemann, W. Michael. 1997. “Price and Rate Structures.” In Urban Water Demand
   Management and Planning, ed. D. D. Baumann, J. J. Boland, and W. M. Hanemann, 137-
   179. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1974. Taxation and Welfare. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hearne, Robert R. and William K. Easter. 1997. The Economic and Financial Gains from Water
   Markets in Chile. Agricultural Economics 15: 187-199.
Hewitt, Julie A. and W. Michael Hanemann. 1995. A Discrete/Continuous Choice Approach to
  Residential Water Demand under Block Rate Pricing. Land Economics 71: 173-192.
Howe, Charles W., Dennis R. Schurmeier, and W. Douglass Shaw, Jr. 1986. Innovative
  Approaches to Water Allocation: The Potential for Water Markets. Water Resources
  Research 22: 439-445.
Kerr, Suzi and David Maré. 1997. Efficient regulation through tradeable permit markets: the
   United States lead phasedown. Working Paper 96-06, Department of Agricultural and
   Resource Economics, University of Maryland, College Park.
Kleit, Andrew N. and Dek Terrell. 2001. Measuring Potential Efficiency Gains from
   Deregulation of Electricity Generation: A Bayesian Approach. Review of Economics and
   Statistics 83: 523-30.
Kraus, Marvin. 1989. The Welfare Gains from Pricing Road Congestion Using Automatic
   Vehicle Identification and On-Vehicle Meters. Journal of Urban Economics 25: 261-281.
Krause, Kate, Janie M. Chermak, and David Brookshire. 2003. The Demand for Water:
   Consumer Response to Scarcity. Journal of Regulatory Economics 23: 167-191.
Lipsey, R.G. and Kelvin Lancaster. 1956. The General Theory of the Second Best. Review of
   Economic Studies 24: 11-32.
Mayer, Peter W., W. B. DeOreo, E. M. Opitz, J. C. Kiefer, W. Y. Davis, B. Dziegielewski, and J.
  O. Nelson. 1998. Residential End-Uses of Water. Denver: American Water Works
  Association Research Foundation.
McMillan, John. 1994. Selling Spectrum Rights. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8: 145-162.
Melody, William H. 1980. Radio Spectrum Allocation: The Role of the Market. American
   Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 70: 393-397.
Michelsen, Ari M., J. Thomas McGuckin, and Donna M. Stumpf. 1998. Effectiveness of
   Residential Water Conservation Price and Nonprice Programs. Denver: American Water
   Works Association Research Foundation.
Moffitt, Robert. 1990. The Econometrics of Kinked Budget Constraints. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 4: 119-139.


                                              33
Moffitt, Robert. 1986. The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget Constraints: A Survey and
  Exposition of the Maximum Likelihood Method. Journal of Business and Economic
  Statistics 4: 317-328.
Montgomery, W. David. 1972. Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Programs.
  Journal of Economic Theory 5: 395-418.
National Climatic Data Center. 2007. Climate of 2007 – June, U.S. Drought Watch.
   http://www.ncdc.noaaa.gov/oa/climate/research/2007/jun/us-drought.html. (accessed August
   6, 2007).
Newell, Richard G. and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. Cost Heterogeneity and the Potential Savings
  from Market-Based Policies. Journal of Regulatory Economics 23: 43-59.
Newey, Whitney. 1987. Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
  Endogenous Explanatory Variables. Journal of Econometrics 36: 230-251.
Olmstead, Sheila M. Forthcoming. “Reduced-form vs. Structural Models of Water Demand
   Under Non-linear Prices,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.
Olmstead, Sheila M., W. Michael Hanemann, and Robert N. Stavins. Forthcoming. “Water
   Demand Under Alternative Price Structures,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
   Management.
Parry, Ian W. H. and Antonio Bento. 2002. Estimating the Welfare Effect of Congestion Taxes:
   The Critical Importance of Other Distortions Within the Transport System. Journal of Urban
   Economics 51: 339-365.
Pels, Eric and Erik T. Verhof. 2004. The Economics of Airport Congestion Pricing. Journal of
    Urban Economics 55: 257-277.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan and Co.
Pint, Ellen M. 1999. Household Responses to Increased Water Rates During the California
    Drought. Land Economics 75: 246-266.
Renwick, Mary E. and Sandra O. Archibald. 1998. Demand Side Management Policies for
   Residential Water Use: Who Bears the Conservation Burden? Land Economics 74: 343-359.
Rietveld, Piet, Jan Rouwendal, and Bert Zwart. 2000. Block Rate Pricing of Water in Indonesia:
   An Analysis of Welfare Effects. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies 36: 73-92.
Sandmo, Agnar. 1975. Optimal Taxation in the Presence of Externalities. Swedish Journal of
   Economics 77: 87-98.
Schultz, Martin T., Sheila M. Cavanagh, Bisheng Gu, and David J. Eaton. 1997. The
   Consequences of Water Consumption Restrictions During the Corpus Christi Drought of
   1996. Draft Report, LBJ School of Public Affairs, University of Texas, Austin.
Small, Kenneth A. and Jia Yan. 2001. The Value of ‘Value Pricing’ of Roads: Second-Best
  Pricing and Product Differentiation. Journal of Urban Economics 49: 310-336.
Suen, Wing. 1990. Statistical Models of Consumer Behavior with Heterogeneous Values and
   Constraints. Economic Inquiry 28: 79-98.



                                              34
Tietenberg, Tom. 1995. Tradable Permits for Pollution Control when Emission Location Matters:
    What Have We Learned? Environmental and Resource Economics 5: 95-113.
Timmins, Christopher. 2003. Demand-Side Technology Standards Under Inefficient Pricing
   Regimes: Are They Effective Water Conservation Tools in the Long Run? Environmental
   and Resource Economics 26: 107-124.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1973. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41: 477-491.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1977. Is the Price System or Rationing More Effective in Getting a
  Commodity to Those Who Need it Most? The Bell Journal of Economics 8: 517-524.
Winston, Clifford. 1985. Conceptual Developments in the Economics of Transportation: An
   Interpretive Survey. Journal of Economic Literature 23: 57-94.




                                             35
                                              Table 1. Descriptive Statistics


                                                                                 Std.
Variable                          Description                    Units   Mean    Dev.     Min.    Max.

w                  Daily household water demand             kgal/day       .40     .58    0         9.78
                    in season                               kgal/day       .54     .71    0         9.78
                    off season                              kgal/day       .25     .34    0         7.16
wout               Daily water demand outdoors              kgal/day       .22     .55    0         9.50
                    in season                               kgal/day       .36     .69    0         9.50
                    off season                              kgal/day       .07     .30    0         6.79
win                Daily water demand indoors               kgal/day       .17     .13    0         1.91
                    in season                               kgal/day       .17     .13    0         1.04
                    off season                              kgal/day       .17     .13    0         1.91
P(wout>0)          Fraction obs. for which outdoor>0                       .42     .49    0         1
P(win>0)           Fraction obs. for which indoor>0                       >.99     .02    0         1
price              Observed marginal water price            $/kgal/mo     1.71     .57      .5      4.96
phat               Marginal water price instrument          $/kgal/mo     1.71     .53      .76     4.73
income             Gross annual household income            $000/yr      69.72   67.66    5.00    388.64
arid season        Irrigation season=1 / not=0                             .51     .50    0         1
weath              Evapotransp. less effective rainfall     mm/day        5.06    8.42   -46.15    19.37
maxtemp            Maximum daily temperature                °C           24.12    8.78    0        42.78
famsize            Number of residents in household                       2.78    1.34    1         9
bathrooms          Number of bathrooms in household                       2.58    1.30    1         7
                                                                     2
sqft               Area of home                             000 ft        2.02     .82      .40     4.37
                                                                     2
lotsize            Area of lot                              000 ft       10.87    9.22    1.00     45.77
home age           Age of home                              yrs/10        2.89    1.62      .07     5
evap cooling       Evaporative cooling=1 / not=0                           .09     .28    0         1
region 1           Southern California                                     .37     .48    0         1
region 2           Arizona/Colorado                                        .28     .45    0         1
region 3           Northern                                                .26     .44    0         1
region 4           Florida                                                 .09     .29    0         1
Notes: kgal is thousands of gallons.




                                                            36
                     Table 2. Model Testing Probability-Weighted Prices as Instruments


                              DCC Estimates
                               (OHS Paper)                          Test Model 1                         Test Model 2

   Variable              Estimate             SE              Estimate             SE            Estimate               SE

   lnprice              -0.3408*           0.0298            -0.1751            0.1084            -0.3575*           0.0694

   lnincome              0.1305*           0.0118             0.1421*           0.0319             0.1433*           0.0327

   arid season           0.3070*           0.0247             0.3111*           0.0211             0.3156*           0.0209

   weath                 0.0079*           0.0013             0.0081*           0.0011             0.0078*           0.0010

   maxtemp               0.0196*           0.0018             0.0193*           0.0015             0.0201*           0.0015

   famsize               0.1961*           0.0056             0.1915*           0.0152             0.1949*           0.0156

   bathrooms             0.0585*           0.0093             0.0481#           0.0250             0.0557*           0.0259

   sqft                  0.1257*           0.0140             0.1234*           0.0379             0.1349*           0.0393

   lotsize               0.0065*           0.0009             0.0061*           0.0025             0.0077*           0.0025

   home age              0.0867*           0.0219             0.0826            0.0592             0.0990            0.0613

   home age2            -0.0137*           0.0036            -0.0145            0.0098            -0.0171#           0.0102

   evap cooling          0.2277*           0.0300             0.2329*           0.0823             0.2340*           0.0827


   Fixed Effects      City-level                          City-level                         Region-level

   R2 overall                                                  0.20                               0.19
      within                                                   0.10                               0.10
      between                                                  0.36                               0.32


Notes: * significant at 5% (# at 10%). Dependent variable is natural log of daily household water demand (kgal). Model in
column 1 is discrete-continuous choice model from Olmstead et al. (2007). Test models 1 and 2 are 2SLS random effects model
for panel data, in which we instrument for marginal water prices. Estimates for city-level and region-level fixed effects are not
reported. In all cases, N=25,668, with 1,082 households.




                                                               37
                              Table 3. Models of Indoor and Outdoor Water Demand

                                           Indoor              Indoor              Outdoor              Outdoor
                   Variable               (annual)           (by season)           (annual)            (by season)

         lnphat                          -0.0727              -0.0642              -0.4457*            -0.4116*
                                         (0.0577)             (0.0575)             (0.0452)            (0.0459)

         lnphat wet season                                    -0.0349                                  -0.1606*
                                                              (0.0286)                                 (0.0381)

         perr                                                                       1.9777*             2.2680*
                                                                                   (0.0720)            (0.0963)

         perr wet season                                                                               -0.6109*
                                                                                                       (0.1202)

         lnincome                         0.0669*              0.0671*              0.0939*             0.0950*
                                         (0.0279)             (0.0278)             (0.0196)            (0.0196)

         arid season                     -0.0168              -0.0341               0.4267*             0.3388*
                                         (0.0164)             (0.0215)             (0.0211)            (0.0282)

         weath                            0.0005               0.0006               0.0083*             0.0085*
                                         (0.0008)             (0.0008)             (0.0012)            (0.0012)

         maxtemp                         -0.0012              -0.0012               0.0300*             0.0303*
                                         (0.0012)             (0.0012)             (0.0016)            (0.0016)

         famsize                          0.2391*              0.2394*              0.0378*             0.0401*
                                         (0.0132)             (0.0132)             (0.0092)            (0.0094)

         bathrooms                        0.0025               0.0026               0.0511*             0.0504*
                                         (0.0220)             (0.0220)             (0.0158)            (0.0155)

         sqft                             0.0145               0.0150               0.1457*             0.1486*
                                         (0.0335)             (0.0334)             (0.0246)            (0.0247)

         lotsize                          0.0031               0.0031               0.0104*             0.0104*
                                         (0.0022)             (0.0021)             (0.0015)            (0.0015)

         home age                         0.0641               0.0639               0.0502              0.0530
                                         (0.0522)             (0.0521)             (0.0360)            (0.0360)

         home age2                       -0.0132              -0.0131              -0.0057             -0.0061
                                         (0.0087)             (0.0086)             (0.0060)            (0.0060)

         evap cooling                     0.1456*              0.1454*              0.0829#             0.0840#
                                         (0.0704)             (0.0703)             (0.0504)            (0.0501)

Notes: * significant at 5% (# at 10%). For indoor models, dependent variable is natural log of daily household indoor demand and
model is 2SLS random effects, with 25,136 observations. For outdoor models, dependent variable is daily household outdoor
demand and model is 2SLS Tobit random effects, with 25,707 observations. About half of the observations fall in each season.
Results for regional fixed effects not reported. The variable perr is the residual from the first stage (fitted price) equation.




                                                              38
                                       Table 4. Summary of Elasticity Estimates

                                                              Indoor Demand              Outdoor Demand
                                                                Elasticities               Elasticities

                                                                 -0.0727                     -0.6836*
                    Overall
                                                                 (0.0577)                    (0.0693)

                                                                 -0.0642                     -0.7365*
                    Arid Season
                                                                 (0.0575)                    (0.0893)

                                                                 -0.0991                     -1.1750*
                    Wet Season
                                                                 (0.0633)                    (0.1073)


Notes: * significant at 5% (# at 10%). Elasticities are calculated for models reported in Table 3. Indoor elasticities are constant-
elasticity demand model coefficients. Outdoor elasticities are estimated as follows, where   αTobit is the Tobit price coefficient,
and   P and w are sample averages:

                                                              αTobit * P( wout > 0)
                                                    ε out =
                                                                      wout




                       Table 5. Price Elasticities of Demand, by Income/Lot Size Group


                                    Household             Indoor Demand           Outdoor Demand
                                     Group                  Elasticities            Elasticities

                                  Rich, big lot                 -0.1186               -0.4837*
                                                                (0.0804)              (0.1028)

                                  Poor, big lot                 -0.0861               -0.8017*
                                                                (0.1010)              (0.1233)

                                  Rich, small lot               -0.0663               -0.7758*
                                                                (0.0731)              (0.0946)

                                  Poor, small lot               -0.0423               -0.8690*
                                                                (0.0785)              (0.0938)

Notes: * significant at 5% (# at 10%). The number of observations is 7,188 for rich, big lot; 4,016 for poor, big lot; 7,386 for rich,
small lot; and 7,117 for poor, small lot.




                                                                   39
            Table 6. Shadow Prices, Market-clearing Prices Under Various Drought Policies

                                                  Current Price         Shadow Price            Market-clearing Price
                                                  Mean ($/kgal)         Mean ($/kgal)              Mean ($/kgal)
     Drought Policy                                [Std. Dev.]           [Std. Dev.]                [Std. Dev.]

     Status quo (no drought policy)                    1.79
                                                      [0.65]

     No outdoor watering                                                    50.00                      17.21
                                                                            [0.00]                    [14.50]

     Outdoor watering once/week                                              6.92                       6.86
                                                                           [10.50]                     [7.81]

     Outdoor watering twice/week                                             4.98                       3.90
                                                                            [7.49]                     [3.20]

     Outdoor watering 3 times/week                                           3.55                       2.77
                                                                            [5.06]                     [1.61]

Notes: All prices are for arid season only. We assume willingness-to-pay is at most $50 per thousand gallons.



                                  Table 7. Estimated Welfare Impacts by Utility


                                 Shadow Price ($/kgal)
                                                                     Market Price                   DWL
        Utility                Mean              Std. Dev.             ($/kgal)             ($/household/summer)

Seattle, WA                   2.91                   0.41               2.92                          1.71
Eugene, OR                    1.16                   0.48               1.06                          2.93
Waterloo, ONT                 2.25                   0.68               2.10                          3.48
Cambridge, ONT                1.94                   0.91               1.80                          4.31
Lompoc, CA                    3.09                   1.05               2.86                          5.61
Tampa, FL                     2.04                   1.19               1.96                         10.08
Highline, WA                  3.74                   1.79               3.30                         12.88
San Diego, CA                 3.80                   2.79               3.01                         26.04
Tempe, AZ                     3.05                   2.45               2.25                         26.96
Denver, CO                    3.16                   3.15               2.34                         29.93
Bellevue, WA                  3.83                   5.45               2.94                         58.33
Walnut Valley, CA             7.08                   7.40               4.71                         94.85
Phoenix, AZ                   5.02                   5.87               3.85                        106.54
Scottsdale, AZ                7.43                   7.10               5.07                        113.04
Northshore, WA                5.66                  11.87               3.61                        234.56
Las Virgenes, CA             16.39                  15.14              12.95                        437.48

  Sample-weighted
     Average                      4.98               4.35                3.90                         80.63

Notes: Shadow prices and deadweight losses (DWL) are calculated for a two-day per week outdoor watering policy. Estimates
and averages are for arid season only. DWL is estimated as the area under demand curves. For indoor demand,
                                                                                                     α
win = e Z δ e H β pα Y . Let Cin = e Z δ e H β Y . Then, win = Cin pα and the integral is: Cin p ( p ) = win p . For outdoor
                      µ                         µ

                                                                                                  (α + 1) α + 1
demand, wout = α ln p + µ ln Y + δ Z + β H . Let Cout = µ ln Y + δ Z + β H . Then, wout = Cout + α ln p , and the integral is:

Cout p − α p + α p ln p .


                                                               40
                    Table 8. Average Deadweight Loss and Change in Surplus by Group
                                        Average DWL             Average Change            Average Change in Surplus/Average
               Group                    ($/arid season)           in Surplus                       Annual Income
   Rich, big lot                            $223.9                    -$73.2                        -.0006
   Rich, small lot                            24.2                    -109.3                        -.0014
   Poor, big lot                              11.7                     -75.6                        -.0026
   Poor, small lot                            30.6                     -47.2                        -.0015
   Average household                          80.6                     -77.1                        -.0011
   Suppliers (per household)                    -                      157.7

Notes: DWL is welfare loss from the absence of a market. Average change in consumer and producer surplus results from
introducing a constant, market-clearing price.




                                    Table B.1. Robustness of Elasticity Estimates

                                                          Indoor Demand                   Outdoor Demand
                                                            Elasticities                    Elasticities
                                                              0.0881                          -0.3922*
                   City FEs
                                                             (0.0883)                         (0.1277)

                                                             -0.0689                           -0.5959*
                   Aggregate consumption
                                                             (0.0627)                          (0.1029)


Notes: * significant at 5% (# at 10%). Results in Table B.1. should be considered relative to the estimates reported in Table 4.




                                 Table B.2. Robustness of Heterogeneity Estimates

                                                                                                   City-specific
                                           City FE                   Aggregate Data                  Lot Size
                Household
                Sub-group           Indoor       Outdoor         Indoor        Outdoor         Indoor       Outdoor

             Rich, big lot         0.0494       -0.5183*        -0.0816        -0.2943#       -0.1467        -0.6883*
                                  (0.1016)      (0.1573)        (0.0861)       (0.1483)       (0.0805)       (0.0988)

             Poor, big lot         0.0819       -0.6725*        -0.0512        -0.8992*       -0.0234        -0.7833*
                                  (0.1250)      (0.1773)        (0.1023)       (0.1768)       (0.0915)       (0.1087)

             Rich, small lot       0.0898       -0.6727*        -0.0503        -0.7085*       -0.0449        -0.5979*
                                  (0.0961)      (0.1559)        (0.0802)       (0.1391)       (0.0721)       (0.0930)

             Poor, small lot       0.1296       -0.6739*       -0.0836        -0.7474*        -0.0809        -0.8473*
                                  (0.1079)       (0.1604)      (0.0802)       (0.1383)        (0.0825)       (0.0948)


Notes: * significant at 5% (# at 10%). Results in Table B.2. should be considered relative to the estimates reported in Table 5. In
the city FE model for outdoor demand (column 2), the “rich, big lot” elasticity is weakly different from the others (p=.10).




                                                                41
           Figure 1. Welfare Loss from Outdoor Consumption Restrictions




       $                                                             $
                                                     Dindoor

                     DWL
       λ

       P*                                                           P*
                                                        Doutdoor
      P                                                             P


∆Qindoor ∆Q reg                ∆Q*                                        ∆Qoutdoor


                  Required demand reduction from all uses




                                       42
                Figure 2. Welfare Losses from Outdoor Consumption Restrictions with Heterogeneous Outdoor Demand




$                                           $                                           $
                      DWL                   λB                     DWL                              DWL
    *
P
λA
P



        QA*      QAreg       QAunreg                       QBreg QB* QBunreg                   QC* QC

                         A                                         B                                    C
               Relatively Elastic                      Somewhat Less Elastic                    Indoor Demand
               Outdoor Demand                            Outdoor Demand


              (Where P* is the market-clearing price for QAreg + QBreg + QC = QA* + QB* + QC* ).




                                                              43
                                   Figure 3. Distribution of Shadow Prices


                                      Histogram of Shadow Prices
                                               Eugene and San Diego
                            1.16                     3.8
                  2.5


                   2


                  1.5
        Density




                   1


                   .5


                   0                                                                                          0
                        0            2                   4                  6                  8

                                Eugene Shadow Price                        San Diego Shadow Price



Notes: Distributions are of estimated shadow prices for Eugene, Oregon and San Diego, California, given a two days
per week water policy. Numbers at the top of the figure identify average shadow prices for each city, and vertical lines
represent the alternative policy of a market-clearing price, in dollars per thousand gallons.




                                                             44
                                                 Figure 4. Allocation of Water Consumption by Drought Policy


                                                                   Rich,                             Poor, Small Lot
                               Poor,                              Big Lot                                 16%
                              Small Lot                            43%
                                19%
                                                                                           Poor, Big Lot                                        Rich, Big Lot
                                                                                               12%                                                  48%



                        Poor,
                       Big Lot
                        15%                                                                      Rich, Small Lot
                                                                                                      24%
                                                                                                                                            Market-based policy
                                                                                                                                    with aggregate reductions equivalent
                                                                                                                                        to watering 2 days per week
                                        Rich,
                                       Small Lot                                       Poor, Small Lot
                                                                                            23%
                                         23%                                                                                           Rich, Big Lot
                                                                                                                                           35%

                                            No drought policy


                                                                                     Poor, Big Lot
                                                                                         14%
                                                                                                                                                   Outdoor watering
                                                                                                                                                    2 days per week

                                                                                                                  Rich, Small Lot
                                                                                                                       28%



Notes: Total arid season consumption (the “size of the pie”) is 6,815 kgal with no drought policy, and 4,607 kgal with either drought policy.




                                                                                        45
