                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRICES VS. QUANTITIES:
           ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION AND IMPERFECT COMPETITION

                                            Erin T. Mansur

                                         Working Paper 13510
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13510


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




I would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Peter Berck, Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Nat Keohane,
Barry Nalebuff, Aviv Nevo, Sheila Olmstead, Chad Syverson, Chris Timmins, Frank Wolak, Catherine
Wolfram, two anonymous referees, and the editor for helpful suggestions. I also thank seminar participants
at Berkeley, UCEI, Yale, and NBER. I am grateful for funding from the California Public Utilities
Commission and the University of California Energy Institute. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Erin T. Mansur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Prices vs. Quantities: Environmental Regulation and Imperfect Competition
Erin T. Mansur
NBER Working Paper No. 13510
October 2007
JEL No. L13,L94,Q53

                                              ABSTRACT

In a market subject to environmental regulation, a firm's strategic behavior affects the production and
emissions decisions of all firms. If firms are regulated by a Pigouvian tax, changing emissions will
not affect the marginal cost of polluting. However, under a tradable permits system, the polluters' decisions
affect the permit price. This paper shows that this feedback effect may increase a strategic firm's output.
Relative to a tax, tradable permits improve welfare in a market with imperfect competition. As an
application, I model strategic and competitive behavior of wholesalers in the Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
and Maryland electricity market. Simulations suggest that exercising market power decreased local
pollution by approximately nine percent, and therefore, substantially reduced the price of the region's
pollution permits. Furthermore, I find that had regulators opted to use a tax instead of permits, the
deadweight loss from imperfect competition would have been approximately seven percent greater.

Erin T. Mansur
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
erin.mansur@yale.edu
1         Introduction
This paper examines the welfare implications of strategic behavior in a market subject to
environmental regulation. Market-based policies—including some tradable permit systems—
appear to be implemented without the consideration of whether or not the polluting markets
are competitive. This omission is important because, if firms have market power, they alter
the output and emissions of all firms relative to a competitive market. This paper studies
the interaction of environmental regulation and imperfectly competitive markets by asking
two questions: First, does strategic behavior aﬀect pollution in environmentally regulated
markets? Second, how does the choice of environmental policy instrument aﬀect the welfare
implications of imperfect competition?
        This paper develops a theoretical model of environmental regulation, focusing on the
comparison between emissions taxes (i.e., a price instrument) and tradable permits (a quan-
tity instrument). In a classic analysis, Weitzman [34] examines the welfare consequences of
price and quantity regulations when abatement costs are uncertain. In contrast to modeling
this uncertainty, I examine the welfare consequences of policy instrument choice when firms
have market power in selling a polluting good. In a market subject to environmental regu-
lation, a firm’s strategic behavior aﬀects the production and emissions decisions of all firms.
If firms are regulated by a Pigouvian tax, changing emissions will not aﬀect the marginal
cost of polluting. However, under a tradable permit system, polluters’ decisions aﬀect the
permit price. As shown in this paper, this feedback eﬀect may increase a strategic firm’s
output.1 Therefore, relative to a tax, tradable permits improve welfare in a product market
with imperfect competition.2
    1
     As discussed below, this will always be the case when the dominant firm is relatively dirty. When the
dominant firm is relatively clean, the results depend on the sensitivity of the permit price to the firm’s
behavior.
   2
     To be consistent with the literature on pollution regulation, I use the term “product market” to distin-
guish markets that produce goods (and pollute in the process) as opposed to a market, like a permit market,
where firms trade property rights.



                                                     2
       The paper then studies the welfare consequences of policy instrument choice in the con-
text of restructured electricity markets. Regulators restructured power generation with the
hopes of providing incentives for better investment and operation of power plants. In general,
however, restructuring has enabled wholesalers to exercise market power.3 I focus on the
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Maryland (PJM) market, which was restructured in April
1999. During the summer of 1998, before restructuring, wholesale prices were consistent
with those of a competitive market, while after restructuring actual prices were substan-
tially higher than simulated competitive prices [22]. Furthermore, after restructuring, firms
distorted production and caused welfare losses [23].
       At the same time, the PJM market was subject to market-based environmental regulation:
the tradable permit system established by the Ozone Transport Commission (OTC) regulates
nitrogen oxides (NOx ) emissions by power plants in the Northeast. I simulate the interaction
of the PJM and OTC markets to determine the impact of policy instrument choice on welfare.
Since 1999, the geographic coverage of both PJM and the regional NOx regulations have
changed: the simulation in the paper is based on the old PJM footprint.
       In the simulation, I make a few assumptions that diﬀer from the theory section. First,
while the theory section allows for the possibility that firms may exercise market power in the
input market, this eﬀect is assumed to be relatively minor as it is not the focus of this paper
(see Hahn [14] for a discussion of that eﬀect). In the simulation, this is made explicit by
assuming that firms take input prices as given. Secondly, the theory focuses on a dominant
firm facing a competitive fringe in order to provide the intuition of how strategic behavior in
product markets may aﬀect pollution levels. The simulation model uses a Cournot model,
which is arguably more appropriate for this application [6]. However, the environmental
eﬀects of introducing a dominant firm are more straightforward to model and are the focus
of the theory part of the paper.
   3
     Numerous studies find large, positive price-cost margins in England and Wales [35],[36],[37], California
[3],[16],[27], and New England [7].



                                                     3
        Throughout the paper, I define “local” emissions as those occurring in the product market
of interest (e.g., PJM).4 Results imply that the market power introduced by restructuring
reduced local emissions by approximately nine percent, and decreased permit prices by 48
percent (relative to simulated competitive prices).5,6 A tax set assuming a competitive prod-
uct market would have increased the production distortions of strategic firms. I conclude
that the welfare loss from imperfect competition in PJM would have been seven percent
larger under a tax than under the permit system.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses how this paper fits into the
economics literature. In section 3, I construct a model of optimal environmental regula-
tion for the case of perfectly competitive markets. Section 4 examines the environmental
implications of strategic behavior. Section 5 discusses the welfare implications of environ-
mental policy instrument choice. In section 6, I simulate how NOx permit prices respond to
market power in the PJM electricity market and quantify the welfare impacts of the policy
instrument choice of taxes versus tradable permits. Section 7 oﬀers concluding remarks.


2         Related Literature
This paper adds to an extensive literature that has examined the theory of environmental
regulation in imperfectly competitive markets. As an example of the theory of the second
best, a polluting monopoly facing a Pigouvian tax, which is set equal to the marginal ex-
    4
     As noted below, when a region is regulated by a cap-and-trade program, local reductions in emissions
will result in greater emissions elsewhere in the region (as long as the cap is binding). In this case, the eﬀect
will be to lower the permit price. There may be additional welfare eﬀects if the regulated pollutant is not
uniformly mixed.
   5
     Strategic firms in PJM tend to have higher emissions rates than the fringe [[24]. As discussed below,
when a dominant firm is relatively dirty, market power reduces local emissions.
   6
     Consistent with this result, Mansur [24] finds emissions measured using a model of competitive behavior
exceeded the actual emissions of firms in PJM by approximately eight percent. Chen and co-authors [9],[10]
examine the interaction of market power in the PJM and NOx markets. They note that firms may exercise
market power in the permit market, depending on the initial allocation of permits. They find that exercising
market power in the electricity market will lower the price of permits. However, their models do not allow
for trading of permits outside of PJM so there are no “local” environmental eﬀects as defined here.



                                                       4
ternal cost, may cause more welfare loss than an unregulated competitive market [5].7 In
practice, however, ignoring market structure may lead to small ineﬃciencies when determin-
ing pollution regulation given that these concerns are second order [26]. On the other hand,
second-order implications do matter in a general equilibrium setting because of distortions
in other markets, like labor markets [4].8
       Monopolies distort overall production but produce using the least costly technology. In
contrast, in addition to distorting overall production, oligopolists also cause production ineﬃ-
ciencies by substituting production across firms. In these markets, the pollution implications
of market power depend on total production and the technologies employed. Key factors
include demand elasticity, the costs and emissions associated with various technology types,
the distribution of technologies among firms, and the exact strategic game.
       Therefore, determining the optimal environmental regulation in this second-best setting
becomes more complicated when polluters behave strategically. Taxes, even when propor-
tional to emissions rates, may increase pollution from an oligopolistic industry with asymmet-
ric cost functions [20]. Since market structure leads to production ineﬃciencies and distorts
the total quantity produced, the second-best tax may exceed the marginal environmental
cost [8],[29],[30]. A related literature has examined the importance of strategic behavior in
setting environmental policy with international trade [2],[13],[33].
       This literature discusses optimal taxation policy assuming regulators observe market
structure. However, as discussed below, regulation may be slow to react to changes in
market structure or there may be other reasons why environmental regulators do not consider
issues of market power in product markets. Thus, in contrast to the existing literature, this
paper asks whether ignoring market power in product markets has welfare consequences. In
   7
      Due to additional distortion in the product market, the second-best tax for a monopolist is less than the
marginal external cost [1],[19].
    8
      In general, environmental policy makers may improve welfare by considering: when the product market
is economically regulated [11]; when markets are regulatory constructs (such as permit markets) that may be
either set sub-optimally initially or cannot respond optimally to market shocks; and when product market
regulations or structure have large environmental impacts.


                                                      5
particular I ask, if environmental regulators assume competitive product markets, what type
of policy instrument choice will lead to greater social welfare, prices or quantities?


3         Model
3.1        Setup
3.1.1       Product Markets

Suppose that there are several independent product markets comprising N firms that emit
pollution into a common airshed. Of these, M firms are located in the product market of
interest, which may or may not be perfectly competitive. Their emissions are defined as
“local” emissions. The set of N − M firms are located in other product markets, which
will be assumed to be perfectly competitive. For each firm i, emissions (ei ) equal the firm’s
output (qi ) times its emissions rate (ri ): ei = qi ri ,        i ∈ {1, ..., N }. For simplicity, I study
just a short-run model. In particular, I assume the following about the product markets:

             · Firms cannot change abatement technology: ri is fixed.9
             · The number of firms, N , is fixed (firms cannot enter or exit).
             · The production costs (ci (qi )) are convex.

        Pollution results in environmental and health damages. Assume a convex damage func-
tion that depends only on aggregate emissions and not on their spatial distribution:

                                                   XN
                                             D = D(   qi ri ).                                              (1)
                                                       i=1

Regulators can set either an emissions tax or a tradable permits cap to limit pollution in an
eﬀort to correct for the externality. In the case of a permit system, firm i is allocated permits
    9
    I make this assumption in order to simplify the model. The paper’s results also hold if the firms’ profit
functions are additively separable in choosing production levels and abatement technologies. Furthermore,
given reasonable restrictions, the results of this paper can be shown to be robust to the presence of endogenous
emissions rates [21].


                                                       6
of amount ei . Transaction costs may result from firms trading permits. If any such costs
exist, then they will be minimized if permits are allocated such that no trades are needed
in order to achieve overall cost minimization [31]. In other words, I assume regulators set ei
equal to the level that would be eﬃcient under perfect competition.10

3.1.2      Setting Environmental Policy

Throughout this paper, I assume that regulators who set environmental policy fail to account
for imperfectly competitive product markets. If regulators correctly model market structure,
then we are in a second-best setting. If the absolute slopes of the marginal abatement costs
and marginal damages are similar [34], then there will be some level of emissions, which
can be obtained by either a tax or permit system, that will minimize welfare loss across the
product and abatement markets. However, there are two reasons why we might think that
environmental regulation does not account for the current structure in the industry.
       First, regulators may be slow to adjust to the introduction of strategic behavior resulting
from deregulation, restructuring, mergers, etc. As in Weitzman [34] and in the literature
on technological change [15], important diﬀerences arise between policy instrument choices
when regulators are slow to react.
       Second, environmental policy may ignore strategic behavior in product markets because
of the separation of regulatory obligations in the government. The Environmental Protec-
tion Agency and Department of Justice have diﬀerent mandates. For example, the EPA’s
Integrated Planning Model assumes a competitive electricity industry.11
  10
     This assumption can be relaxed. However, by setting permit allocation at this level, I am able to
distinguish between the eﬀect that Hahn [14] discusses regarding market power in permit markets from that
being observed here: that permit prices might change because of imperfect competition in a product market.
The incentives to distort the permit price could be significant and, depending on the distribution of permits,
may exacerbate or even contradict the results of this paper. For example, if the dominant firm is relatively
dirty and is a large net buyer of permits, it may pollute even more than would occur in a competitive market
in order to drive down the permit price. These eﬀects are shown in the first order conditions below.
  11
     See section 2 of the description of the Integrated Planning Model, written by ICF, on the electricity
market (http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/epa-ipm/).



                                                      7
3.2       Environmental Regulation in Competitive Markets
3.2.1      Taxation

If product markets are competitive, firm i takes its product market’s price (Pi ) as given.
Under a tax (τ 0 ), firm i chooses qi in order to maximize profits (which equal total revenue
less total production costs, minus what the firm must pay for polluting):

                                     max{Pi qi − ci (qi ) − τ 0 qi ri }.                         (2)
                                       qi


The resulting first order condition implies that firms set their marginal abatement cost
(MACi ) equal to the tax:
                                                 Pi − c0i (qi )
                                     MACi ≡                     = τ 0 .12                        (3)
                                                     ri
Therefore, in the case of fixed abatement technology, the marginal abatement cost is exactly
the forgone profits associated with emitting an extra ton of pollutant.
       Eﬃciency is achieved by the set of output decisions {q1∗ , ..., qN
                                                                        ∗
                                                                          } that equate marginal net
benefits of emissions (or equivalently, the marginal abatement costs) and marginal damages
for each firm [32]:

                          Pi − c0i (qi∗ )     XN
                                            0
                                          =D(     qi∗ ri ), for all i ∈ {1, .., N }.             (4)
                              ri              i=1

Note that the source of emissions is not relevant to the marginal damage function. Therefore,
the social optimum will be attained when regulators levy a tax equal to the marginal damages
                                                               P
from emissions where firms produce {q1∗ , ..., qN
                                                ∗
                                                  }: τ 0 = D0 ( N    ∗
                                                                i=1 qi ri ).


3.2.2      Emission Trading

Alternatively, regulators could use a tradable permit system to achieve the social optimum.
Firm i will take the permit price (τ ), as well as Pi , as given. Here, the cost of polluting equals
  12
    This assumes an interior solution, an assumption made throughout this paper. Note that the second
order condition for profit maximization is met: −c00i (qi ) < 0.



                                                      8
any additional pollution beyond the firm’s allocated permits. In a competitive market, firm
i solves:
                                   max{Pi qi − ci (qi ) − τ · (qi ri − ei )}.                                (5)
                                    qi

Since the permit price is not a function of qi , the first order condition of (5) is similar to
(3): the firm sets its marginal abatement cost equal to the permit price. Here, regulators
                                                                      P         PN ∗
allocate permits in aggregate equal to the optimal level of emissions: N
                                                                       i=1 ei =  i=1 qi ri . To

minimize transaction costs, firm i is allocated permits equal to its optimal level of emissions:
ei = qi∗ ri .


4       Environmental Implications of Strategic Behavior
This section examines how production decisions, and therefore emissions, diﬀer when a
product market is imperfectly competitive. In the case when regulators levy taxes, I compare
the emissions under perfect competition with those of a market dominated by a strategic firm.
I show that the implications of strategic behavior depend on the relative emissions rates of the
dominant firm and the competitive fringe. Next, for the case of tradable permits, I compare
the local emissions from markets that are perfectly competitive with those with strategic
firms. Here, I examine how permit prices respond to the degree of market competition.

4.1       Implications Under a Tax

In order to model the equilibrium, I make two simplifying assumptions. First, I assume that
the imperfectly competitive product market consists of a single dominant firm (which pro-
duces qm ) and a competitive fringe (qf ).13 The simplicity of the model shown here allows for
  13
     One could construct a more complicated model with multiple strategic firms, such as a Cournot or
Bertrand model. In some cases, it is clear that the strategic interactions of oligopolists will have implications
for environmental policy [2]. However, the welfare implications that this paper discusses occur because of
indirect eﬀects through the permit market price. In other words, if an alternative model were used, what
matters (from the perspective of this paper) is whether the permit price rises or falls when firms exercise
market power in the product market. Furthermore, if the permit price changes, does this necessarily result
in less of a distortion of the product market? These more complex models will be studied in future work.


                                                       9
ease in exposition. Second, I assume that demand in this product market is perfectly inelas-
tic (q). This is an assumption common to the literature on wholesale electricity markets.14
In equilibrium, the quantity supplied equals the quantity demanded: qm + qf = q. Note that
assuming demand is perfectly inelastic is not the same as assuming that P 0 (qm ) = −∞: the
dominant firm recognizes that the competitive fringe will change its production depending
on the dominant firm’s behavior.
       For the imperfectly competitive product market facing a tax, the dominant firm recognizes
that its output aﬀects P (qm ) and solves:

                                max{P (qm ) · qm − cm (qm ) − τ 0 qm rm }.                               (6)
                                 qm


As in (3), the firm cannot aﬀect the regulation price (τ 00 = 0). The first order condition of
(6) implies that the dominant firm will set marginal abatement cost equal to the tax:

                                P (qm ) + P 0 (qm ) · qm − c0m (qm )
                                                                     = τ 0 .15                           (7)
                                                rm

Let qbm solve (7). Again, the firm’s marginal abatement cost equals forgone profits. Propo-
sition 1 states that relative to a competitive market, the dominant firm produces less while
the fringe produces more:

                     ∗
Proposition 1 qbm < qm and qbf > qf∗ .

Proof. See Appendix A.
       Next, I examine the local pollution implications of introducing strategic behavior—that is,
the emissions in the dominant firm’s product market. With fixed abatement technology and
perfectly inelastic demand, these pollution implications will depend solely upon the relative
  14
     Derived demand is nearly completely inelastic for two reasons. First, consumers have no incentive to
reduce quantity demanded at higher prices because the regulatory structure of electricity retail markets has
kept consumers’ rates constant. Second, the firms that procure customers’ electricity in the wholesale market
are mandated to provide the power at any cost.
  15
     The second order condition for profit maximization is the typical condition for strategic firms and is
assumed to hold: 2P 0 (q) + P 00 (q) · q − c00 (q) < 0.

                                                     10
emissions rates of the dominant firm and of the competitive fringe. The reduction in output
                       ∗
by the dominant firm (qm −b                                                           qf −qf∗ ).
                          qm ) exactly equals the increase in output from the fringe (b
             ∗
Define ∆b
        q ≡ qm − qbm (which is positive and equals qbf − qf∗ ). For a given tax, the dominant
firm reduces emissions by ∆b
                           q · rm , while the fringe emits ∆b
                                                            q · rf more. The net impact on
emissions is ∆b
              q · (rf − rm ). Hence the environmental eﬀects will depend on whether the
dominant firm is relatively dirty (i.e., rm > rf ) or relatively clean (i.e., rm < rf ).
   Figures 1 and 2 present the local pollution eﬀects of introducing market power. For a
firm in a competitive market, (3) implies that the marginal abatement cost is decreasing in
production (and therefore in emissions). Given the convexity assumption, marginal damages
are increasing in emissions. The figures display the optimal policy, using taxes or permits,
under the assumption of competitive product markets.
   Figure 1 displays the case when the dominant firm has a higher emissions rate than
the fringe: rm > rf . When the dominant firm behaves strategically, local pollution falls
    q · (rm − rf ). The same level of emissions can be achieved with less abatement from
by ∆b
firms in other product markets. Thus, the aggregate marginal abatement cost function lies
below that of the competitive market. Hence in this case, strategic behavior results in lower
emissions than perfect competition when the regulator levies a tax.
   Figure 2 presents the converse case when the dominant firm has a lower emissions rate
than the fringe: rm < rf . When the dominant firm exercises market power, local pollution
increases. The aggregate marginal abatement cost curve now lies above the competitive
market’s curve. With a tax, emissions increase under imperfect competition.

4.2    Implications Under a Tradable Permit System

The environmental implications of strategic behavior diﬀer under a permit system. Even
though total emissions are fixed, the share of emissions from any one product market changes
when the dominant firm exercises market power. In contrast to a tax, this has implications
for the price of the regulation. Namely, changes in local pollution aﬀect the permit price.

                                                11
       Under a permit system, a strategic firm recognizes that its output aﬀects prices P (qm )
and τ (qm ) and solves:

                          max{P (qm ) · qm − cm (qm ) − τ (qm ) · (qm rm − em )}.                              (8)
                           qm


The first order condition then implies that a strategic firm equates the forgone profits in
the product market from abating with the profits it earns from selling a permit, where the
permit price is endogenous:

                   P (qm ) + P 0 (qm ) · qm − c0m (qm )                               em 16
                                                        = τ (qm ) + τ 0 (qm ) · (qm −    ).                    (9)
                                   rm                                                 rm
Let qem solve (9).
       Note that if there are only two agents (the dominant firm and the competitive fringe)
that are in both the product and permit markets, then there is only one (qm , qf ) pair that will
solve the two constraints of perfectly inelastic demand for the product and a fixed supply of
permits. However, in this model, there are N − M firms in other product markets that are
also regulated by the permit market. This relaxes the constraint and allows the dominant
firm to exercise market power without violating the two constraints.
       In general, a strategic firm considers both: (i) the incentive to increase the product market
price; and (ii), in order to minimize regulation costs, the incentive to distort the permit
                                       ∗
price. Under the assumption that em = qm rm , the first incentive dominates, or otherwise
is consistent with, the second incentive [14]. Hence, a firm acting strategically will produce
                                                        ∗
less than it would have in a competitive market: qem < qm . (Appendix B provides a general
discussion of qem ).
       It is important to note that if τ 0 (qm ) is small, then there will be little diﬀerence between
the tax and the permit market. For example, given that there are many firms in the national
SO2 market, this would be less of an issue. As the US moves from small regional NOx
  16
     The second order condition for profit maximization is 2P 0 (q)+P 00 (q)·q−c00 (q)−2τ 0 (q)·r−τ 00 (q)·(qr−e) <
0. Note that P 0 (q) < 0 and that c00 (q) > 0. No restrictions are imposed on τ (q). As discussed below, the sign
of τ 0 (q) diﬀers when the strategic firm is relatively dirty from when it is relatively clean.

                                                        12
markets to larger ones (OTC to NOx SIP Calls to CAIR), this distinction between taxes and
permits will be less of an issue.
       The abatement decisions are also more complex for a strategic firm facing a permit price.
The problem is analogous to the problem of defining a supply function for a monopoly. That
said, one could derive the abatement “supply” function from (9). The function would depend
                                                                                           ∗
on the output and emissions of the dominant firm and its various competitors. Since qem < qm ,
the firm’s equilibrium (τ , qem ) abatement “supply” function (or equivalently, its demand for
permits) will lie below that of a competitive market. As with a tax, the aggregate marginal
abatement cost function depends on whether the dominant firm is dirty or clean relative to
the fringe. As aggregate demand for permits shifts, the equilibrium price will change.
       When the dominant firm is relatively dirty (as in Figure 1), then introducing market
power reduces local emissions. For the permit market to be in equilibrium, the reduced
demand for permits will result in permit prices falling.17 At the initial permit cap, the
marginal damages exceed the new marginal abatement costs. This implies that firms emit
more than the new level maximizing surplus in the “market” for abatement (given by e∗ ).
As noted below, in a second-best setting, e∗ is not the optimal regulation given that there is
deadweight loss in the product market: the shaded areas only show the welfare loss occurring
in the abatement market. Alternatively, had regulators established an initially optimal tax
instead, strategic behavior would result in less pollution as firms abate to the point were
marginal abatement costs equal the tax (given by b
                                                 e).
       The converse arguments can be made when the fringe is relatively dirty, as shown in
Figure 2. For a given permit price, more local pollution occurs when the dominant firm
exercises market power. Firms in other product markets must abate more to attain the
same level of emissions in the airshed. Therefore, this increase in demand will result in
higher permit prices. Now, e∗ allows for more pollution than the initial permit cap. In
  17
   Here, the marginal abatement cost function includes the feedback eﬀect that permits have on the product
market: firms will alter production decisions when marginal costs change, including permit prices.



                                                   13
contrast, if regulators had established an initially optimal tax, then firms would emit more
than e∗ .
       In summary, if the dominant firm is relatively dirty (clean), introducing market power
reduces (increases) local emissions. Under a permit system, this will result in a lower (higher)
permit price. If demand is not perfectly inelastic, the results are slightly modified.18
       Note that, in this model, the introduction of strategic behavior is akin to a shock to the
marginal abatement cost function. Assuming that regulation is set optimally given some
initial conditions, almost any such change in marginal abatement costs results in welfare
loss.19 As an application of the theory of the second best, however, regulators may not
want to eliminate this deadweight loss, because additional welfare losses also exist in the
imperfectly competitive product market. Next, I examine the conditions under which permit
markets are more robust to market power in product markets in comparison to a tax.


5        Theoretical Implications for Policy Instrument Choice
In this section, I examine the welfare implications of policy instrument choice, given that
environmental regulators either may not consider the welfare implications in the product
market, or simply do not know whether there will be more or less pollution after a dominant
firm exercises market power in the product market. When abatement costs are uncertain,
the size of the welfare loss from the “mistake” implied by regulators acting on expectations
is not equivalent under taxes and tradable permit systems but rather depends on the slopes
of marginal abatement costs and marginal damages [34]. In the special case of equal absolute
slopes, policy makers should be indiﬀerent between the instruments; both cause the same
  18
     If the dominant firm is dirtier, then the eﬀect is unambiguous; less quantity demanded would reinforce
the conclusion that overall emissions would go down. However, if the dominant firm is cleaner, then the
eﬀect is ambiguous.
  19
     In the extreme cases, regulatory mechanisms can mimic society’s demand for clean air: if the marginal
damages are perfectly inelastic, then a permit system will respond optimally. Alternatively, taxes respond
optimally when the marginal damages are perfectly elastic.



                                                    14
environment-related welfare losses given a shock to marginal abatement costs. The social
planner will prefer a tax to a quota system when the slope of marginal damages is less, in
absolute terms, than that of marginal abatement costs. In contrast, the quota system will
be preferred if marginal damages are steeper.
       Given Weitzman’s findings, I examine whether policy instrument choice has further wel-
fare implications when product markets are imperfectly competitive. For any given abate-
ment and damage functions, the welfare eﬀects will depend on both the arguments of Weitz-
man as well as those argued here. To separate these eﬀects, I make the following simplifying
assumption.
       Assume that, under perfect competition, regulators are indiﬀerent between a tax and
tradable permits that are set such that the tax equals the expected permit price where mar-
ginal damages equal marginal abatement costs. This implies that the slope of the marginal
damages equals the absolute value of the slope of the marginal cost of abatement. Thus,
any shock to costs will result in welfare loss in the market for abatement that will have the
same expectation regardless of instrument choice. This is shown in both Figures 1 and 2 by
the shaded areas. The gray area is the welfare loss associated with a tradable permit. The
black area is the welfare loss associated with a tax.
       The assumptions that (1) regulators set policy optimally and (2) that policy makers are
just indiﬀerent to taxes and permits allows me to isolate the specific welfare implication
that I want to address. Namely, how does instrument choice aﬀect welfare in an imperfectly
competitive product market?20 The key insight to why instrument choice may matter is
to recognize that, relative to a tax, permit prices respond to production decisions. The
implications for production, and therefore welfare, can be seen by looking at how profits
change when the permit price falls.
  20
    These assumptions may suggest that my findings are second order. However, as the literature on the tax
interaction eﬀect has found, second order eﬀects can be quite large when a market is previously distorted. For
example, if regulation is not set optimally or if policy makers have a tendency to use one type of regulation,
then the eﬀects of strategic behavior may be exacerbated.


                                                     15
    In order to determine whether a dominant firm will produce more under a permit system
or under a tax, I compare the firm’s first order conditions under each policy at a specific
point. Namely, I examine the conditions at the level of output (b
                                                                qm ) where the dominant firm
maximizes profits (π) under a tax. The diﬀerence between the first order condition under a
permit, ( dπ(τ )
           dq qem
                 | ), and the first order condition under a tax, ( dπ(τ 0)
                                                                    dqm qem
                                                                           | ), can be written as:

  dπ(τ (qm ))        dπ(τ 0 )
              |qem −                          qm )] · (rm − rf ) + τ 0 (b
                              |qe = [τ 0 − τ (b                         qm ) · (em + qbm rf − qbm rm ). (10)
     dqm              dqm m
See Appendix A for the derivation of (10). Next, I determine the sign of (10) separately for
a dominant firm that is relatively dirty from one that is relatively clean.

5.1     Relatively Dirty Dominant Firm

If the dominant firm is relatively dirty (rm > rf ) and exercises market power, then permit
                                                qm ) < τ 0 ). In this case, τ 0 (qm ) > 0 and (by
prices will fall below the level of the tax (τ (b
assumption) em > qbm rm . Therefore, at qbm , profits are increasing in qm under a permit (while
dπ(τ 0 )
 dqm qem
         |   = 0). As stated in proposition 2, the dominant firm produces more if regulated by
a permit system than if regulated by a tax.

Proposition 2 If rm > rf , then qem > qbm .

Proof. Proof follows immediately from the preceding arguments.
    As a case in point, consider rm = 1 and rf = 0. Now (10) equals:

                                           qm ) + τ 0 (b
                                  τ 0 − τ (b           qm ) · (em − qbm ).                             (11)

Figure 3 depicts the welfare implications of this example by plotting residual demand (a
function of the fringe’s production costs), the marginal revenue of that function, and four
cost curves: marginal private costs (c0m (qm )), marginal social costs (c0m (qm ) + D0 (qm ) · rm ),
marginal private costs plus the tax (c0m (qm ) + τ 0 rm ), and marginal private costs plus the
permit price (c0m (qm ) + τ (qm ) · rm ). The shaded area is a measure of welfare loss, not a

                                                    16
transfer, as less eﬃcient units (i.e., those with higher marginal social costs) are being used
to produce energy when lower cost ones are not producing [23].
   As permit prices fall relative to the tax, the strategic firm produces more. This will reduce
the dominant firm’s production costs relative to a tax, and production for the strategic firm
is greater than it would have been under a tax: qem > qbm . The welfare loss from a dominant
firm facing a tradable permit is the area between the residual demand curve and the marginal
social costs from the point where the dominant firm opts to produce (e
                                                                     qm ) to the optimal
                                 ∗
point where the lines intersect qm (the hashed area). A tax would result in addition welfare
loss (the gray area), as the dominant firm would produce even less (b
                                                                    qm ).

5.2    Relatively Clean Dominant Firm

If the dominant firm is relatively clean, rm < rf , and exercises market power, then the dirty
fringe produces more and permit prices rise relative to a tax, τ (b
                                                                  qm ) > τ 0 . Greater permit
prices will result in an increase of production costs for all firms. Ceteris paribus, greater
marginal costs for the dominant firm imply that it would increase profits by reducing output.
However, what matters is the relative eﬀect. Namely, if marginal revenue increases even more
than marginal costs, the dominant firm will increase output. Below I discuss the conditions
for this to be the case.
   Note that when the dominant firm is relatively clean, the increase in the permit price will
cause the fringe’s production costs to increase even more so than those of the dominant firm.
Returning to (10), this has two potentially oﬀsetting eﬀects on marginal revenue. I examine
both parts of (10) separately. First, as the permit price exceeds the tax, τ (b
                                                                              qm ) > τ 0 , and
the dominant firm is relatively clean, rm < rf , increasing output improves profits under a
permit relative to a tax:
                                [τ 0 − τ (b
                                          qm )] · (rm − rf ) > 0.                          (12)

Second, the more the dominant firm produces, the permit price exceeds the tax by a smaller


                                               17
amount: τ 0 (qm ) < 0. Therefore, the second term of (10) is negative, τ 0 (b
                                                                            qm ) · (em + qbm · (rf −
rm )) < 0, as rf > rm . When qm is near zero (and τ 0 (qm ) · em is insubstantial), the first eﬀect
is likely to dominate: the marginal revenue under a permit system will exceed that under a
                                                  ∗
tax. Conversely, at the competitive output level qm , the permit price is assumed to be set
                      ∗
equal to the tax, τ (qm ) = τ 0 , so the second eﬀect dominates. At this competitive outcome,
marginal profits are greater under a tax.
                                                                                   ∗
   Given that (10) is a continuous monotonic function, there exists some qm ∈ (0, qm ) where
these two eﬀects oﬀset and the marginal revenue under the tax is equal to the marginal
revenue under the permit system. Permits will result in more production by the dominant
                 qm > qbm ) and less welfare loss only if the permit price does not respond
firm than a tax (e
substantially to changes in qm around qbm , meaning:

                                  [τ 0 − τ (b
                                            qm )] · (rm − rf )
                                                               > −τ 0 (b
                                                                       qm ).                   (13)
                                     em + qbm · (rf − rm )

Proposition 3 states that—when the dominant firm is relatively clean and conditional on (13)
holding—profits are increasing in qm under a permit at qbm . In this case, as in proposition 2,
the firm produces more if regulated by a permit system than if regulated by a tax.

Proposition 3 If rm < rf and (13) holds, then qem > qbm .

Proof. Proof follows immediately from the preceding arguments.
   I examine the implications of this proposition using simplifying assumptions: rm = 0 and
rf = 1. Also, I assume that the clean dominant firm will not be allocated permits: em = 0.
Now the condition (13) can be written:
                                                       ∗
                                     qm ) − τ 0
                                  τ (b                qm  − qbm
                              (                 ) · (           ) > −τ 0 (b
                                                                          qm ).                (14)
                                    qm − qbm
                                     ∗                   qbm

The left-hand side of this equation equals the average increase in the permit price from
reducing output from the competitive level multiplied by a ratio. The ratio, which is the
amount of output reduced over the amount the dominant firm produces, is bounded by zero

                                                      18
and one assuming positive marginal costs. The right-hand side is the marginal increase in
the price from further reducing output. If the average impact is substantially greater than
the marginal eﬀect, then permits are welfare improving. In other words, this constraint will
hold if τ (qm ) is concave.
       Figure 4 provides an example of the welfare implications. As in the previous case, the
strategic firm produces where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. This figure has four
residual demand curves based on the fringe’s costs in these cases: marginal private costs
(c0f (q − qm )), marginal social costs (c0f (q − qm ) + D0 (qm ) · rf ), marginal private costs plus the
tax (c0f (q−qm )+τ 0 rf ), and marginal private costs plus the permit price (c0f (q−qm )+τ (qm )·rf ).
I have drawn the marginal revenue curves for the two policy instruments. I have shown the
case when the residual demand with the permit price lies above that with the tax at qbm .
Therefore, for a given fringe emissions rate, the marginal revenue for the residual demand
with permits is greater than that with taxes, implying more welfare loss under the tax (the
same area shading is used as in Figure 3).
       In summary, the relatively dirty dominant firm produces more under a tradable permit
system than under a tax and, therefore, there is less welfare loss. If (13) holds, then the
relatively clean dominant firm will also produce more under a permit system and welfare will
be improved. All else equal (and if (13) holds), I find that given the presence of strategic
firms in product markets, welfare losses will be reduced if environmental policy makers opt
for tradable permit systems in comparison to pollution taxes. This finding suggests that,
even when the slope of the marginal abatement costs exceed, in absolute values, the slope
of the marginal damages, regulators should give some consideration to tradable permits in
imperfectly competitive markets.21
  21
    The policy recommendations of Weitzman [34] could be modified to account for this additional eﬀect.
The expected welfare from a given policy will depend on many characteristics of the regulated market and
the pollutant’s damages.




                                                  19
6        Simulation of Policy Instrument Choice
This section asks whether these welfare eﬀects are of economic significance. Specifically,
the question I ask is: what would be the additional deadweight loss in the PJM electricity
market had a tax been implemented instead of a permit system? Throughout this paper, I
assume the tax would have been set optimally assuming competitive behavior. Since strategic
firms in PJM are dirtier than those in the fringe, exercising market power will reduce local
emissions [24]. If the OTC permit price is endogenous, the decreased demand for permits
will result in a permit price below the tax.
       As noted in the previous section, this lower permit price gives incentives for the strategic
firms to produce more than they would under a tax, and therefore, cause less distortion to
the economy. Again, I assume that the slopes of the marginal benefits and marginal costs of
abatement are equal so that the welfare implications are solely a function of the impacts on
the electricity market.
       The calculation of the welfare implications requires modeling the regulators tax level
decision and the strategic firms’ production behavior under this scenario. This requires a
permit supply model for firms that are regulated by the OTC but are outside PJM. From
May to September, the OTC NOx permit market regulates firms in PJM, New England,
and New York. During 1999, OTC did not apply to firms in Maine, Maryland, Vermont,
Virginia, and Washington, D.C. The number of permits are fixed. If the PJM firms pollute
more, the other firms in New England and New York must abate an equal amount.22 To
clear the PJM firms’ demand for extra permits with these non-PJM firms’ supply, the permit
price will rise.
       In addition, the simulation uses models of firm behavior in the PJM electricity market.
The strategy is first to determine what the permit price would have been had the firms in
  22
   This market allows firms to bank permits for future summers. However, this feature would be extremely
complex to model as it would require considering multiple years of permit supply and demand.




                                                  20
PJM behaved competitively. In equilibrium, the increase in emissions in PJM as the market
changes from a strategic “regime” to a competitive one must equal the increase in abatement
by firms outside of PJM. Given the equilibrium price, I assume that regulators would have
set the tax at this intended level and then simulate how strategic firms would have produced.
As demand is assumed to be perfectly inelastic, the welfare eﬀects of a tax are the extra
production costs. These costs include the environmental externality that is valued at the tax
level. This assumes optimal regulation whereby the tax equals the marginal external cost.
       The section begins by describing the model of abatement supply outside of PJM. Then
I model firm behavior in the PJM electricity market for both the competitive and strategic
regimes. Finally, the simulation method is discussed and the results are presented.

6.1       Model of Permit Supply

The degree to which the price rises depends, in part, on the elasticity of the non-PJM
firms’ supply of abatement. NOx pollution can be abated by installing technologies such as
Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR), by reducing the burning eﬃciency of a power plant,
and by improving the monitoring of the production process. Some of this technology was
installed in preparation for this regulation. I assume that these capital investments are fixed
in the short run and that firms could not change these investment decisions during the first
summer of the regulation. In the short run, firms can abate pollution by not operating. The
firm forgoes profits but no longer needs to purchase or to hold on to a pollution permit. It
is this trade-oﬀ of profits for permits that determines my abatement supply curve.23
       In order to construct this curve, I model the permit market and the New England and
New York electricity markets as competitive. Recall from (3), the marginal cost of abatement
(MCA) of a firm taking prices as given is equal to the rents (P −c0 (q)) divided by the emissions
rate (r). For the period of May to September, I construct an abatement supply curve by
  23
    In the long run, the permit supply function becomes much more elastic. This will dampen the respon-
siveness of the permit price to the actions of the dominant firm (i.e., τ 0 (qm ) is smaller). This will reduce
any diﬀerences between the welfare eﬀects of taxes and permits.

                                                      21
measuring the hourly MCA for each power plant regulated by OTC but not in PJM. To
measure the market price (P ), I use the hourly system-wide price from the New England
ISO for the New England firms. New York did not restructure until the following winter.
Therefore, I use the New England price as a proxy for the New York electricity price. The
price is assumed to be exogenous to individual cost shocks. Further, I do not model the New
England electricity price as a function of the permit price. Note that if electricity prices
are endogenous, then more abatement will mean higher permit prices and higher electricity
prices. This will increase the slope of the abatement supply curve. Ignoring this endogeneity
results in a less elastic supply of permits, which in turn results in a smaller diﬀerence between
the welfare eﬀects of taxes and permits.
    The EPA’s Egrid database includes information on a power plant’s heat input, electricity
output, capacity, emissions, primary fuel source, and regulations. The data sources of the
New York city gate natural gas spot market and New York oil spot market are discussed
in [22], while the EIA’s form 767 spot coal prices by power plant are discussed in [[17].
The daily marginal costs (c0 (q)) are defined as the sum of fuel costs, variable operating and
maintenance costs, and SO2 pollution costs.24 These costs do not include the costs of the
NOx regulation.
    From these data, I construct the abatement supply curve. If the hourly price equals
or exceeds a plant’s marginal cost, then that plant can abate up to its capacity times its
emissions rate that hour. I sort the quantity of abatement by the plant-hour’s MCA. Then
I calculate a cumulative abatement function, assuming a linear fit of abatement for observa-
tions with MCA below $5000/ton. An OLS regression implies that for every additional ton
abated by firms outside of PJM, the permit price will increase by $0.1053/ton.25
   24
      Data on variable O&M costs are not readily available so I assume them to be $2/MWh for all power
plants. The SO2 pollution costs apply to power plants regulated by Phase I of the 1990 Clean Air Act
Amendment’s Title IV.
   25
      The independent variable is the emissions rate times the plant’s capacity. In the long run, firms will
install abatement technology, changing its emissions rate. This may be correlated with the dependent variable
(foregone profits). However, in the short run, this is not likely to be the case as abatement technology and


                                                     22
6.2    Model of Competitive and Strategic Behavior

This section adapts a model of competition and Cournot behavior from Bushnell, Mansur,
and Saravia [6] (hereafter BMS). As noted above, some firms in PJM had incentives to
increase prices as they sold a substantial amount of energy, q, in the wholesale market.
Other firms had obligations to serve large amounts of electricity, or native load, (q c ) to retail
customers at fixed rates. These firms may have benefited from lower wholesale prices. The
diﬀerence between a firm’s production of q and retail obligations of q c , or “net positions,”
aﬀect firms’ incentives. The first order condition is a modification of (9):

                  P (q) + P 0 (q) · (q − qc ) = c0 (q) + τ (q) · r + τ 0 (q) · (qr − e),      (15)

where now firms profit from higher prices only on the amount sold in the market net of the
contracts. BMS discuss and account for these net positions. That paper’s model uses a firm’s
first order condition of profit maximization to solve for equilibrium in the PJM electricity
market.
   Note that firms may have incentives to exercise market power in permit markets directly
[14]. If the allocation of permits, e, is similar to the amount emitting by a strategic firm
(qr ' e), then the term last term of (15), τ 0 (q)·(qr −e), will be small. The two firms likely to
set prices in the wholesale electricity market are the Philadelphia Electric Company (PECO)
and Pennsylvania Power & Light (PPL) [22]. These firms emitted 120 and 74 percent as
much NOx as they were allocated in permits, respectively.26 In order to focus on the impact
of policy instrument choice on welfare in the product market, I assume that firms did not
behave strategically in the permit market: qr ' e. For a given permit price, I simulate
how much each firm in PJM would have produced under both the competitive and Cournot
regimes.
capacity are fixed. For this reason, I assume the independent variable to be exogenous.
   26
      Using CEMS data, I calculate that during the period of OTC regulation, PECO emitted
3554 tons of NOx .        In contrast, the firm was allocated permits for 2939 tons of NOx (See
http://www.pacode.com/secure/data/025/chapter123/s123.121.html). PPL emitted 14,785 tons and was
allocated permits for 20,027 tons.

                                                   23
       Regardless of whether firms take prices as given or act strategically, they will produce
a given amount using their least costly generating units. The BMS model includes data on
marginal costs, capacity, and emissions rates for all polluting units. Thus, a firm can respond
to changes in permit prices by substituting across its units using diﬀerent fuels or abatement
technologies (i.e., fuel switching). For a given permit price, I recalculate the merit order
(least costly set of generating units a firm owns). I use these data to determine each firms’
hourly emissions. This allows me to compare aggregate emissions across regimes and permit
prices.

6.3        Simulation Results
6.3.1       Market Power and Permit Prices

The simulation is solved in several steps. I begin by modeling the permit price assuming
firms actually behave as Cournot firms in the PJM electricity market [6]. The actual permit
price was volatile during the summer of 1999; the price started near $5000/ton and eventually
settled around $1000/ton. In comparison, a tax would have been constant throughout this
period. It would be diﬃcult to interpret the eﬀects of a volatile permit price relative to a
tax. Therefore, I model the permit price as a constant equal to the price that permits were
trading at in late September. This is when firms had to demonstrate compliance. I model
the permit price as equal to $1000/ton.
       Second, I use the BMS model to estimate firm behavior in PJM for each hour in the
summer of 1999 when OTC was in eﬀect.27 From May 1 to September 30, 1999, the Cournot
model simulation predicts that the PJM firms regulated by OTC emit 88,222 tons of NOx
(see Table 1). In contrast, these same firms would have emitted 100,936 tons, an increase of
11 percent, if they had taken prices as given. Therefore, PJM firms in a competitive regime
would have demanded 12,713 more permits than those in a Cournot regime. This increase
in demand for permits would have resulted in a higher permit price. If the firms in PJM
  27
       For greater discussion of the assumptions of this model, see BMS.


                                                      24
behaved the same regardless of the permit price, then based on the permit supply estimates
above, the price would have been $2338/ton.28 However, the PJM firms do change their
production decisions as the permit price increases.
       I solve this simultaneity problem by iterating between the two models discussed in sections
6.1 and 6.2. I begin by picking a permit price. Then I measure the quantity of abatement,
or number of permits, supplied by firms outside of PJM at that price.29 Next I determine
the amount of permits demanded by competitive firms in PJM at that price and compare
that level with the amount demanded in the benchmark case: Cournot firms at the $1000
price. I vary the permit price until one is found that equates supply and demand. At the
equilibrium price of $1934/ton, the firms in the competitive market emit 97,096 tons, which
is 8874 more than the Cournot equilibrium emissions. This implies that introducing market
power reduced local emissions by approximately 9 percent. To meet this extra demand for
permits, the permit price rises by 93 percent, a level well within the range firms actually
faced during that summer.

6.3.2      Welfare Eﬀects in PJM

As in section 3, I assume that regulators would have set a tax equal to the marginal external
cost of NOx emissions. If they assumed a competitive PJM market, then (based on the
calculations of the permit price above) this tax would be $1934/ton.30 As discussed in
section 4, deadweight loss is greater under such a tax than under a permit system when
firms behave strategically. To quantify this eﬀect, I measure the total variable social cost
in the PJM market including production costs and the environmental externalities of NOx
pollution. Note that consumer surplus does not change in the short run given fixed retail
prices (see footnote 14).
  28
     That is, the initial $1000/ton plus the slope of $0.1053/ton times the change in emissions of 12,713 tons.
  29
     Note that by changing the permit price for each iteration, this will change the merit order of each firm.
For any given permit price, the firm will produce using the least costly generating units.
  30
     This first-best solution ignores any tax interaction eﬀect [12].



                                                      25
   Over the summer of 1999, the variable social costs for the competitive regime totaled
$1452 million. This is the case for both a permit system and a tax because, if PJM were a
competitive market, then the permit price would equal the tax of $1934/ton. The Cournot
model predicts costs of $1565 million given the permit price of $1000/ton. This simulation
predicts that firms exercising market power in PJM cause deadweight loss equal to $113
million, or 7.8 percent of the variable social costs.
   Next, the total variable social costs are estimated assuming a tax. As mentioned, the
competitive model costs are the same as above since the tax and permit prices equate. With
a tax, the strategic firms distort production even more. The variable social costs, including
the externality, equal $1573 million. The higher price of pollution resulted in 2300 fewer
tons, a reduction of 2.7 percent. The value of this pollution reduction is $4.4 million. The
benefit of these externalities have been taken into account in the simulation’s measure of
total cost. In other words, the costs to the firms are $12.7 million greater under the tax in
comparison to the permit system, but society also values the cleaner air under a tax. Thus,
relative to a permit system, social costs in PJM have increased by $8.3 million under a tax
even though there is less pollution.

6.3.3   Welfare Eﬀects from Imports

In addition, the equilibrium electricity price under the tax is greater than that under the
permit system. The higher prices imply greater imports of electricity, which are costly. The
area under the import supply curve between the electricity price with the permit and that
with the tax represents additional variable costs. Using the BMS import supply function, I
find that these costs total $3.0 million.
   Therefore, a tax would have increased the deadweight loss in PJM by $11.3 million in
one summer. This is equal to 7.4 percent of the total welfare loss associated with strategic
behavior in this market. In addition to these welfare eﬀects, retail customers pay more
for electricity under a tax. The simulated electricity price for the Cournot regime averages

                                               26
$52.85/MWh under a tax, slightly more than the $51.89/MWh average under a tradable
permit system.31 If all electricity traded at these prices, then the procurement costs of
buyers in the wholesale market would have increased by $102.4 million under a tax relative
to a permit system. Recall these costs are for one market and one summer only. If similar
margins exist in other pollution regulations, the overall impacts on welfare and transfers may
be substantial.


7        Conclusions
Policy makers developing incentive-based environmental regulation should consider the con-
sequences of firms exercising market power in product markets. When dominant firms are
dirtier than the fringe, exercising market power reduces pollution from the product market
and lowers prices in permit markets. The optimal pollution cap is lower than under perfect
competition. When dominant firms are cleaner than the fringe, the opposite conclusions are
drawn. However, altering the environmental regulation could increase welfare loss in the
product market. In this second best setting, the overall welfare eﬀects must be considered.
       Market conditions influence whether a permit system increases welfare in comparison to
a tax. In this paper, I suppose that the environment policies optimize welfare assuming
perfect competition in all markets. This may result from regulators being slow to adjust
to the introduction of strategic behavior. Alternatively, environmental policy makers may
ignore issues of competition because of regulatory jurisdiction.
       Tradable permits may be preferable to taxes when firms set prices in product markets.32
When the fringe has lower emissions rates than the dominant firms, permit prices fall as
  31
     These prices may seem small in an oligopoly market with perfectly inelastic demand. However, as BMS
note, this is because the vertically integrated PJM firms had large retail commitments and had less incentive
to set high prices.
  32
     If marginal damages and marginal abatement costs have similar slopes in absolute value, these policies
would have the same expected welfare loss [34]. Relative to this baseline, I argue that permits are less
distortionary.



                                                     27
market power is exercised. A permit system will be preferable to a tax if strategic firms’
marginal costs decrease by more than their marginal revenues (which depend on the fringe’s
marginal costs). In the case in which the fringe is dirtier, strategic behavior increases the
permit price. This may increase the dominant firms’ marginal revenue more than its costs.
As an application of the theory of the second best, when regulators initially determine opti-
mal environmental policy assuming competitive product markets, the presence of strategic
behavior in product markets may make tradable permits preferable to a tax.
   This paper examines the magnitude of these welfare implications of environmental pol-
icy instrument choice. I simulate the OTC permit market and firm behavior in the PJM
electricity market. This simulation predicts that strategic behavior reduced local emissions
by approximately nine percent. Had the market been competitive, the permit price would
have been 93 percent greater than the price given strategic behavior. I then estimate and
compare the welfare eﬀects of Cournot behavior at the observed permit price and under a
tax. I model regulators as setting the tax optimally given an assumption of competitive
behavior in all markets. The deadweight loss from strategic behavior would have increased
by seven percent if regulators had chosen a tax rather than a tradable permit system.
   These theoretical and simulation results suggest that regulators may improve social wel-
fare by considering the interactions between environmental regulation and firm behavior in
product markets. In particular, I find that more consideration should be given to permit
markets. However, there are many other factors that must be considered in policy choice,
most notably uncertainty [34], transaction costs [31] and tax-interaction eﬀects [12]. The
relative significance of these eﬀects will be case specific.
   The results have applications beyond the electricity industry. For example, this work
may have implications for the regulation of local fisheries, oil refining, and automobile fuel
economy standards. While most market based environmental regulation of air pollutants
has focused on the electricity industry, there are many examples of environmental regulation
in imperfectly competitive markets.

                                               28
References
 [1] A. Barnett, The Pigouvian Tax Rule Under Monopoly, Amer. Econ. Rev., 70 (1980)
     1037-1041.
 [2] S. Barrett, Strategic Environmental Policy and International Trade, J. Public Econ. 54
     (1994) 325-338.
 [3] S. Borenstein, J. Bushnell, F. Wolak, Measuring Market Ineﬃciencies in California’s
     Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market, Amer. Econ. Rev. 92 (2002) 1376-1405.
 [4] E. Browning, A Neglected Welfare Cost of Monopoly - and Most Other Product Market
     Distortions, J. Public Econ. 66 (1997) 127-144.
 [5] J. Buchanan, External Diseconomies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structure, Amer.
     Econ. Rev. 59 (1997) 174-177.
 [6] J. Bushnell, E. Mansur, C. Saravia, Market Structure and Competition: A Cross-Market
     Analysis of U.S. Electricity Deregulation, Amer. Econ. Rev. (forthcoming).
 [7] J. Bushnell, C. Saravia, An Empirical Assessment of the Competitiveness of the New
     England Electricity Market, CSEM Working Paper CSEM WP-101 (2002).
 [8] F. Carlsson, Environmental Taxation and Strategic Commitment in Duopoly Models,”
     Environ. Resource Econ. 15 (2000) 243-256.
 [9] Y. Chen, B. Hobbs, An Oligopolistic Power Market Model with Tradable NOx Permits,
     IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 20 (2005) 119-129.
[10] Y. Chen, B. Hobbs, S. Leyﬀer, T. Munson, Solution of Large-Scale Leader-Follower
     Market Equilibria Problems: Electric Power and NOx Permit Markets, Computational
     Management Science, 3 (2006) 307-330.
[11] M. Cropper, W. Oates, Environmental Economics: A Survey, J. Econ. Lit. 30 (1992)
     675-740.
[12] L. Goulder, I. Parry, D. Burtraw, Revenue-Raising vs. Other Approaches to Environ-
     mental Protection: The Critical Significance of Pre-Existing Tax Distortions, RAND J.
     Econ. 28 (1997) 708-731.
[13] M. Greaker, Strategic Environmental Policy: Eco-dumping or a Green Strategy? J.
     Environ. Econ. Manage. 45 (2003) 692-707.
[14] R. Hahn, Market Power and Transferable Property Rights, Quart. J. Econ. 99 (1984)
     753-765.

                                            29
[15] A. Jaﬀe, R. Newell, R. Stavins, Environmental Policy and Technological Change, Env-
     iron. Resource Econ. 22 (2002) 41-69.

[16] P. Joskow, E. Kahn, A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior In California’s Whole-
     sale Electricity Market During Summer 2000, Energy J. 23 (2002) 1-35.

[17] N. Keohane, Environmental Policy and the Choice of Abatement Technique: Evidence
     from Coal-Fired Power Plants, Yale University mimeo (2005).

[18] J. Kolstad, F. Wolak, Using Environmental Emissions Permit Prices to Raise Electricity
     Prices: Evidence from the California Electricity Market, Stanford University mimeo.
     (2003).

[19] D. Lee, Eﬃciency of Pollution Taxation and Market Structure, J. Environ. Econ. Man-
     age. 2 (1975) 69-72.

[20] D. Levin, Taxation within Cournot Oligopoly, J. Public Econ. 27 (1985) 281-290.

[21] E. Mansur, Note Regarding Endogenous Emissions Rates in Prices vs. Quantities, Yale
     University mimeo (2006).

[22] E. Mansur, Upstream Competition and Vertical Integration in Electricity Markets, J.
     Law Econ. 50 (2007) 125-156.

[23] E. Mansur, Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets, Rev. Econ. Stat.
     (forthcoming).

[24] E. Mansur, Do Oligopolists Pollute Less? Evidence from a Restructured Electricity
     Market, J. Ind. Econ. (forthcoming).

[25] W. Misiolek, H. Elder, Exclusionary Manipulation of Markets for Pollution Rights, J.
     Environ. Econ. Manage. 16 (1989) 156-166.

[26] W. Oates, D. Strassmann, Eﬄuent Fees and Market Structure, J. Public Econ. 24
     (1984) 29-46.

[27] S. Puller, Pricing and Firm Conduct in California’s Deregulated Electricity Market,
     Rev. Econ. Stat. 89 (2007) 75-87.

[28] E. Sartzetakis, Raising Rivals’ Costs Strategies via Emission Permits Markets, Rev. Ind.
     Organ. 12 (1997) 751-765.

[29] S. Shaﬀer, Optimal Linear Taxation of Polluting Oligopolists, J. Regul. Econ. 7 (1995)
     85-100.

                                             30
[30] D. Simpson, Optimal Pollution Taxation in a Cournot Duopoly, Environ. Resource Econ.
     6 (1995) 359-369.

[31] R. Stavins, Transaction Costs and Tradable Permits, J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 29
     (1995) 133-147.

[32] T. Tietenberg, Environmental and Natural Resource Economics, 7th Edition, Pearson,
     Boston, 2006.

[33] A. Ulph, Environmental Policy Instruments and Imperfectly Competitive International
     Trade, Environ. Resource Econ. 7 (1996) 333-355.

[34] M. Weitzman, Prices vs. Quantities, Rev. Econ. Stud. 41 (1974) 477-491.

[35] F. Wolak, R. Patrick, The Impact of Market Rules and Market Structure on the Price
     Determination Process in the England and Wales Electricity Market, POWER Working
     Paper PWP-047 (1997).

[36] C. Wolfram, Strategic Bidding in a MultiUnit Auction: An Empirical Analysis of Bids
     to Supply Electricity in England and Wales, RAND J. Econ. 29 (1998) 703-725.

[37] C. Wolfram, Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot Market, Amer.
     Econ. Rev. 89 (1999) 805-826.




                                           31
                                                   Figures and Tables

        $


                                                                Marginal Damages



  Tax τ 0                                                        Marginal Abatement Costs (competition)
P ermit τ
                                                                 Marginal Abatement Costs (market power)



                                  eˆ e* P ermit                                             E missions (e)
                                           Cap

 Figure 1: Implications of Strategic Behavior for Environmental Regulations: The Case of a Relatively Dirty Dominant Firm.



                                                                 32
       $

                                                                Marginal Damages

P ermit τ
   Tax τ 0                                                         Marginal Abatement Costs (competition)

                                                                 Marginal Abatement Costs (market power)


                                        *
                               P ermit e eˆ                                                 E missions (e)
                                  Cap

   Figure 2: Implications of Strategic Behavior for Environmental Regulations: The Case of a Relatively Clean Dominant Firm.




                                                                  33
   $


                                                   Marginal Private Costs with Permits
                                                                      Marginal Social Costs
                                                                         Marginal Private Costs with Tax
                                                                         Marginal Private Costs


                                                                     Residual Demand

                                             Marginal Revenue                         Dominant Firm
                                                                                      Output (q1)

Figure 3: Implications of Strategic Behavior for Production: The Case of a Relatively Dirty Dominant Firm.




                                                                34
    $
                                Residual Demand (permits)
                                Marginal Revenue (permits)


                                                         Residual Demand (social costs)

                                                            Marginal Costs
                                                                           Residual Demand (tax)
                                                                           Marginal Revenue (tax)
                                                                  Residual Demand (private costs)

                                                                                    Dominant Firm
                                                                                    Output (q1)
Figure 4: Implications of Strategic Behavior for Production: The Case of a Relatively Clean Dominant Firm.




                                                                35
                                             Table 1

              Simulation of Policy Choice Effects on Emissions and Welfare

                                        Permit                                               Percent
                                        System                Tax       Difference        Difference
Marginal private cost of a              $1,000             $1,934            $934               93%
ton of NOx pollution

NOx emissions (tons)
 Cournot                                88,222             85,923             2,300              2.7%
 Competitivea                          100,936             97,096             3,839              4.0%
 Difference                             12,713             11,174
 Percent difference                       11%                12%
 Additional permitsb                                                          8,874            10.1%

Variable costs ($ millions)
  Cournot                                 1,565             1,573                8.3
  Competitive                             1,452             1,452                  0
  Welfare loss
     Emissions component                                                        -4.4
     Firm cost component                                                        11.7
   PJM total                               113                121                8.3             7.4%
     Percent loss                         7.8%               8.3%
   Change in Imports                                                             3.0
   Total                                                                        11.3           10.0%
  Percent loss

Notes:
    a)    Under a permit system, the competitive regime’s permit price would equal $1934/ton. The
          first column holds the price at $1000/ton (the Cournot regime’s permit price) for comparison
          purposes only.
    b)    “Additional permits” compares the Cournot regime’s emissions at a $1000/ton permit price
          with the competitive regime’s emissions at a $1934/ton permit price or tax.




                                                36
Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1.
Because demand is perfectly inelastic, the price in the product market P (qm ) is determined
by the marginal cost of the fringe. Under a tax, P (qm ) equals:
                                    P (qm ) = c0f (qf ) + τ 0 rf                                    (A1)
                                            = c0f (q − qm ) + τ 0 rf .
Hence, (7) can be written to define qbm as a function of exogenous parameters:
                    c0f (q − qm ) + τ 0 rf − c00f (q − qm ) · qm − c0m (qm ) − τ 0 rm = 0           (A2)
                                                                  ∗
Similarly, for a price taking firm, (3) can be written to define qm :
                              c0f (q − qm ) + τ 0 rf − c0m (qm ) − τ 0 rm = 0                       (A3)
                                ∗
Comparing (A2) and (A3) at qm     , and noting that c00f (q − qm ) > 0, the strategic firm will
                                                                            ∗
always produces less than it would have in a competitive market: qbm < qm     . With perfectly
                                                             ∗
inelastic demand, the opposite holds for the fringe: qbf > qf .
    Q.E.D.

Derivation of Equation (10).
As in the proof of proposition 1, residual demand (P (qm )) is defined by the fringe’s marginal
cost. Under a permit system, this equals:
                                  P (qm ) = c0f (q − qm ) + τ (qm ) · rf .                          (A4)
This implies that the slope of the residual demand function will be:
                                 P 0 (qm ) = −c00f (q − qm ) + τ 0 (qm ) · rf                       (A5)
The first order condition (9) is modified for the dominant firm as:
         dπ(τ (qm ))
                     = [c0f (q − qm ) + τ (qm ) · rf ] + [−c00f (q − qm ) + τ 0 (qm ) · rf ] · qm   (A6)
            dqm
                       −c0m (qm ) − τ (qm ) · rm − τ 0 (qm ) · (qm rm − em ) = 0.
   Under a tax, based on (A1), the dominant firm’s first order condition (7) is rewritten as:
      dπ(τ 0 )
               = [c0f (q − qm ) + τ 0 · rf ] + [−c00f (q − qm )] · qm − c0m (qm ) − τ 0 · rm = 0.   (A7)
       dqm
            dπ(τ 0 )
Note that    dqm qem
                     |   = 0. Subtracting (A7) from (A6), the cost equations cancel, yielding
(10).

                                                      i
Appendix B
For a firm regulated by a tradable permit system, this appendix discusses the relationship
                                                               ∗
between a firm’s production in a competitive market (qm          ) and its production in a imperfectly
competitive market (e qm ). The strategic firm can aﬀect prices in the product (P (qm )) and
permit markets (τ (qm )). A firm will exercise monopoly or monopsony power depending
on whether its sells or buys permits, on net [14]. In comparing (3) and (9), the firm will
produce less when acting strategically than it would have in a competitive market as long
             ∗
as, at qm = qm :
                             P 0 (qm ) · qm < τ 0 (qm ) · (qm rm − em ).                         (B1)
                                                      ∗
    This holds when permits are allocated em = qm       rm , as assumed in this paper. To see
this, note that when qm = qm , (B1) is simplified to P 0 (qm
                               ∗                            ∗                  ∗
                                                              ) < 0. Thus, at qm , the first order
incentive to set high prices in the product market dominates the second order incentive to
set permit prices.
    However, if permits are allocated diﬀerently, then the incentives to set permit prices may
dominate. As section 4 discusses, increasing output may increase the permit price in some
cases, but will decrease it in others. In the case of a positive τ 0 (qm ), had the firm been
allocated a substantial amount of permits, it would want to produce more in order to drive
up the permit price and this inequality would fail. Similarly, in the case of a negative τ 0 (qm ),
if the firm had been given very few permits, then the firm would increase production and
reduce the permit price (as explained in the paper, by reducing demand for other, dirtier
firms’ production). This would also result in the failure of the inequality.
    Another reason firms may have incentives to aﬀect the market price is in order to raise
their rivals’ costs [25],[28]. Kolstad and Wolak [18] find that firms’ behavior in California is
consistent with this incentive. However, this is beyond the scope of this paper. In contrast
to the previous research on market power in permit markets and raising rivals’ costs, this
paper focuses on another aspect of permit prices: namely, input prices may be aﬀected by
firm behavior, which in turn has welfare implications.




                                                  ii
