                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         AVERTING REGULATORY ENFORCEMENT:
                          EVIDENCE FROM NEW SOURCE REVIEW

                                          Nathaniel Keohane
                                           Erin T. Mansur
                                           Andrey Voynov

                                        Working Paper 13512
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13512


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We thank Jim Bushnell and Catherine Wolfram for many helpful discussions. We also thank Catherine
Wolfram for data on firms' financial statistics. Michael Greenstone and Ken Chay are thanked for
data on attainment counties. We also thank two anonymous referees and seminar participants at Yale
University, Rice University, University of Houston, Texas A&M University, Resources for the Future,
Dartmouth College, and NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Nathaniel Keohane, Erin T. Mansur, and Andrey Voynov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Averting Regulatory Enforcement: Evidence from New Source Review
Nathaniel Keohane, Erin T. Mansur, and Andrey Voynov
NBER Working Paper No. 13512
October 2007
JEL No. L51,L94,Q52,Q58

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper explores firms' response to regulatory enforcement. New Source Review, a provision of
the Clean Air Act, imposes stringent emissions limitations on significantly modified older power plants.
In 1999, the EPA sued owners of 46 plants for NSR violations. We study how electricity companies
respond to both the perceived threat of future action, and the action itself. A discrete choice model
estimates plants likelihood of being named in lawsuits increases with large historic emissions and
investments. On the eve of the lawsuits, emissions at plants with a one standard deviation greater probability
of being sued fell approximately ten percent.

Nathaniel Keohane                                     Andrey Voynov
Yale University, School of Management                 Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies
135 Prospect St.                                      205 Prospect Street
Box 208200                                            New Haven, CT 06511
New Haven, CT 06520-8264                              andrey.voynov@aya.yale.edu
nathaniel.keohane@yale.edu

Erin T. Mansur
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
erin.mansur@yale.edu
1     Introduction

This paper uses data from the U.S. electric power industry to explore the strategic responses
of regulated firms to government enforcement. We focus on the provisions of the Clean Air
Act that impose stringent emissions limitations on new sources and extend these new-source
limits to aging power plants that undergo substantial modification. In November 1999, the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a sweeping enforcement action against
24 electric power plants. The agency announced additional lawsuits in the following year,
bringing the total to 46 plants owned by nine utilities. The lawsuits charged that the plants’
parent utilities had failed to seek regulatory approval for major modifications that should
have been reviewed by the agency to determine whether they triggered the more stringent
emissions limits applicable to new sources.
    These “New Source Review” (NSR) regulations oﬀer a valuable test case for studying how
the threat of enforcement aﬀects the behavior of regulated firms, because we can identify
precisely when that threat became salient. Although the law had been in place for decades,
it was never vigorously enforced. In the sole prominent enforcement action brought by the
EPA prior to the period we study, the court handed down a ruling that strongly favored
the industry. Before 1998, therefore, there was little to make the industry concerned about
the threat of a regulatory crackdown. In that year, however, the EPA announced a more
aggressive stance. The industry did not know in advance which plants would be named in
the suits; the ambiguity over how the law would be interpreted allowed the EPA considerable
scope in deciding whom to target. But there was widespread expectation by the end of 1998
that the EPA was about to enforce the law more vigorously.
    In this paper, we explore how electric utilities responded to the perceived threat of future
action, as well as to the lawsuits themselves. Our measure of “response” focuses on plants’
emissions, since those were not only a known trigger of regulatory action but also the source
of concern that motivated the regulations in the first place. Of course, power plants were
not equally vulnerable to the imminent enforcement. For example, power plants that had

                                               1
made major capital investments in previous years might have fallen under greater regulatory
scrutiny.
   To distinguish among power plants in the severity of the threat, therefore, we first in-
vestigate the determinants of the EPA’s choice of which plants to name in the lawsuit: in
particular, we want to determine which historic, exogenous factors firms might have expected
to have influenced the likelihood of their plants being named in a lawsuit. In line with the
oﬃcial agency stance, we find that the probability of enforcement action was higher at plants
with large increases in emissions and large capital investments (excluding investments in pol-
lution control equipment) over the previous fifteen years. However, the EPA was also more
likely to target plants owned by large utilities.
   In the second part of our analysis, we use the estimated coeﬃcients from our model of
the agency’s choice to construct a predicted enforcement probability for each plant. Using
a panel data set of monthly plant-level emissions from January 1996 to December 2000, we
run a fixed eﬀects regression of emissions on this measure of the perceived threat during
the threat of enforcement period. We also examine how the emissions of plants named in
lawsuits changed after the lawsuits were announced.
   Here we focus exclusively on power plants that were required to participate in the first
phase of the sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) allowance market created by Title IV of the 1990 Clean
Air Act Amendments. These were the oldest and dirtiest plants, and therefore among the
most likely to be sued; moreover, they faced a constant regulatory regime over the period
of interest, since Phase I lasted from 1995 through 1999. (In contrast, plants that entered
the allowance market only in Phase II, starting in 2000, experienced a sharp change in air
pollution regulation at just the same time as EPA was stepping up its enforcement.) We find
strong evidence that firms sought to avert enforcement. Plants that were more likely to be
sued show greater reductions in emissions, even controlling for plant and month-year fixed
eﬀects. On the eve of the lawsuits, emissions at plants with a one standard deviation greater
probability of being sued fell approximately ten percent. The plants named in lawsuits also


                                               2
reduced emissions: on average, their emissions fell 18 percent.
    The third part of our analysis returns to the model of enforcement and asks whether firms’
evasive actions did result in lowering the probability of being sued. We find that a plant’s
current emissions helped predict whether it was named in the EPA’s lawsuits, controlling for
the potential endogeneity of emissions and enforcement. This suggests that power plants had
reasonable grounds to change their behavior after the threat became known, but before the
EPA announced its lawsuits. For a subset of data, we also report the results of a three-stage
least squares model that tests the robustness of our findings.
    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section reviews related literature. Section 3
discusses the history of New Source Review regulation, setting the stage for our subsequent
analysis. Section 4 models regulators’ decision of which power plants to name in the lawsuits.
In particular, we examine whether–based on historic actions at a power plant–a firm might
expect to be sued. In section 5, we examine whether threatened firms attempted to avert
enforcement by reducing emissions. Section 6 examines whether regulators incorporated
these reduced emissions in their decision of which plants to name in lawsuits. The final
section oﬀers conclusions.



2     Related Literature

Our paper relates to several existing strands of the economics literature. First, our paper
is closely related to the literature on self-regulation, which examines when a firm (or a
group of firms) self-regulates in order to preempt regulatory action. Maxwell et al. (2000)
develop a theoretical model of firms that deter political action through voluntary restraints.
Using toxic release data, they find evidence that increased regulatory threat induces firms
to reduce emissions. Corporations’ environmental management systems tend to be more
comprehensive when there are higher compliance costs, public pressure, or liability threats
(Khanna and Anton, 2002). Anton et al. (2004) find that more comprehensive systems are



                                              3
associated with lower emissions of toxics. However, the theoretical literature shows that
self-regulation does not necessarily improve welfare.1 Lyon and Maxwell (2004) provide a
detailed discussion of the general literature on regulatory threat.
   Our focus on the determinants of enforcement complements previous work on regulatory
enforcement and its eﬀects on compliance. In a study of the pulp and paper industry, Magat
and Viscusi (1990) find that more strenuous enforcement (as measured by the frequency
of inspections) increases subsequent compliance. Bartel and Thomas (1985) conclude that
more frequent inspections increases compliance with workplace safety regulations, but find
little evidence that compliance drives enforcement decisions.
   More recent empirical analyses of enforcement have taken explicit account of the potential
endogeneity between enforcement and the behavior of regulated firms (Gray and Deily 1996;
Laplante and Rilstone 1996; Eckert 2004). For example, Gray and Deily use a simultaneous
equations model to account for endogeneity; they find that enforcement of air pollution regu-
lation induces compliance among regulated steel mills, while compliance averts enforcement.
We address the same endogeneity issues here, using predicted enforcement probabilities as
an instrument for actual enforcement decisions. A key diﬀerence, however, is our interest on
how the threat of enforcement changes behavior prior to the enforcement decision itself. In
other words, we also use the predicted probability of enforcement as the actual independent
variable of interest in predicting behavior–a measure of the degree of threat, rather than a
way of getting around endogeneity.2
   In its topical focus, this paper is heir to a long line of literature on so-called “vintage-
diﬀerentiated regulations” or VDRs, of which NSR is one of the most prominent examples.3
Economists have long bemoaned the perverse investment incentives created by programs that
diﬀerentially aﬀect old and new sources of pollution. The underlying legislation that gave
rise to NSR was the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments, which imposed stringent
standards on new sources of emissions while exempting or “grandfathering” existing sources.
These new-source standards led electric utilities to extend the operating lives of old power


                                              4
plants, delaying the construction of new ones (Nelson 1984; Maloney and Brady 1988; Nelson
et al. 1993).
   In a recent paper, Bushnell and Wolfram (2006) [henceforth BW] identify a second per-
verse eﬀect of VDRs: regulated firms are discouraged from undertaking investments that
would improve the operating eﬃciency of existing units, in the fear that doing so will trigger
enforcement. Consistent with this view, List et al. (2004) find that NSR slowed modifica-
tion rates at industrial facilities in sectors other than electric power. To probe the extent of
this distortion, BW examine NSR enforcement in the electric power industry, as we do, but
ask a slightly diﬀerent question: Did stepped-up enforcement by the EPA aﬀect plant-level
heat rates or expenditures on capital investment and operation & maintenance expenditure?
They find some evidence of an eﬀect on investment, but no evidence of an eﬀect on O&M
expenditure or heat rates.
   Because BW and our paper use similar data to ask closely related questions, it is worth
pointing out how the two studies diverge. First, BW are interested in vintage-diﬀerentiated
regulation per se, and how enforcement of such regulations distorts investment decisions.
In contrast, the motivation for our analysis is the strategic response of regulated firms to
the threat of enforcement. As such, our analysis focuses only on those plants most likely
to be sued: the Phase I plants. This eliminates diﬀerences in regulatory regimes over the
time period studied.4 Second, we delve into the EPA’s decisions to target a certain set of
plants in the lawsuits. BW focus on how the greater scrutiny aﬀected plant operations and
expenditures ex post. Third, our probability-of-lawsuit model identifies which plants were
more likely to be sued, allowing us to see whether those plants responded more readily to
the threat of enforcement. For their part, BW use the prevalence of scrubbers to capture
relevant variation among power plants. Since a successful lawsuit by the EPA would require
a plant to install scrubbers, plants that already had scrubbers were less likely to suﬀer large
economic losses as a result of the lawsuits, and hence less likely to change their behavior.




                                               5
3     Regulatory Background

Early Regulation
    Because this paper centers on the determinants of EPA’s lawsuits, and the responses of
the utility industry to the agency’s actions, it is worth presenting the regulatory background
in some detail. The roots of New Source Review lie in the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendments,
when Congress first established federal authority over emissions from stationary sources such
as coal-fired power plants. Reasoning that controlling pollution from new sources would be
much less expensive than retrofitting older ones–and expecting that continued demand
growth would lead utilities to replace older units as they aged–Congress established a na-
tionwide uniform performance standard of 1.2 lbs. of SO2 /mmBtus of coal, applicable on
all new coal-fired generating units (among other categories of sources). In 1977, Congress
amended the Clean Air Act further, augmenting the emissions-based standard with an ad-
ditional requirement that individual sources reduce between 70 and 90 percent of the SO2
in their flue gas. The only way to meet this percentage reduction requirement was to install
a “flue-gas desulfurization” device, better known as a “scrubber.” Hence the 1977 Amend-
ments eﬀectively represent a technology standard. At the same time, the 1977 legislation
strengthened the national ambient air quality standards.
    To implement these regulations, EPA required all potential new sources of emissions to
apply for a so-called “Permit to Construct,” which triggered an extensive review of the pro-
posed facility. The requirements for being granted such a permit were more stringent in
“nonattainment areas” that did not meet the ambient air quality standards. Nonetheless,
costly pollution control requirements were still imposed on proposed sources in attainment
areas, in order to prevent further deterioration of air quality. These stringent requirements
on new sources created strong incentives for electric utilities to keep their older power plants
in operation. Generating units built in the 1940s remained online years past their origi-
nally scheduled retirement dates, drawing the outrage of environmental advocacy groups
and eventually attracting attention from regulators at EPA.

                                               6
   Of course, Congress had anticipated this problem in the original legislation. The statutory
definition of “new source” explicitly included sources that subsequently underwent “mod-
ification,” defined as “any physical change in, or change in the method of operation of, a
stationary source which increases the amount of any air pollutant emitted by such source
....”5 Taken literally, this provision would trigger New Source Review in response to virtually
any maintenance operation at a power plant. Thus in implementing the Act, the EPA spec-
ified a more lenient characterization of “modification,” which specifically required that the
contemplated physical change result in a “significant net emissions increase” of pollution.
In particular, EPA ruled out “routine maintenance, repair, and replacement” as a trigger
for NSR.6 The scope of NSR was narrowed further in 1992, when EPA issued the so-called
“WEPCo Rule” following a successful suit against the agency brought by the Wisconsin
Electric Power Company.7 In July 1996, EPA announced a new eﬀort to reform the NSR
program, but couched it as “significantly reduc[ing] the number and types of activities at
sources that would otherwise be subject to major NSR,” “streamlin[ing] the overall NSR
permitting process,” and “relieving regulatory burden.”8
   Threat of Enforcement
   In 1998, the EPA followed up with a second notice, ostensibly to solicit more detailed
comments on the WEPCo rule proposal. In the announcement, however EPA signaled a
shift to a much more vigorous stance in its enforcement of NSR in the electric power sector.
Specifically, the agency declared that “it appears that although there are a number of sub-
stantial changes to existing units, as well as an increase in the amount of electricity being
generated ... changes to utility units .... are not being reported to permitting agencies.”
The agency further warned that it had “reconsidered” the WEPCo rule’s demand growth
exclusion, and had “tentatively concluded that [it] should not be continued, ... especially in
view of recent developments in the electric power sector.”9
   These changes did not go unnoticed by the industry. In August, the Utility Environment
Report ran an article headlined “EPA Proposes ‘WEPCo’ Rule Changes; Would Required


                                              7
New Emissions Limits.” In October, the industry’s concerns increased, as word began to
spread of imminent enforcement action against the electric utility industry. In an article
entitled “EPA Seeking Naughty Coal-Fired Boiler Users,” the Electricity Daily reported
that agency had sent letters to several boiler manufacturers requesting information on “all
coal-fired units over 25 MW constructed since 1930, subsequent recommended changes in
operation, and any other known changes in operation since 1978.”10
   NSR Lawsuits
   A year later, on November 3, 1999, the Department of Justice, on behalf of the EPA,
announced lawsuits against seven electric utilities (alleging violations at 24 power plants) as
well as an administrative compliance order against the Tennessee Valley Authority (naming
seven more plants). Subsequent lawsuits in March, April, and December of 2000 brought
to 46 the total number of power plants targeted by the enforcement action. Table I lists the
holding companies, utilities, and power plants named in the lawsuits.
   The basis for EPA’s legal action was its claim that utilities had made significant modi-
fications to their power plants without notifying the agency. New Source Review does not
prohibit the modification of plants: rather, it requires that firms inform the EPA of such
changes and, if the changes are significant enough, that they meet the applicable New Source
Performance Standards (NSPS). Hence while they did not point to explicit changes in emis-
sions, all of the lawsuits cited specific modifications that (according to the EPA) should
have been reported (Parker and Blodgett 2000). The stakes were considerable. A firm that
lost a lawsuit could be required to meet the new source standard — installing scrubbers to
capture SO2 and Selective Catalytic Reduction to control nitrogen oxides, at a cost of tens
or hundreds of millions of dollars —or else shut down its plant. Firms also faced fines of up
to $25,000 per day of violation (Parker and Blodget 2000). To date, some of these lawsuits
have been settled out of court (e.g., Cinergy agreed to pay $1.4 billion to install pollution
control technology, along with $8.5 million in fines), while many are still pending.11
   Our econometric analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we model the EPA’s decision of


                                              8
which power plants to sue, using historical data on the likely determinants of the agency’s
enforcement action. Second, we look for evidence that the power plants that were eventually
targeted–or those that were likely to be targeted–reduced their emissions in reaction to
the threat of being sued. Finally, we ask whether such a response was rational: That is, did
power plants that changed their behavior on the eve of the EPA’s action aﬀect the probability
of a lawsuit?



4     Model of Regulatory Enforcement Decision

4.1    Empirical Model of Enforcement

We begin by modeling the probability that a given plant was named in the EPA’s lawsuits in
1999 and 2000. For this analysis, we construct a cross-sectional sample of 249 coal-fired power
plants that had at least one generating unit built before 1971 and therefore grandfathered
out of the NSPS in the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Acts. Therefore, each plant in our sample
was potentially subject to New Source Review. These include all of the coal-fired “Table A”
plants–plants that housed at least one unit required to participate in Phase I of the Title
IV allowance market, named after the table in the 1990 Clean Air Act that listed them.12
The sample includes all 44 of the 46 plants named in the EPA lawsuits that were charged
with evading new source review in the modification of existing emissions units.13
    Section 6 asks whether utilities could avert regulatory enforcement. There, we will exam-
ine the link between contemporaneous behavior and the lawsuits. To begin with, however,
we wish to model the probability that a plant was targeted in a lawsuit as a function of
various fixed plant characteristics, along with past actions that had taken place well before
the agency announced its plans to increase scrutiny of utilities. Such a model yields an “ex-
pected probability of being sued,” based on factors that were purely exogenous by the time
the electric utilities might have contemplated taking actions to avoid further scrutiny. In
essence, this is a rational expectations model of the electric utilities’ behavior. Given what


                                              9
had already occurred by the time the EPA altered its approach to New Source Review, how
likely was a given plant to be targeted by the EPA for enforcement action?
   The lawsuits filed by the EPA cited specific violations of the law that dated as far back to
1979 and were concentrated in the late 1980s and early- to mid-1990s. We start by focusing
on behavior over the same period. In particular, all of the variables discussed in this section
are computed using data for power plant operation from 1985 through 1997.
   First, the EPA’s definition of “major modification” suﬃcient to trigger New Source Re-
view focused on changes that would increase a plant’s emissions in expectation. Thus we
would expect the lawsuits to have been more likely at plants that had large increases in
emissions. We measure this in two ways: the maximum year-on-year change in emissions
(mx∆emit), and the cumulative change over the period 1985-1997 (cum∆emit). Similarly,
we include the maximum year-on-year and cumulative changes in generation (mx∆gen and
cum∆gen).
   Next, the incentives to keep older plants operating were at the heart of the NSR con-
troversy. Hence plants that reported large capital investments–either in a single year
(mxinvest) or accumulated over time (mninvest)–might have attracted more attention from
the EPA. High maximum or average maintenance expenditures (mxmaint and mnmaint, re-
spectively) might have signaled an attempt to keep older plants operating past their normal
lifetimes–or might have represented capital investment reported as maintenance to avoid
scrutiny. Investment and maintenance figures are normalized by the generating capacity of
a plant. Older plants (age) may also have been more likely to be sued.
   Because the agency’s objective was ultimately to limit the damages from deteriorating
air quality, it might have taken account of the attainment status of the county in which
a plant was located (attainment) or the environmental damages that a particular plant
caused per ton of pollution (damages). Finally, to the extent that EPA chose high-profile
cases to maximize the deterrent eﬀect of its actions, it might have been more likely to identify
violations at large power plants (plantsize), or at those plants owned by large parent utilities


                                              10
(firmsize). We take natural logarithms of age and firm size to account for the scaling of
those variables.14
   Under the assumption that idiosyncratic shocks (ε) were drawn from a standard normal
distribution, we estimate the probability of a lawsuit naming plant i using the following
probit model:


  Pr(lawsuiti ) = Xi0 β i + εi , where                                                    (1)

           Xi0 β i = β 0 + β 1 mx∆emiti + β 2 cum∆emiti + β 3 mx∆geni + β 4 cum∆geni +

                     β 5 mxinvesti + β 6 mninvesti + β 7 mxmainti + β 8 mnmainti +

                     β 9 ln (agei ) + β 10 attainmenti + β 11 damagesi +

                     β 12 ln (plantsizei ) + β 13 ln(f irmsizei ).


We use the coeﬃcient estimates from equation (1) to predict the likelihood that a given plant
will be sued (probsue).


4.2    Data for Enforcement Model

The data in this study are taken from a range of publicly available government sources.
We constructed the list of power plants sued by the EPA from press releases and reports
published by the Department of Justice and the EPA, and made available on their websites.
   The historical data used to calculate data on emissions and generation are from the
Energy Information Administration (EIA) Form 767. For the years 1985 to 1997, annual
emissions (in thousands of tons of SO2 ) were estimated on a mass-balance basis and used to
compute the variables mx∆emit and cum∆emit. Generation figures for calculating mx∆gen
and cum∆gen were also computed from the EIA data.
   The financial data are taken primarily from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) Form 1 and span the period 1981 to 1997. We construct our measure of capital
investment by first computing total annual expenditures on structures and improvements,

                                                11
equipment, and land (reported in cumulative form on FERC Form 1), and then subtracting
plant-level expenditures on abatement equipment (reported on EIA Form 767). Hence we do
not count expenditures on scrubbers or other pollution control equipment, instead isolating
the operational investments that are likely to invite regulatory scrutiny. The maxinvest and
meaninvest variables are the maximum and mean of these annual “net dirty” investments,
respectively; both are expressed in dollars per megawatt of nameplate generating capacity
($/MW), expressing dollar amounts in real year-2000 terms using the appropriate Handy-
Whitman Electric Light and Power Construction cost index (taken from the 2003 Mergent
Public Utility Manual). The FERC data also include annual maintenance expenses, used to
compute mxmaint and mnmaint. These measures are also expressed in dollars per MW,
using the producer price index for intermediate materials, goods, and components to convert
dollar amounts into real (year-2000) terms.
   We use the EPA’s eGRID database for 1999 to construct the measures of age (in years
as of 1999), and plantsize and f irmsize (in gigawatts, GW or 1000 MW, of capacity).
The indicator variable on SO2 county attainment status (attainment) is for the year 1990.
Environmental damages (damages) are based on a county-to-county source-receptor matrix
for particulate matter (PM10), used by EPA to assess the benefits of clean air regulation
(see Latimer (1996) and Abt (2000)). The receptor matrix specifies a transfer coeﬃcient
representing the eﬀect of a ton of SO2 emissions from that source on ambient PM10 con-
centrations in each receptor county (in µg/m3 ). We multiply each power plant’s transfer
coeﬃcient by the 1990 population of the receptor county, and then sum over all 3080 re-
ceptor counties, to get our measure of per-ton damages for that plant. Thus the variable
represents a population-weighted measure of the eﬀect of one ton of SO2 emissions on ambi-
ent pollution concentrations. Table II presents summary statistics for the variables used in
our analysis.




                                              12
4.3    Results of Enforcement Model

Table III presents the results of estimating the likelihood of being sued. Column 1 estimates
the probability of a lawsuit as a function of historic behavior only, equation (1). Overall, the
independent variables are reasonable predictors of the lawsuits (pseudo-R2 = 0.40).15 The
probability of a lawsuit increases with both maximum year-to-year changes in emissions and
the cumulative increase in emissions from 1985-1997. Note that changes in generation did
not aﬀect the likelihood of a lawsuit. This suggests that to the extent EPA focused on plants
that boosted their output, it did so as a means of targeting plants that increased emissions,
rather than as an end in itself. The marginal eﬀects of maximum and cumulative emissions,
respectively, are 0.009 and 0.0009.16 Those estimates imply that the probability of a lawsuit
rose by 1 percentage point for every 1100-ton increase in a plant’s maximum year-on-year
emissions, and by every 11,000-ton increase in cumulative emissions over the period.
   Both mean investment and age also significantly increase the probability that a plant was
targeted, suggesting that the EPA was indeed concerned about expenditures extending the
operating lives of older power plants. An increase in mean annual investment of $2.54 per
MW of capacity (roughly 20 percent of the sample mean) raised the probability of a lawsuit
by 1 percentage point. The estimated eﬀect of age is more dramatic: the probability of a
lawsuit rose by 1 percentage point with each 6 percent increase in age.17
   Power plants owned by larger parent firms were more likely to be targeted by the agency,
all else equal. A 15 percent increase in a firm’s nameplate capacity, 3.1 GW on average,
corresponded to a 1 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a lawsuit. Large plants
have similar marginal eﬀects. These results are consistent with the EPA choosing high-profile
cases in order to maximize the deterrent eﬀect of its actions. On the other hand, measures
of the environmental impacts of emissions (county attainment status and marginal damages)
were not significant determinants of enforcement.




                                              13
5     Firms’ Response to Enforcement

5.1    Empirical Model of Firms’ Response

Next, we examine whether firms changed their emissions as a result of the lawsuits. For
this analysis, we construct a panel data set that includes monthly observations for all coal-
fired Table A plants from 1996 to 2000. These plants faced a constant regulatory regime
throughout the period. We exclude from the sample other older plants which were not
required to participate in Phase I of the allowance market.18 Since those plants entered the
allowance market in 2000, they confronted a new system of regulation precisely when the
EPA began to crack down on NSR, which would complicate identification of the latter eﬀect.
    Recall that we are interested in measuring how plants responded to both the threat of
enforcement action, and to the actual lawsuits. In our regressions, the dependent variable
is the natural logarithm of tons of SO2 emitted at plant i in month t (emitit ). The first
explanatory variable of interest is the threat of a lawsuit during the months leading up to
the EPA’s announcements. As our measure of the magnitude of that threat, we use the
predicted probability from the probit regression in equation (1) (probsuei ). We interact this
with a dummy variable (threatit ) that equals one for plant i starting in October 1998 and
ending in either (i) the month before plant i was named in a lawsuit, or (ii) December 2000.
The result is our variable of interest, denoted probsuei · threatit , that equals the predicted
probability of a lawsuit during the “threat window” running from October 1998 until a plant
was sued (or through the end of the period under study).19 Since probsuei is a generated
regressor, we correct the estimated standard errors using the Murphy and Topel (1985)
method.
    The second key explanatory variable concerns the lawsuit itself. To measure the eﬀect of
enforcement actions after they were announced, we compute the variable lawsuiti –a dummy
variable that equals one if plant i was targeted by the EPA during 1999 and 2000. We interact
this variable with an indictor of all months t starting in the month that the enforcement


                                              14
action was announced and continuing to December 2000 (actiont ). The variable of interest
is lawsuiti · actiont . Of course, whether a power plant was named in the EPA’s lawsuits may
have depended in part on the plant’s contemporaneous emissions (a possibility we examine
directly in the next section). To address the simultaneity issue that arises when estimating
how power plants responded to the enforcement action, we instrument for lawsuiti · actiont
using the predicted probability from equation (1) in the months following an enforcement
action (and zero beforehand): probsuei · actiont .
   The SO2 emitted from a power plant is the product of two quantities: the sulfur dioxide
emissions rate (measured per mmBtus of fuel input), and the amount of fuel consumed.
While the first of these can be altered at short notice (e.g., by using a fuel with a lower
sulfur content), fuel consumption depends, in a large part, on how much electricity the
plant generates, which is only partially under the control of the power plant’s operator.
We account for this by including monthly electricity generation (genit ) in our regression.
Since a power plant operator has some control over generation, we instrument for it using
aggregate monthly state electricity demand (salesit ) heating degree-days (hddit ), and cooling
degree-days (cddit ).20 We include plant-level fixed eﬀects (δ i ) in the regression to control for
unobserved characteristics of power plants. Finally, we include month-year fixed eﬀects (ζ t )
to account for any determinants of emissions levels, common to all plants, that varied over
time. (The most obvious example is the price of sulfur dioxide emissions under the emissions
trading program.) The resulting model is:


 ln(emitit ) = γ 1 (probsuei · threatit ) + γ 2 (lawsuiti · actiont ) + γ 3 ln(genit ) + δ i + ζ t + υ it , (2)


using probsuei ·actiont , ln(salesit ), ln(hddit ), and ln(cddit ) to instrument for lawsuiti ·actiont
and ln (genit ).




                                                     15
5.2     Data for Firms’ Response

In this section, we use data from the EPA’s Continuous Emissions Monitoring System
(CEMS). The EPA collects hourly data on SO2 emissions and gross generation for most
fossil-fueled generating units in the US.21 CEMS data are highly accurate and comprehen-
sive for most types of fossil units (Joskow and Kahn, 2002). We aggregate these data by
plant and month.
   The data used to construct the instruments are from two sources. Electric utilities report
hourly demand (FERC Form 714) that we aggregate by month and state. We compute the
monthly statewide heating and cooling degree-days from National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) data.22


5.3     Results of Firms’ Response

Table IV presents results from regressions of emissions on measures of enforcement (equation
(2)), using panel data for 1996-2000. All of the regressions reported in the table instrument
for lawsuiti · actiont and include plant and month-year fixed eﬀects. We compute Newey-
West standard errors allowing for a six-month lag structure, to account for the possibility of
(unspecified) autocorrelation among observations from the same plant. Column 1 presents
estimates without instrumenting for generation; to the extent utilities shifted output away
from plants that were at high risk of being targeted, these estimates will be biased. Col-
umn 2 presents our main specification–instrumenting for ln(genit ) and lawsuiti · actiont
with sales, heating/cooling degree-days, and the predicted probability of a suit (using the
b coeﬃcients in Table III). The instruments are strong.23 Over-identification tests fail to
β
reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are valid.24 As a robustness check on our
instrumenting strategy, column 3 of Table IV presents estimates using an alternative set of
instruments: namely, the full set of covariates in equation (1), as well as ln(salesit ), ln(hddit ),
and ln(cddit ).25
   Because we include plant fixed eﬀects and measure emissions in logs, the coeﬃcient on

                                                 16
probsuei · threatit , γ 1 , estimates the percent change in emissions during the “threat window”
relative to prior emissions at the same plant, controlling for contemporaneous generation.
This is negative and statistically significant at the 1-percent level in all three specifications
presented in Table IV. Hence plants with a greater probability of being sued reduced their
emissions by a larger percentage. Using the estimated coeﬃcients in the main specification
of column 3, a plant that faced nearly certain enforcement (i.e., probsue near one) reduced
emissions by approximately 33 percent.26 Of course, the incentive to avert enforcement was
most relevant for plants on the margin. Looking across plants, a one standard deviation
increase in the probability of being sued (about 0.28) results in a ten percent reduction
in emissions. The interquartile diﬀerence was roughly the same magnitude; hence moving
a plant from the 25th percentile of probsue to the 75th percentile also corresponded to a
roughly ten percent increase in emissions. At the median plant, this corresponds to a drop
in annual emissions of 280 tons of SO2 relative to 1996-1998 levels. By comparison, the drop
in emissions during the first year of the SO2 emissions trading program under the 1990 Clean
Air Act (one of the most ambitious pollution control policies in the country’s history) was
on the order of one-third.27
   These findings correspond to the emissions response to the threat of the lawsuits, regard-
less of whether a plant was actually sued or not. The eﬀect of the lawsuits themselves is
captured by the coeﬃcient on lawsuiti · actiont , γ 2 . The estimates in Table IV suggest that a
power plant’s emissions fell by about 18 percent after the announcement of an EPA lawsuit,
relative to emissions prior to October 1998. This is half the magnitude of the estimated
coeﬃcient on the probsuei · threatit variable. One possible explanation for the dampened
response after firms were named in the lawsuits, compared to the threat, is the firms had
already optimally adjusted.
   Of course, there is a key diﬀerence in the range of the independent variables. The
severity of the threat diﬀered across plants, with a median of only 0.07. Hence while plants
at greater risk responded sharply to the threat of lawsuits, the “average plant” reduced


                                               17
emissions by only a few percentage points. In contrast, a power plant was either sued–in
which case it reduced emissions by 18 percent on average–or it was not. Taken together,
the evidence suggests that firms responded to the threat of the lawsuits, as well as to the
lawsuits themselves.


5.4    Robustness Tests

Our identification strategy is simple: it rests on comparing emissions during the threat
window to prior emissions. One way to check the robustness of our results is to run a “false
experiment,” using an alternative (arbitrary) event window in place of the actual one to
define the probsuei · threatit variable. Table V presents the results of defining the threat as
equal to probsuei during the years 1997 or 1998 only (the specification is otherwise the same
as in column 2 of Table IV).28 The estimates fail to find any significant eﬀect, consistent
with our premise that the EPA’s announcements in 1998 presaged a shift in the enforcement
regime.
   We then examine how firms reduced emissions. The EIA Form 767 data provide in-
formation on the sulfur content of a plant’s coal each month. Replacing the dependent
variable in equation (2) with the natural logarithm of sulfur content, we find that those
plants more likely to be named in lawsuits switched to lower sulfur coal (the coeﬃcient on
probsuei · threatit is −0.139 (s.e. of 0.044)). However, there was no significant response to
the lawsuits themselves (lawsuiti · actiont ): −0.009 with a s.e. of 0.051. We find similar
results if we use the natural logarithm of the emissions rate (in lbs. of SO2 /mmBtus) as the
dependent variable.29 Given the magnitudes of these findings and those reported in Table IV,
we posit that firms reduced emissions by reducing both emissions rates (primarily through
fuel switching) as well as output.




                                              18
6     Regulatory Response to Changing Emissions

6.1    Empirical Model of Regulatory Response

Finally, we return to the question of which plants were named in the EPA’s lawsuits. This
time, however, we are interested in whether there was any “rational” basis for power plant
operators to change their behavior in the months leading up to the lawsuits. To investigate
this question, we introduce the change in the natural logarithm of emissions from the 12-
month period before the announcement, October 1997 to September 1998, to the 12-month
period afterwards, October 1998 to September 1999, (∆ ln(emiti )) as an explanatory variable
in our “likelihood of lawsuits” model (equation (1)).
    As noted above, lawsuits and contemporaneous emissions may have been jointly deter-
mined. Thus we instrument for the change in emissions using the change over the same time
period in the natural logarithm of state electricity demand.30 The model is now:


                            Pr(lawsuiti ) = α (∆ ln(emiti )) + Xi0 β i + εi ,                 (3)


using the change in the natural logarithm of sales (∆ ln(salesi )) as an instrument for ∆ ln(emiti )
(compare with equation (1)). We estimate equation (3) on the cross section of power plants
described in section 4.31


6.2    Data for Regulatory Response

This section combines those plant characteristic data from section 4.2 with the monthly data
on emissions and sales from section 5.2. The variable of interest, ∆ ln(emiti ), is defined using
emissions data from October 1997 to September 1999 using the CEMS data. For the 249
plants in the sample, the average change in emissions was −245 tons or approximately 8
percent.




                                                   19
6.3    Results of Regulatory Response

Our motivating premise is that firms sought to avert being sued by reducing their emissions
on the eve of enforcement. If so, we should find evidence that current emissions positively
aﬀected the probability of a lawsuit. To explore this possibility, we re-estimate the probability
of a lawsuit using equation (3), this time including the change in plant-level emissions.
   Of course, estimating the eﬀect of contemporaneous behavior on the EPA’s decision
raises econometric concerns. After all, we have just shown that power plants reduced their
emissions in anticipation of the lawsuits. Hence a power plant at greater risk of being
sued (for unrelated reasons) was likely to reduce its emissions on the eve of the lawsuits,
in the hopes of mollifying the agency. Such behavior would generate a negative correlation
between changes in emissions and the probability of being sued–obscuring the evidence of
its eﬀectiveness (i.e., whether in the absence of a plant’s response it would have been more
likely to be sued). This is a standard simultaneity problem; if we include the change in
emissions as an explanatory variable in estimating the probability of a lawsuit, we would
expect biased results.32
   To underscore this point, column 1 of Table VI presents estimates from standard maxi-
mum likelihood estimation of equation (3), without instrumental variables. The results are
little diﬀerent from the estimates of equation (1) presented in Table III.33 In particular, the
estimated coeﬃcient on ∆ ln(emiti ) is essentially zero. This null result begs the question:
Was the EPA’s decision determined entirely by the actions of power plants before 1998? Or
are the averting eﬀects of eleventh-hour changes in emissions being canceled out by the fact
that the plants undertaking such measures were more likely to be sued to begin with?
   We untangle these eﬀects by instrumenting for the change in emissions with changes in
the natural logarithm of state sales. Results for the first stage are presented column 2 of
Table VI. The instrument is statistically significant at the 5-percent level. In addition, the
model predicts that plants with lower maximum historical changes in emissions and those in
attainment areas had increased emissions relative to others.


                                               20
   Column 3 of the table presents estimates from the second stage of the instrumental-
variables model (equation (3)). The results confirm the relevance of contemporaneous be-
havior to the enforcement decision, and reveal the averting eﬀect that was obscured in column
1. Controlling for a range of other determinates of a lawsuit (all of which were fixed before
1998), power plants with larger increases in emissions at the time of the treat of enforcement
were much more likely to be targeted by the EPA. Even with current emissions included in
the analysis, the maximum historic increase in emissions (mx∆emit) remains a strong pre-
dictor of a lawsuit. However, investment, age, plant size, and firm size lose their predictive
power. Interestingly, in this model, plants in nonattainment areas were also more likely to
be sued. (In Table III, the coeﬃcient is similar in magnitude but has a large standard error.)
   The key conclusion to emerge from Table VI is that the lawsuits were responsive to the
emissions decisions of the firms. This buttresses our analysis of the response by power plants.
Since even eleventh-hour reductions in emissions helped stave oﬀ enforcement action by the
EPA, firms did indeed have reason to respond strategically to the threat of enforcement.


6.4    Robustness Test using Three-Stage Least Squares

In estimating equation (2), we have used as our measure of the threat of enforcement the
predicted probability of being sued based on equation (1). To avoid endogeneity concerns,
we estimated the likelihood of a lawsuit on the basis of factors that were exogenous by the
time the EPA announced its shift in approach. Nonetheless, the underlying logic of our
model might also suggest that the lawsuits and the utilities’ actions in anticipation of the
lawsuits were jointly determined. To account for this possibility, we next estimate equations
(2) and (3) as a system, using three-stage least squares (3SLS).
   While appealing in principle, this approach raises a few complications that must be
addressed in practice. First, our sample size for the likelihood-of-lawsuit model falls to
102 plants (from 249). This is because only Table A units faced the same environmental
regulation (namely Phase I of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments’ Title IV program)


                                              21
during the entire time period studied.34 Second, the 3SLS model requires assuming a linear
probability model, rather than the probit used above.
   Third, and arguably most importantly, the equations do not neatly fit into the 3SLS
framework. Typically, a 3SLS model is of the form:


                              yi,1 = Xi β 1 + α1 yi,2 + Zi,1 γ 1 + εi,1                         (4)

                              yi,2 = Xi β 2 + α2 yi,1 + Zi,2 γ 2 + εi,2                         (5)


Our case, however, raises several diﬃculties. Equation (1), the likelihood of being sued, is
a cross section, while equation (2), emissions, is a panel. Furthermore, the equations are
not simple linear functions of each other. While emissions (say, y2 in the above system of
equations) do aﬀect the probability of being sued, it is the change in emissions around the
time of the threat (October 1997 to September 1999) that matters, rather than the level.
Similarly, we are interested in the response of emissions not only to the actuality of a lawsuit
after the EPA’s action (y1 ), but also to the likelihood of being sued (E([y1 ])), during the
“threat window” leading up to the EPA’s actions. Thus, the correct system of equations
would replace yit,2 and yit,1 with f (yit,2 ) and g (yit,1 ), respectively, in equations (4) and (5)
above.
   Nonetheless, despite its shortcomings, the 3SLS model provides a useful means of probing
the robustness of our main approach. In place of equation (3), we estimate a linear probability
model, using the same (exogenous) regressors as in the earlier specification, along with the
change in emissions during the threat window (∆ ln(emiti )). In the spirit of equation (2), we
estimate ∆ ln(emiti ) as a function of whether the plant was named in a lawsuit (lawsuiti )
and its change in electricity generation, ∆ ln(geni ). Furthermore, like the instruments in
equation (2), the change in generation is a function of the change in sales, ∆ ln(sales),
heating degree-days, ∆ ln(hdd), and cooling degree-days, ∆ ln(cdd).
   In Table VII, we present results of simultaneous estimation of the three equations. A



                                                 22
plant’s likelihood of being named in a lawsuit increases with changes in current emissions,
changes in historic emissions, and firm size. Changes in emissions are increasing in generation
and are smaller if the plant was named in a lawsuit. With this small sample, the weather and
demand variables are weak predictors of generation. Overall, we conclude that the results
are comparable to those highlighted above in Tables III, IV, and VI.



7     Conclusions

In this paper, we have explored how electric utilities responded to greater regulatory scrutiny
and an increased threat of enforcement. In line with the public stance taken by the EPA,
we find that the probability of enforcement action was higher at plants with large, historic
emissions increases or capital investments. However, the agency was also more likely to
target large plants and plants owned by large utilities.
    We then estimate the strategic responses of firms to the threat of enforcement, using our
model of the lawsuit decision to construct predicted enforcement probabilities. This provides
a measure of how vulnerable each plant was to the increased regulatory threat. We find that
plants that were more likely to be sued (based on decisions stretching back over the prior
two decades) reduced their emissions by more, even controlling for fixed plant and month-
year eﬀects. On the eve of the lawsuits, emissions at plants with a one standard deviation
greater probability of being sued fell approximately ten percent. We conclude that firms
sought to avert enforcement. In addition, the plants named in lawsuits reduced emissions
by approximately 18 percent.
    Finally, we examine whether the government did respond to the reduced emissions. When
we include a plant’s contemporaneous emissions in the lawsuit model, we find that it is a
strong predictor of whether the plant was sued. We take this as evidence that firms had
reasonable grounds to change their behavior in order to avert enforcement.
    Taken together, these results suggest a complementary pair of conclusions. Firms appear



                                              23
to respond strategically to a perceived threat of enforcement, changing their behavior to
avert the scrutiny of regulators. Furthermore, these actions are eﬀective: regulators do take
these actions into account when determining whether or not to enforce regulation on firms.




                                             24
References

[1] Abt Associates, 2000, “The Particulate-Related Health Benefits of Reducing Power
   Plant Emissions,” prepared for Clean Air Task Force (October).

[2] Anton, W., G. Deltas, and M. Khanna, 2004, “Incentives for Environmental Self-
   Regulation and Implications for Environmental Performance,” Journal of Environmen-
   tal Economics and Management, 48, 632-654.

[3] Bartel, A. and L. Thomas, 1985, “Direct and Indirect Eﬀects of Regulations: A New
   Look at OSHA’s Impact,” Journal of Law and Economics, 28, 1-25.

[4] Bushnell, J. and C. Wolfram, 2006, “The Economic Eﬀects of Vintage Diﬀerentiated
   Regulations: The Case of New Source Review,” CSEM Working Paper CSEM WP-157.

[5] Eckert, H., 2004, “Inspections, Warnings, and Compliance: The Case of Petroleum
   Storage Regulation,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 47, 232-
   259.

[6] Fabrizio, K., N. Rose, and C. Wolfram, forthcoming, “Do Markets Reduce Costs? As-
   sessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric Generation Eﬃciency,”
   American Economic Review.

[7] Glachant, M., 2007, “Non-Binding Voluntary Agreements,” Journal of Environmental
   Economics and Management, 54, 32-48.

[8] Gray, W. and M. Deily, 1996, “Compliance and Enforcement: Air Pollution Regulation
   in the U.S. Steel Industry,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 31,
   96-111.

[9] Joskow, P. and E. Kahn, 2002, “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior In Cali-
   fornia’s Wholesale Electricity Market During Summer 2000,” Energy Journal, 23, 1-35.



                                          25
[10] Khanna, M. and W. Anton, “Corporate Environmental Management: Regulatory and
    Market-Based Incentives,” Land Economics, 78, 539-558.

[11] Laplante, B. and P. Rilstone, 1996, “Environmental Inspections and Emissions of the
    Pulp and Paper Industry in Quebec,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
    agement, 31, 19-36.

[12] Latimer, D., 1996, “Particulate Matter Source-Receptor Relationships Between All
    Point and Area Sources in the United States and PSD Class I Area Receptors,” prepared
    for EPA Oﬃce of Air Quality Planning & Standards, September.

[13] List, J., D. Millimet, and W. McHone, 2004, “The Unintended Disincentive in the Clean
    Air Act,” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4, 26 pages.

[14] Lutz, S., T. Lyon, and J. Maxwell, 2000, “Quality Leadership When Regulatory Stan-
    dards Are Forthcoming,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 48, 331-348.

[15] Lyon, T. and J. Maxwell, 2003, “Self-Regulation, Taxation and Public Voluntary Envi-
    ronmental Agreements,” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 1453-1486.

[16] Lyon, T. and J. Maxwell, 2004, Corporate Environmentalism and Public Policy, Cam-
    bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

[17] Magat, W. and W. Viscusi, 1990, “Eﬀectiveness of the EPA’s Regulatory Enforcement:
    The Case of Industrial Eﬄuent Standards,” Journal of Law and Economics, 33, 331-360.

[18] Maloney, M. and G. Brady, 1988, “Capital Turnover and Marketable Pollution Rights,”
    Journal of Law and Economics, 31, 203-226.

[19] Maxwell, J., T. Lyon, and S. Hackett, 2000, “Self-Regulation and Social Welfare: The
    Political Economy of Corporate Environmentalism,” Journal of Law and Economics,
    43, 583-617.



                                           26
[20] Montero, J., 1999, “Voluntary Compliance with Market-Based Environmental Policy:
    Evidence from the U.S. Acid Rain Program,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 998-
    1033.

[21] Murphy, K, and R. Topel, 1985, “Estimation and Inference in Two-Step Econometric
    Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3, 88-97.

[22] Nelson, R., 1984, “Regulation, Capital Vintage and Technical Change in the Electric
    Utility Industry,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 66, 59-69.

[23] Nelson, R., T. Tietenberg, and M. Donihue, 1993, “Diﬀerential Environmental Regula-
    tion: Eﬀects on Electric Utility Capital Turnover and Emissions,” Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 75, 368-373.

[24] Parker,   L.    and   J.   Blodgett,   2000,   “Air     Quality    and   Electricity:     En-
    forcing    New    Source     Review,”   CRS     Report     for     Congress,   available   at:
    http://www.ncseonline.org/nle/crsreports/air/air-35.cfm.

[25] Stavins, R., 2006, “Vintage-Diﬀerentiated Environmental Regulation,” Stanford Envi-
    ronmental Law Journal, 25, 29-63.




                                              27
Notes
   1
       Lyon and Maxwell (2003) examine self-regulation in the context of “public voluntary
agreements.” The authors develop a model showing when such agreements may reduce wel-
fare. Furthermore, in the case of minimum quality standards set by regulators, a firm of
high quality can induce the regulator to weaken standards, thereby lowering welfare (Lutz
et al. 2000). Voluntary agreements with polluters may also reduce welfare, depending on
the strength of congressional lobbyists (Glachant 2007).
   2
       The studies that have taken explicit account of endogeneity have also framed their
analysis in terms of the threat of enforcement; see for example Laplante and Rilstone (1996).
But the use of an instrumental variables strategy simply ensures that the eﬀect of enforcement
is identified by the exogenous component of enforcement. Examining the eﬀect of the threat
of action distinct from the actual action requires analyzing a window of time during which
enforcement was imminent but had not yet taken place.
   3
       See Stavins (2006) for an overview of the literature on VDRs.
   4
       In contrast, BW consider a more diﬀuse sample of 329 plants subject to a variety of reg-
ulatory regimes. This provides them with a greater scope of exploring vintage diﬀerentiated
regulations. However, Phase I and Phase II plants are likely to have very diﬀerent responses
circa 2000, the beginning of Phase II, and hence to the regulatory window.
   5
       72 USC §7411(a).
   6
       See, for example, CFR §51.166(b)(2).
   7
       The ruling in that case by the U.S. Court of Appeals (7th Circuit) established that power
plants could carry out “like-kind replacements” of boiler components without triggering New
Source Review, and led the EPA to revise its methodology for estimating and evaluating the
increased emissions that would result from changes to existing units in the electric power
sector. In particular, the new rule excluded emissions increases due to growth in electricity
demand. Even so, considerable ambiguity remained.
   8
       See the announcement of the proposed rule in the Federal Register, vol 61, No., 142 (July

                                                28
23, 1996), p38251. Among other proposals was a suggestion that the EPA might extend some
of the WEPCo methodology to other industrial sectors.
   9
       See the Federal Register, vol 63, No., 142 (July 24, 1998), p. 39860.
  10
       The article went on to report that: “Agency oﬃcials believe an in-depth investigation
will show that many utilities and other generators have not disclosed boiler modifications
that would trigger new source review .... EPA reportedly plans to target 25 power plants
initially for investigation and possible enforcement action.” (Electricity Daily, vol. 11, No.
72, October 13, 1998)
  11
       For more on NSR, see http://www.epa.gov/nsr/index.html. Unfortunately, our data do
not allow use to examine how emissions have changed either at plants that have settled or
at threatened plants since President Bush took oﬃce. (Only one case has been brought by
the Bush administration.) We leave this to future research.
  12
       Specifically, the analysis includes 105 of the 110 Table A plants. Five plants with Table
A units are excluded: Breed (IN); Des Moines (IA), and North Oak Creek (WI), whose Table
A units were retired by 1994; and Northport and Port Jeﬀerson (NY), which did not burn
coal. The remaining 144 plants in the data housed units on which construction began before
1971, hence were grandfathered out of the NSPS and subject to state regulation.
  13
       The violations at the remaining two plants (the Miller and Scherer Plants operated by
Georgia Power) concerned units that were built after the 1977 Amendments took eﬀect but
did not comply with the relevant NSPS. Hence their presence on the list of plants targeted
by the EPA can easily be explained by their flagrant violation of the clear meaning of the
legislation, rather than the nuances of how it was implemented by the agency.
  14
       Our conclusions are unaﬀected by including these variables in other ways, e.g., letting age
enter quadratically. We measure emissions, investment, and maintenance in levels because
these variables take on negative values, reflecting declining emissions or utilization, or capital
depreciation (i.e., negative net investment).
  15
       In order to predict 90 percent of the plants named in lawsuits, we need to consider all


                                                 29
plants with predicted probabilities of 0.14 or above to be sued. However, about 56 percent
(49 of 88 plants) with predicted probabilities above this cutoﬀ were not actually sued.
  16
       We calculate the marginal eﬀects for each observation and report the sample mean. This
is done using the margeff command in Stata 9.0
  17
       We test the robustness of the model specification to alternative functions of age. For
example, we also include ln(age) · ln(age). However, the variable is insignificant (-1.21 with
a standard error (s.e.) of 1.07) so is excluded from the main specification.
  18
       Although some of these plants voluntarily participated in Phase I as “substitution units,”
the ones that chose to do so had already reduced their emissions for other reasons (Montero,
1998). Because of this adverse selection eﬀect, we choose to focus on the plants that were
required to participate in Phase I. Our results are unaﬀected by the inclusion of the non-
Table A plants that participated in Phase I.
  19
       We also test the functional form of this variable. One might expect that for plants very
likely to be named in lawsuits, there is little point in attempting to appease regulators. We
test this hypothesis by including a quadratic function of probsuei · threatit . We find that
the linear variable remains significant and negative (-0.52 with a s.e. of 0.15). The squared
term is positive as expected, 0.34, though the standard error is large (0.27).
  20
       These variables are standard instruments for generation (for example, see Fabrizio, Rose,
and Wolfram (forthcoming)). Retail electricity prices are fixed for long periods of time,
making short run demand for electricity extremely inelastic and a valid instrument. Heating
(cooling) degree days are the number of degrees the average daily temperature was below
(above) 65◦ F, which we aggregate over the month.
  21
       All units over 25 MW and new units under 25 MW that use fuel with a sulfur content
greater than 0.05 percent by weight are required to measure and report emissions under the
Acid Rain Program. Gross generation diﬀers from net generation because of the discrepancy
between electricity generated by a unit and the amount of electricity sold onto the grid. This
discrepancy arises from internal power usage for water pumps, conveyor belts, etc. Informal


                                                30
data on gross to net ratios suggest an average ratio of 1.05 to 1.1. More importantly for this
analysis, the ratios remain relatively constant for a given plant.
  22
       NOAA reports the daily mean temperature at hundreds of weather stations nationwide.
We calculate statewide daily averages of these weather stations and compute hdd and cdd
as defined in footnote 20. See U.S. Department of Commerce, National Climatic Data Center,
NOAA Satellite and Information Service [http://www7.ncdc.noaa.gov/IPS/getcoopstates.html]).
  23
       For both first stages, Wald tests on the joint significance of the instruments are significant
at the 1-percent level: ln(genit ) (F-stat of 19.2); and lawsuiti · actiont (F-stat of 168).
  24
       For example, for the Sargan N ∗ R2 test, the χ2 = 0.13 (p-value = 0.938). We reach
similar findings using the other tests of overidentification that are calculated by the overid
command in Stata 9.0.
  25
       For this specification, the instruments are also strong, with Wald tests significant at the
1-percent level: lawsuitit (F-stat of 3993); and genit (F-stat of 6.2). In this case, the Sargan
over-identification test rejects the null hypothesis (χ2 = 88, p − value = 0.001).
  26
       Percent change is approximately eγ 1 − 1.
  27
       Using the data described in section 4.2, we calculate that Table A plants emitted
7,434,616 tons of SO2 in 1994 and 4,782,639 tons in 1995.
  28
       Namely, In the first column, we define probsuei · threatit as equaling probsuei if year is
1997, zero else. In the second column, the variable equals probsuei if year is 1998 (and zero
otherwise).
  29
       The coeﬃcient on probsuei · threatit is −0.218 (s.e. of 0.046) and the coeﬃcient on
lawsuiti · actiont is −0.092 (s.e. of 0.053).
  30
       We initially used sales and heating/cooling degree-days as instruments for emissions, like
in equation (2). However, the temperature variables were weak instruments (a Wald test
rejects the joint significance of the weather variables: F-stat of 0.60).
  31
       We use the ivprobit command in Stata 9.0.
  32
       It may appear that including the change in emissions without instrumenting would


                                                  31
capture the eﬀect of the strategic response we are interested in. But note that we are
interested in isolating the eﬀect of contemporaneous behavior on the EPA’s actions, rather
than in whether plants that reduced emissions ended up more or less likely to be sued. This
is akin to examining how prices change with quantities: without some clear identification
strategy such as instrumental variables, it is not clear whether the variation is from supply
or demand shocks. In our context, we want to understand the best response functions of
both firms and of the government. In section 5, we estimated the firms’ response function.
Here, we are estimating the response function of the government.
  33
       A Hausman test rejects that the coeﬃcients of the variables common to both equations
(1) and (3) are significantly diﬀerent (χ2 =9.6).
  34
       Of the 105 Table A plants in our panel, moreover, three lack generation data–bringing
the sample size down to 102. If we estimate the model on the full sample, we get qualitatively
similar results for the likelihood model (changes in current and historic emissions, age, and
firm size increase the likelihood of a lawsuit), changes in cooling degree-days increase changes
in generation, and changes in generation increase changes in emissions. However, in this
sample, the lawsuit does not significantly aﬀect changes in emissions. Given the sample
includes many Phase II plants, these results should be treated with caution.




                                              32
             Table I: Companies and Power Plants Sued for Violating NSR


Holding Company (Utility)             Date of Lawsuit   Power Plants
American Electric Power (Cardinal)    November 1999     Cardinal
AEP (Central Operating)               November 1999     Philip Sporn
AEP (Indiana Michigan Power)          November 1999     Tanners Creek
AEP (Ohio Power)                      November 1999     Mitchell; Muskingum River
Cinergy (Cincinnati Gas & Electric)   November 1999     Walter C Beckjord
Cinergy (Psi Energy)                  November 1999     Cayuga
Dynegy (Illinois Power)               November 1999     Baldwin
FirstEnergy (Ohio Edison)             November 1999     W H Sammis
Southern (Alabama Power)              November 1999     Barry; Gorgas; James H Miller Jr
Southern (Georgia Power)              November 1999     Bowen; Scherer
TECO Energy (Tampa Electric)          November 1999     Big Bend; F J Gannon
Tennessee Valley Authority            November 1999     T H Allen; Bull Run; Colbert; Cumberland;
                                                        John Sevier; Paradise; Widows Creek
Vectren (Southern Indiana Gas & Elec) November 1999     F B Culley
AEP (American Electric Power)         March 2000        Clinch River; John E Amos; Kanawha River
AEP (Columbus Southern Power)         March 2000        Conesville
AEP (Ohio Power)                      March 2000        Kammer
Cinergy (Psi Energy)                  March 2000        R Gallagher; Wabash River
Southern (Alabama Power)              March 2000        E C Gaston; Greene County
Southern (Gulf Power)                 March 2000        Crist
Southern (Mississippi Power)          March 2000        Jack Watson
Southern (Savannah Electric & Power) March 2000         Kraft
Tennessee Valley Authority            April 2000        Kingston; Shawnee
Duke Energy Corporation               December 2000     Belews Creek; Buck; Cliffside; Dan River;
                                                        G G Allen; Marshall; Riverbend; W S Lee




                                                   33
                             Table II: Summary Statistics


  Variable                units      mean         s.d.          min       max
       lawsuit             0/1         0.18      0.38           0.00      1.00
      mx∆emit        000 tons        11.72      11.95           0.24     75.54
    cum∆emit         000 tons        -16.12     48.23        -320.26     73.20
      mx∆gen              GWh       992.39     924.17         48.20    6171.40
     cum∆gen              GWh       537.46    1311.27       -3649.72   7130.68
      mxinvest        $/MW           96.05     123.23          -0.17    587.01
      mninvest        $/MW           12.58      15.99         -53.75     92.13
      mxmaint         $/MW           31.34      19.35           7.95    154.60
      mnmaint         $/MW           20.08      10.31           3.50     59.02
           age            years      45.66      15.18         20.00      99.00
    attainment             0/1         0.10      0.31           0.00      1.00
      damages        see text          2.89      2.01           0.00     10.95
      plantsize            GW          0.89      0.73           0.10      3.54
      firmsize             GW        21.26      19.00           0.32     66.56


Notes: 249 observations




                                         34
                           Table III: Likelihood of Lawsuits


Dependent variable: Indicator of power plant named in lawsuit (0/1)


Variable                Coefficient                 Std. err        dF/dx
mx∆emit                      0.0583***                0.0145        0.0090
cum∆emit                     0.0058**                 0.0027        0.0009
mx∆gen                      -0.0002                   0.0002        0.0000
cum∆gen                      0.0001                   0.0001        0.0000
mxinvest                     0.0008                   0.0013        0.0001
mninvest                     0.0254*                  0.0132        0.0039
mxmaint                     -0.0288                   0.0308       -0.0045
mnmaint                     -0.0279                   0.0477       -0.0043
ln(age)                      1.0762**                 0.5349        0.1665
attainment                  -0.5456                   0.4901       -0.0732
damages                     -0.0756                   0.0715       -0.0117
ln(plantsize)                0.4865*                  0.2683        0.0753
ln(firmsize)                 0.4406***                0.1480        0.0682
constant                    -5.6097***                2.0153


Notes: 249 observations. We note significance at the 1-percent level (***), 5-percent
level (**), and 10-percent level (*). Psuedo-R2 of 0.40.




                                            35
                      Table IV: SO2 Emissions Response to Lawsuits


Dependent variable: ln(emit) by power plant and month


Variable                               (1)              (2)             (3)

probsue*threat                     -0.392***        -0.400***       -0.412 ***
                                   (0.076)          (0.075)         (0.073 )

lawsuit*action                     -0.194***        -0.200***       -0.209 ***
                                   (0.064)          (0.064)          0.077 )

ln(gen)                             1.008***         1.150***        1.357 ***
                                   (0.101)           0.129)         (0.182 )


Plant fixed effects                   Yes              Yes             Yes
Month-year fixed effects              Yes              Yes             Yes
Instrument for lawsuit           probsue           probsue       RHS vars
Instrument for ln(gen)                 No              Yes             Yes
Observations                         6029             6029            6029
R2                                   0.90             0.90             0.89
First stage, lawsuit (P-value)      0.001            0.001           0.001
First stage, ln(gen) (P-value)         n/a           0.001           0.001
Sargan overid test (P-value)           n/a           0.938           0.001


Notes: Robust (Newey-West) standard errors with 6-month lag structure. We use the
Murphy-Topel correction for the generated regressor (probsue). We note significance at
the 1-percent level (***), 5-percent level (**), and 10-percent level (*).




                                             36
                  Table V: Falsification Tests of Emissions Response


Dependent variable: ln(emit) by power plant and month


Variable                             1997             1998

probsue*threat                      0.095           -0.112
                                   (0.071)          (0.071)

lawsuit*action                     -0.058           -0.091
                                   (0.059)          (0.058)

ln(gen)                             1.103***         1.096***
                                   (0.119)          (0.117)


Plant fixed effects                   Yes              Yes
Month-year fixed effects              Yes              Yes
Instrument for lawsuit           probsue           probsue
Instrument for ln(gen)                Yes              Yes
Observations                         6029             6029
R2                                   0.90             0.90
First stage, lawsuit (P-value)      0.001            0.001
First stage, ln(gen) (P-value)      0.001            0.001
Sargan overid test (P-value)        0.868            0.863


Notes: Robust (Newey-West) standard errors with 6-month lag structure. We use the
Murphy-Topel correction for the generated regressor (probsue). We note significance at
the 1-percent level (***), 5-percent level (**), and 10-percent level (*).




                                             37
                Table VI: Regulatory Response to Changing Emissions

                                  (1)                    (2)                       (3)
Variable                lawsuit (0/1)                ∆emit99             lawsuit (0/1)
∆ln(emit)                   -0.0668                                           3.4294 ***
                            (0.6248 )                                        (0.2424 )
mx∆emit                      0.0580 ***               -0.0051 **              0.0305 ***
                            (0.0147 )                 (0.0022 )              (0.0118 )
cum∆emit                     0.0058 **                 0.0005                -0.0003
                            (0.0028 )                 (0.0004 )              (0.0019 )
mx∆gen                      -0.0002                    0.0000                -0.0001
                            (0.0002 )                 (0.0000 )              (0.0001 )
cum∆gen                      0.0001                    0.0000                 0.0000
                            (0.0001 )                 (0.0000 )              (0.0001 )
mxinvest                     0.0008                    0.0000                 0.0001
                            (0.0013 )                 (0.0002 )              (0.0008 )
mninvest                     0.0252 *                 -0.0004                 0.0086
                            (0.0133 )                 (0.0017 )              (0.0082 )
mxmaint                     -0.0288                    0.0009                -0.0117
                            (0.0309 )                 (0.0024 )              (0.0121 )
mnmaint                     -0.0277                   -0.0041                 0.0119
                            (0.0478 )                 (0.0046 )              (0.0200 )
ln(age)                      1.0770 **                -0.0028                 0.2212
                            (0.5353 )                 (0.0711 )              (0.3148 )
attainment                  -0.5383                    0.2027 ***            -0.7888 ***
                            (0.4953 )                 (0.0609 )              (0.2482 )
damages                     -0.0761                   -0.0003                -0.0206
                            (0.0718 )                 (0.0104 )              (0.0419 )
ln(plantsize)                0.4878 *                  0.0124                 0.0724
                            (0.2685 )                 (0.0337 )              (0.1497 )
ln(firmsize)                 0.4391 ***                0.0280                 0.0218
                            (0.1484 )                 (0.0183 )              (0.1023 )
∆ln(sales)                                             0.6470 **
                                                      (0.3010 )
constant                      -5.6071 ***             -0.0228                 -1.1472
                              (2.0165 )               (0.2591 )               (1.3035 )
Pseudo R2                         0.40                    0.10                    0.43

Notes: 249 observations. We note significance at the 1-percent level (***), 5-percent
level (**), and 10-percent level (*). Hausman tests reject that the coefficients of column 1
(χ2=0.01, prob> 10 percent) or of column 3 (χ2=9.6, prob> 10 percent) significantly differ
from those in Table III.


                                            38
            Table VII: Robustness Test using Three-Stage Least Squares

Dependent variable: Indicator of power plant named in lawsuit (0/1)
Variable         Coefficient      Std. err
∆ln(emit)             1.4551       0.5820 **
mx∆emit               0.0187       0.0060 ***
cum∆emit              0.0006       0.0009
mx∆gen               -0.0001       0.0001
cum∆gen               0.0000       0.0000
mxinvest              0.0007       0.0004
mninvest              0.0018       0.0032
mxmaint              -0.0029       0.0071
mnmaint              -0.0053       0.0130
ln(age)               0.1265       0.1743
attainment           -0.0538       0.1693
damages               0.0016       0.0245
ln(plantsize)         0.0731       0.0771
ln(firmsize)          0.0842       0.0404 **
constant             -0.4293       0.6279

Dependent variable: Change in ln(emit) from Oct 97-Sep 98 to Oct 98-Sept 99
Variable         Coefficient     Std. err
lawsuit              -0.1461      0.0829 *
∆ln(gen)              1.5075      0.3113 ***
constant             -0.0291      0.0317

Dependent variable: Change in ln(gen) from Oct 97-Sep 98 to Oct 98-Sept 99
Variable         Coefficient     Std. err
∆ln(hdd)             0.0243       0.1469
∆ln(cdd)             0.1541       0.1028
∆ln(sales)           0.2810       0.3010
constant             0.0196       0.0371

Notes: 102 “Table A plant” observations. We note significance at the 1-percent level
(***), 5-percent level (**), and 10-percent level (*).




                                           39
