NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPENNESS, TECHNOLOGY CAPITAL, AND DEVELOPMENT
Ellen McGrattan
Edward C. Prescott
Working Paper 13515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13515

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

We thank the National Science Foundation for financial support for this research (grant SES-0422539)
and Loris Rubini, Johanna Wallenius, and particularly Simona Cociuba for exceptional research assistance.
This paper was presented at the April 2007 conference at the University of Chicago honoring the contributions
of Robert E. Lucas, Jr. Discussions by Bob Lucas and Paul Romer were extremely helpful for us in
revising an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Ellen McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Openness, Technology Capital, and Development
Ellen McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 13515
October 2007
JEL No. F23,F41,O11,O32
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we extend the growth model to include firm-specific technology capital and use it to
assess the gains from opening to foreign direct investment. A firm's technology capital is its unique
know-how from investing in research and development, brands, and organization capital. What distinguishes
technology capital from other forms of capital is the fact that a firm can use it simultaneously in multiple
domestic and foreign locations. Foreign technology capital is exploited by permitting foreign direct
investment by multinationals. In both steady-state and transitional analyses, the extended growth model
predicts large gains to being open.
Ellen McGrattan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER
erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us
Edward C. Prescott
Economics Department
ASU / Main Campus
PO BOX 873806
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
edward.prescott@asu.edu

1. Introduction
Economists generally agree that being open has large economic benefits. This view is
based mostly on empirical evidence [7, 10] because existing economic theory provides little
support for this view. Here we develop a theoretical framework and use it to conclude that
there are large gains to openness to foreign direct investment (FDI) by multinationals. The
theoretical framework is an extension of the standard growth model that has proven so useful
in macroeconomics.
The extension has two key features: firm-specific technology capital and locations. A
firm’s technology capital is its unique know-how, accumulated from investing in such things
as research and development (R&D), organization capital, and brands. What distinguishes
technology capital from other types of capital is the fact that a firm can use its technological
capital simultaneously in multiple domestic and foreign locations.1 A firm with technology
capital realizes rents at every location it operates because its location technology production
sets display decreasing returns to scale beyond some point. The mechanism by which foreign
technology capital is exploited in a given country is by permitting FDI. Opening to FDI
benefits both the country that opens up and the countries that make the foreign direct
investment.
We derive the aggregate production function and find it displays constant returns
to scale, as does the aggregate production function for the standard growth model. Consequently, price taking is assumed. We show that even though there is a constant returns
to scale technology, there are increasing returns with respect to the size of a country as
measured by the number of its locations, but there are no increasing returns with respect to
the factor inputs: technology capital, plant-specific capital, and services of labor.2
1

In the language of classical general equilibrium theory, a unit of technology capital is a set of technologies,
with one technology for each location.
2
In [9], to address current account issues, we find it necessary to introduce two varieties of plant-specific
capital, namely tangible and production-unit specific intangible capital. Differences in tax treatments and
reporting necessitated this distinction. For the issues addressed in this paper, however, we need not and do
not make the distinction between plant-specific tangible and intangible capital. The extension is straightforward, but complicates the notation. All that needs to be done is to introduce an aggregator at the

1

We quantify our model with standard parameter values and use it to predict steady
states and transition paths as countries move from being closed to being open. We find
that overall, the model predicts what the empirical evidence has suggested: large gains to
openness. More specifically, we find large increases in productivity when similar countries
form an economic union which requires openness between members. And we find that
unilateral opening is mutually beneficial, with most of the benefits going to the country
that opens and allows foreign multinationals to produce within its borders. When countries
are open, what matters is the world stock of technology capital, not its distribution across
countries.
Our abstraction focuses on the role of openness to FDI in making possible the use of
foreign production know-how in other countries. Also associated with economic integration,
there are, almost surely, gains to total factor productivity (TFP), which amplify the direct
gains from openness. We thus do some additional analysis that assumes the TFP of a country
that becomes open increases over time to the TFP level of the already open countries. Our
results strongly suggest that these indirect benefits of opening are as quantitatively important
as the direct benefits.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present some empirical evidence
that becoming open to FDI and becoming integrated with the advanced industrial economies
leads to catching up. In Section 3 we present theoretical support for the empirical evidence.
We start by developing an aggregation theory underlying our aggregate production function.
We then develop formulas for the steady state and for the transition paths and use these
formulas to assess the importance of openness for productivity and consumption. Section 4
concludes.
production-unit level.

2

2. Empirical Evidence
Empirical evidence clearly suggests that, in general, becoming economically integrated
with other countries leads to improvements in the economic development of countries previously closed. Our measure of development is GDP per hour worked, which is what we mean
when we say productivity. We examine what has happened to productivity in various countries over time, as they have become more economically integrated. Some of the countries we
study have joined economic unions of countries, while others have opened their economies
in less formal ways. We compare the productivities of countries that are opening to those
of others that were already relatively open during the same time periods. In all the newly
opened countries, we see that economic integration appears to have boosted productivity.
We also see that relatively closed countries have low and even falling productivity.
2.1. Europe
Here we review the empirical evidence that membership in the European Union (EU),
a relatively open set of countries, results in a country catching up to the industrial leader.
In 1957, six countries—Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and
West Germany—signed the Treaty of Rome to form what became the European Union. We
will call this group the EU-6. Figure 1 plots our GDP per hour measure of productivity for
1900–2005 for these six countries compared to that of the United States during that same
time period. Over the 30 years following the signing of the treaty, the productivity of these
countries rose nearly to the U.S. level. After 40 years, it surpassed that level.
The European Union has expanded several times since 1957, so we can review the
productivity of the joining countries in each expansion, to see if they, too, seem to have
gained from the experience. Figure 2 plots the aggregate productivity of the three countries
that joined the EU in 1973—Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom—relative to the
productivity of the original EU-6. The 1973 group is dominated by the experience of the
United Kingdom because its population is by far the largest among the three. Still, we can

3

Figure 1: EU-6 Labor Productivity as a Percentage of US (1900–2005)
%110
EU-6

100
90
80

Belgium
France
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
West Germany

70
60
50

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Figure 2: 1973 Joiners’ Labor Productivity as a Percentage of EU-6 (1960–2005)
%110
1973 Joiners
Denmark
Ireland
U.K.

100

90

80

1960

1970

1980

4

1990

2000

Figure 3: 1995 Joiners’ Labor Productivity as a Percentage of EU-6 (1960–2005)
%110
1995 Joiners
Austria
Finland
Sweden

100

90

80

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 4: Switzerland’s Labor Productivity as a Percentage of EU-6 (1960–2005)
%160

140

120

100

80

1960

1970

1980

5

1990

2000

see in the figure that the relative productivity of the 1973 group fell dramatically just before
the countries joined the EU. Just after joining, their relative productivity leveled off and
then rose slightly.3
Another group of three countries—Austria, Finland, and Sweden—joined the EU in
1995. Figure 3 shows that collectively, the productivity of these countries relative to that
of the EU-6 was also falling until the countries joined the EU; then it turned around and
gained ground.
Switzerland serves as an example of what has happened to a Western European country that has not joined the EU. Figure 4 shows that its relative productivity, like that of the
1995 joiners, lost ground before 1995, but unlike the 1995 joiners, Switzerland’s productivity
lost ground after 1995 as well. Not opening its economy to a large group of industrialized
European countries did not help Switzerland’s productivity.
More recently, in 2004, eight Central European countries—the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia—joined the European
Union. We will call this group the CE-8. Figure 5 plots their post-1989 performance, again
compared to that of the original EU-6. The figure shows some impressive gains beginning
around the time of the collapse of the Soviet Union and continuing as these countries moved
toward EU membership. After joining the EU in 2004, they had further gains. The fact
that EU membership fosters openness suggests that these 2004 EU joiners are on their way
to productivity closer to that of the rest of the EU.
2.2. Other Regions
A region of the world that has been relatively closed in the last half of the 20th century
is South America [4]. Figure 6 shows the aggregate productivity of nine countries relative
to the United States. The nine included are Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
3

Bourlès and Cette [2] make a human capital adjustment for France and estimate that French 2002
productivity is actually 8 percent lower than U.S. productivity, and not 7 percent higher, when corrections
are made for workforce composition. This suggests that the productivities of the 1973 joiners relative to the
EU-6 since 1985 could well be 5 to 10 percent higher than the plotted values in Figure 2.

6

Figure 5: CE-8 Labor Productivity as a Percentage of EU-6 (1989–2005)
%40
CE-8

35

Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Slovakia
Slovenia

30

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. As Figure 6 shows, during the years between 1960
and 2005, the productivity of these relatively closed countries shrunk from 36 percent of the
U.S. level to only 26 percent.
Asia, in contrast, has done much better. Economic openness has increased lately in 12
Asian countries, including China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Pakistan,
the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. Figure 7 shows that as these
countries have become more economically integrated with advanced industrialized countries,
their productivity has benefited. It is still low compared to that of the United States, but
unlike that of the relatively closed South American countries, the gap is narrowing fast.
Between 1960 and 2005, it increased from 8.4 percent to 18 percent of U.S. productivity.
To summarize the empirical evidence, we see a strong positive association between
economic integration of countries and gains in their productivity.

7

Figure 6: South American Labor Productivity as a Percentage of US (1960–2005)
%45

35
South America

25

15

Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela

5
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 7: Asian Labor Productivity as a Percentage of US (1960–2005)
%18

Asia

12

China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand

6

1960

1970

1980

8

1990

2000

3. Theoretical Evidence
We now provide theoretical support for a strong positive association between economic
integration and productivity gains in the case that opening up leads to increased foreign
direct investment. We do this by extending the growth model to include technology capital
and work out the implication of that extension for the aggregate production of a country
and the model’s equilibrium under various degrees of openness. We quantify the steady-state
gains as well as the gains during the transition of an economy as it adjusts from being closed
to being open. By way of a set of empirically relevant examples, we demonstrate that the
gains to opening to FDI are large.
3.1. The Model Extension
In this section, we extend the growth model to include technology capital. We start
with assumptions on the production technology and then derive the aggregate production
function of a country that is partially open. The final step is laying out the rest of the model.
Production Technology
The model that we develop retains the standard inputs to production. They are
plant-specific capital ki and labor li of country i, which can be combined into a composite
input:
zi = kiα li1−α ,

α ∈ (0, 1).

One unit of domestic technology capital and zi units of the composite input at a given
domestic location produce
(1)

yi = Ai zi1−φ ,

φ ∈ (0, 1)

units of country i final output. Here, Ai is the country-specific TFP parameter.
Note that the owner of a unit of technology capital “owns” the location production
function specified by (1) for every domestic location. A given unit of the composite input zi
9

can be used at one and only one location in country i.
Technology capital can also be used to set up operations in a foreign location. Foreign
multinationals hire capital and labor services within country i and use their own technology
capital. In this case, one unit of j 6= i technology capital operated at a location in country
i produces
yi = σ i Ai (kiα li1−α )1−φ ,

σ i ∈ [0, 1]

units of country i final output. Here, σ i is the measure of openness of country i. We assume
that the degree of openness of a country affects the relative productivity of foreign operations
within its borders. If σ i = 1, then country i is totally open to the use of foreign technology
capital within its borders. If σ i = 0, then country i is totally closed to that use.
Aggregate Production Function
We now derive the maximal output that can be produced in a country i, i ∈ {1, . . . , I},
with technology level Ai , openness measure σ i , and a population that we denote by Ni . As we
show below, the maximal output can be expressed as a function of aggregate factor inputs,
including the vector of technology capitals from the I countries in the world.
To derive this function, we need some notation for the measure of locations in a
country and for the stock of its technology capital. We assume that the measure of a
country’s production locations is proportional to its population, since locations correspond
to markets and some measure of people defines a market. Without loss of generality, we
set the proportionality factor relating the measure of locations and Ni to 1. Thus, Ni is
used for both the population in i and the number of locations in i. A country i firm is
a stock mi of technology capital or know-how embodied within the firm. Country i has
aggregate technology capital stock of Mi , which is the sum of the technology capital stocks
of all domestic firms in country i.
We are now ready to derive the maximal output for country i that can be produced

10

given an aggregate quantity of the composite input denoted Zi . It is the solution to
max{Mi Ni Ai zd1−φ + σ i

X

subject to Mi Ni zd +

X

zd ,zf

(2)

Mj Ni Ai zf1−φ }

j6=i

Mj Ni zf ≤ Zi .

j6=i

The amount of the composite input used at each plant operated by a domestic firm is zd , while
the amount used at each plant operated by a foreign firm is zf . The fact that the quantity
zd is the same at each domestic plant follows from the diminishing returns assumption in
(1). For the same reason, zf is the same at each foreign plant in country i. The first term
in (2) is the total output of domestic firms operating in i, and the second term is the total
output of foreign firms operating in i.
The resulting country i aggregate production function, after substituting for Z, is
given by

1−φ
X φ 
Fi (M1 , . . . , MI , Ki , Li ) = Yi = Ai Niφ Mi + ω i
Mj
Kiα Li1−α
,

(3)

j6=i

where Ki , Li are aggregate plant-specific capital stocks and labor services in country i and
1/φ

ω i = σ i . Here, we used Zi = Kiα L1−α
.
i
The parameter ω i in (3) is an alternative measure of openness that can be interpreted
as the fraction of country j foreign technology capital that is permitted to be used in country
i for all j 6= i. A generalization of our framework has ω ij be the fraction of country j
technology capital that can be used in country i. This generalization is straightforward and
is needed to deal with organizations such as the European Union.
The aggregate production functions Fi in (3) have two noteworthy features. First, the
functions display constant returns to scale in the inputs {Ki , Li , {Mj }Ij=1 }. Despite this fact,
the total output of a set of open economies (with ω i > 0) is greater than the total output
of a set of closed economies. It is as if there were increasing returns, when in fact there are
none. Second, if a country is totally open (ω i = 1), then the stock of technology capital used
P
in this country is the world aggregate stock of technology capital ( j Mj ). Therefore, if we
11

compare living standards of two totally open countries with different populations, we would
find no economic advantage or disadvantage to being large.
Rest of the Model
Before we can use the model to estimate the gains of openness, we must specify
household preferences, asset ownership, and the global resource constraint.
Each country has a stand-in household with preferences ordered by
(4)

∞
X
t=0

1
u(ct , lt ),
(1 + ρ)t

where ct and lt are per capita consumption and per capita leisure at time t, respectively.
The utility function u is strictly increasing in both arguments and strictly concave as well as
being continuously differentiable. When we deal with balanced growth, further restrictions
will be imposed that are sufficient for the existence of a balanced growth equilibrium.
We assume that households in each country i collectively own Ki and Mi , and the
current account is in balance each period. Rents on the capital stocks plus labor income are
used to purchase consumption and investment goods.
The economy-wide resource constraint is
Yi = Ci + Xik + Xim + NXi ,
which states that a country i’s output Yi equals consumption Ci plus investment in plantspecific capital Xik plus investment in technology capital Xim plus net exports NXi . The
laws of motion of the two capital stocks are the usual ones:
Ki,t+1 = (1 − δ k )Kit + Xikt
Mi,t+1 = (1 − δ m )Mit + Ximt ,
where the depreciation rates δ k , δ m are positive and less than one.

12

Fixed Parameters
To quantify the gains to opening to foreign direct investment, we need to parameterize
the model. Here, we describe those parameter values that are used in both our steady-state
analysis and our transitional analysis.
These parameter values are reported in Table I. The parameters were selected to
match a labor income share of 66 percent, a plant-specific capital to output ratio of 3, a real
interest rate of 4 percent, and a technology capital to output ratio of 0.5 for a large economic
union such as the European Union or the United States if it were totally closed to the rest
of the world and internally perfectly open.
Table I. Parameter Values

Production parameters

α = 0.3, φ = 0.06

Depreciation rates

δ k = 0.054, δ m = 0.08

Interest rate

ρ = 0.04

3.2. Steady-State Analysis
Having specified the details of the model, we are now ready to use it to make steadystate predictions. We first prove the existence of a steady state and provide an algorithm
for finding one. Because the elasticity of labor supply does not matter quantitatively for our
steady-state comparisons, we will assume here that labor is supplied inelastically.
Existence of a Steady State
The world steady-state interest rate is ρ given preferences (4). The rental price of K
is therefore ρ + δ k . Equating the marginal product of K to its rental prices yields the first
equilibrium condition
(5)

(ρ + δ k )Ki = (1 − φ)αYi .

13

A second equilibrium condition is Li = Ni since each person is assumed to have one unit of
time and to supply it to the market.
An equilibrium relation that we use in subsequent analysis is the one obtained by
substituting Li = Ni and equilibrium condition (5) into the production function (3):
!φ/(1−α(1−φ))
X
(6)
Yi = ψAi Ni Mi + ω i
Mj
,
j6=i
1/(1−α(1−φ))

where Ai = Ai


ψ=

and

α(1 − φ)
ρ + δk

α(1−φ)/(1−α(1−φ))
.

We turn now to developing a set of equilibrium conditions that the technology capital stocks
Mi must satisfy.

(7)

The domestic return on country i technology capital Mi is
!θ
X
∂Fi
= φψNi Mi + ω i
Mj ,
∂Mi
j6=i

where θ = (α−1)(1−φ)/(1−α(1−φ)). This follows from differentiating country i production
function (3) with respect to Mi , then using (5) and Li = Ni to eliminate Ki and Li , and
finally using (6) to eliminate the Yi that comes in when Ki is eliminated.
The foreign return on country i technology capital in country j 6= i is
!θ
X
∂Fj
= ω j φNj ψ Mj + ω j
Mk .
∂Mi
k6=j
This is determined in essentially the same way as (7).
The total return on country i technology capital is
ri (M ) =

X ∂Fj
,
∂M
i
j

where M = {M1 , . . . , MI }. Equilibrium conditions for M , which do not depend upon the
other inputs, are
14

ri (M ) ≤ ρ + δ m

(8)

with equality if Mi > 0.

Proposition 1. A non-zero steady state exists.
Proof.

We develop a function f (M ) whose fixed points are steady-state M̂ . We use the

Kakutani fixed point theorem to establish existence of a fixed point.
We first define the functions gi (M−i ) to be the solution to (8) given M−i , which
denotes the I − 1 dimensional vector of the Mj for j 6= i. The function gi (M−i ) is decreasing,
and therefore
gi (M−i ) ≤ gi (0).
The convex compact set over which the mapping f is defined is
∆ = {M ∈ RI+ : Mi ≤ gi (0) ∀ i}.
The function f : ∆ → ∆ is defined as follows: function g1 is used to compute f1 (M ) =
g1 (M−1 ). The vector (f1 (M ), M2 , . . . , MI ) and g2 are used to determine f2 (M ), and so forth.
This I-stage updating defines the function f .
The function f is continuous and maps convex compact set ∆ into itself. Therefore,
it has a fixed point M̂ . This fixed point is not zero for the following reason. If components
M1 to MI−1 were all zero, then MI would be strictly positive. Thus, a non-zero steady-state
equilibrium exists.
Algorithm for Finding a Steady State
We now show how to construct a steady state.
Consider the system that we analyzed in the last section:

15

ρ + δm =

X ∂Fj
,
∂M
i
j∈I

Mi = 0,

i∈J ⊆I
i 6∈ J.

Given J, this system can be solved uniquely for M = {Mi }i∈I . This involves solving two
systems of linear equations. The task here is to find J such that Mi ≥ 0 for all i.
After initializing with J = I, the iterative procedure is as follows:
• Step 1. Solve the system and check if a steady-state vector with M ≥ 0 has been
found. If not, go to step 2.
• Step 2. Remove the i from the set J for which Mi is most negative. Go to step 1.
With this algorithm, because I is a finite set, a J will eventually be found with solution
M ≥ 0.
If the M vector obtained satisfies (8), then we have a steady state. For the examples
considered below, the algorithm finds the unique steady-state M vector. These examples
have special structures on the {ω i , Ai Ni } that ensure uniqueness.
Steady-State Predictions
We now apply the algorithm in four empirically motivated examples. These examples
show that there is an advantage to size even if countries are not open to FDI and there are
large gains to countries that do open to FDI.
Example 1: Size Advantage if Countries Are Closed
The first example considers the advantage of size for a set of totally closed economies.
This example is motivated by country comparisons prior to the rise of foreign direct investment.
Let ω i = 0 for all i. The per capita output is a function of size AN ; that is,

16

y ∝ (AN )φ/[(1−φ)(1−α)] .
According to the model, the quantitative implication of being ten times larger than other
countries, as measured by AN , is that steady-state output will be 23.4 percent larger. This
implies large productivity gains for smaller countries forming a large economic union in which
they are open with respect to each other.
Example 2: Large Gain to Small Countries Opening
The second example has two countries, a big country and a small country with common levels of openness. This example is motivated by Canada and the United States.
Here, we assess how productivity and consumption vary with openness for a twocountry world. One country has a much larger population than the other. The two countries
could be thought of as the United States with population N1 and Canada with population
N2 . Since the U.S. population is almost ten times that of Canada, we set N1 = 10 and
N2 = 1. The parameters that matter for this comparison are α and φ in the production
function (3). We assume that only Ni differ. The openness measure is ω for both countries.
We set Ai = 1 for i = {1, 2}, since this is just a normalization.
The equilibrium M1 and M2 can be found from equilibrium condition (8). If the
solution to
ρ + δ m = ri (M ),

i = 1, 2

is non-negative, then this solution is the equilibrium M vector. Otherwise, M2 = 0, and M1
is the solution to
ρ + δ m = r1 (M1 , 0).
We turn now to a comparison of productivity in the two countries. Figure 8 plots
the productivity of the two countries measured against the productivity of a totally closed
small country. If ω = 0, the countries are totally closed and the ratio of productivities for
17

Figure 8: Steady-State Productivities as a Function of ω
%130
Big Country

125
120
115

Small Country

110
105
100
95

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Fraction of FDI Permitted, ω

0.8

1

the two countries is the same as in Example 1. If ω = 1, the countries are totally open
and there is no advantage to size. By moving from totally closed to perfectly open, the big
country’s productivity rises only modestly, but the small country’s productivity increases by
24.4 percent, which is a sizable difference.
As Figure 8 shows, there is a nonlinear relation between relative productivities and
ω. Notice, for example, that there is a kink in the small country productivity at ω = 0.081.
For this and higher values of ω, the small country chooses optimally to invest only in plantspecific capital, since it can use the big country’s stock of technology capital. For large values
of ω, the big country’s stock is 0.55 times its own output and 0.5 times world output.
If we take into account the fact that most investment in technology capital is not
counted in GDP, we find that the small country’s measured productivity eventually surpasses
that of the big country. Gross domestic product is output Yi less any expensed investment.
Investment in technology capital is, for the most part, intangible investment of multinationals

18

such as R&D and advertising, which is expensed from accounting profits. As this example
shows, the big country (say, the United States) does all of the investment in M for ω > 0.081.
Thus, the measured productivity of the small country eventually exceeds that of the big
country. At ω = 1, the measured productivity of the small country is 5 percent higher than
that of the big country.
Table II. Per Capita Consumption (with Y2 = 100 when ω = 0)
Fraction of FDI Permitted
Gain
Country

ω=0

ω=1

(%)

Big, N1 = 10

98.4

99.6

1.2

Small, N2 = 1

79.8

96.8

21.3

We turn now to predictions for consumption. Steady-state aggregate consumption in
the two countries is given by:
C1 = Y1 − δ m M1 − δ k K1 + φY2

ωM1
ωM2
− φY1
M2 + ωM1
M1 + ωM2

C2 = Y2 − δ m M2 − δ k K2 − φY2

ωM1
ωM2
+ φY1
.
M2 + ωM1
M1 + ωM2

Based on these formulas and our Table I parameter values, the model predicts the Table II
values of consumption per capita when ω = 0 and when ω approaches 1. The gain for the
big country is only 1.2 percent, but the gain for the small country is 21.3 percent—similar
in magnitude to the gain in productivity.
The argument for two countries generalizes to I countries. First, order the countries
so that N1 > N2 > · · · > NI . The value i∗ must be found such that the solution to

(9)

ri (M ) = ρ + δ m ,
Mi = 0,

i ≤ i∗
i > i∗

satisfies the equilibrium condition (8). The equations in (9) can be violated in two ways. One
19

is if Mi < 0 for some i. Then a smaller i∗ is needed. The other way is if ri∗ +1 (M ) > ρ + δ m .
Then a larger i∗ is needed.
Example 3: Large Gain to Forming Unions
Our third example is designed to determine the gains from expanding the size of an
economic union when the entering country adopts the same degree of openness as the existing
union members. This example is motivated by a country joining the European Union.
We define an economic union as a set of economies (typically, countries) with common
openness policy ω and totally closed with respect to the rest of the world. Let the number
of economies be I. For these examples, all members of the union have equal size, that is
Ai Ni = AN for all i.
In this case, steady-state output per effective person as a function of the number of
union members is
y(I) ∝ [1 + (I − 1)ω]φ/[(1−α)(1−φ)] .
Using estimates from Table I, we see that the ratio of y(I) for ω = 1 and ω = 0 is I .091 . Table
III reports relative per capita output for several values of I. As can be seen from Table III,
forming a union of 20 members increases the members’ per capita output and consumption
27 percent if ω = 2/3.
Table III. Per Capita Output (with y = 1 when I = 1, ω = 0)

Fraction of FDI Permitted
Number of
Countries, I

ω=0

ω = 1/3

ω = 2/3

ω=1

1

1

1.000

1.000

1.000

20

1

1.199

1.269

1.314

21

1

1.204

1.275

1.320

Now, suppose a country joins a union of size I = 20, thereby making the union size
I = 21 with ω = 2/3. As can be seen from Table III, this has a small effect on existing
20

members, with balanced growth per capita output increasing only 0.5 percent. But the
increase of the joiner is large: 27.5 percent.
Example 4: Large Gain to Countries Opening Unilaterally
Now we consider and assess the gains to a country unilaterally opening to a group of
closed economies. This is similar to the situation of Chile in South America. We find that
opening yields large gains to the opening country.
We assume that countries are of equal size, which is normalized to AN = 1. At
the start, they are totally closed (ω i = 0). Then, one country becomes totally open to
foreign direct investment while the others remain totally closed. Assume the world has I + 1
countries. We use equation (5) and the production function (3) with Li = Ni to obtain
(10)

Yc = ψMcφ/[1−α(1−φ)]

for a closed country c.
The country opening up exploits the world stock of technology capital IMc . We
assume I is sufficiently large that Mo = 0 for the open country o. Thus,
Yo
= I φ/[1−α(1−φ)] = I 0.084 .
Yc
The important point is that unilaterally becoming open benefits the country that becomes
open. For example, if I = 10, then the gains to the opened country are 21 percent. If
I = 100, then the gains are 47 percent. These estimates of the gains to opening are large.
3.3. Transition Analysis
Now we turn from analysis of a country’s situation when the economy is in a steady
state to analysis of the equilibrium adjustment path of a country that moves being totally
closed to open. We first treat TFP growth rates as exogenous and equal to the same constant
in all countries. Next we model the relative TFP of the opening country as increasing

21

with openness. The examples analyzed are motivated by actual observations. In all cases,
theory predicts large gains for a country undergoing the transition to openness, with some
interesting non-monotonic patterns in consumption and technology capital investments. Per
capita consumptions and productivities eventually converge, but stocks of technology capital
can be very different across countries. When countries are open, what matters is the sum of
the technology capital stocks, not the distribution of stocks across countries.
For our transition analysis, we relax several assumptions made earlier. Here, we allow
for elastically supplied labor and growth in population and technology. Utility flow in this
case is given by
u(c, l) = log c + ϕ log(1 − l),
with ϕ = 2.5 so that hours of work are consistent with observations. The growth rate in
populations is γ N = .01. The TFP parameters evolve according to Ait = (1 + γ A )t , where
γ A is set so that the interest rate (= ρ) is 4 percent as before. Therefore, total output in the
economy grows at rate γ Y given by
γ Y = [(1 + γ A )(1 + γ N )](1−(1−φ)α)/[(1−φ)(1−α)] − 1
and per capita output grows at rate γ y = (1 + γ Y )/(1 + γ N ) − 1. In the example with TFP
rising as a country opens, we set Ait equal to a function of σ it . Because we consider both the
direct effects of changing σ it and the indirect effects of its change on Ait , we find it convenient
to work here with the openness measure σ rather than with ω. Along the transition paths,
we constrain investments in both types of capital to be positive.
Transition with TFPs on Trend
Here we consider the equilibrium paths in two examples. In the first, a small, closed
country joins a large, open country (or existing union). In the second, two similar-sized
countries open to each other at different times.

22

Example 5. Joining a Larger Open Economy
In this example, we reconsider the situation of the steady-state of Example 2: a small
country opening to a larger country or group of countries that are already open. This, again,
is motivated by the situation of Canada forming an economic union with the United States.
It also applies to that of a small European country joining the EU.
The two countries here are, again, of size N1 = 10 and N2 = 1. We normalize the
initial TFP parameters by setting them equal to one across time and countries. The big
country is actually a union of countries or states that are open to each other but not to
the small country. In period 1, this big country opens up to the small country. The small
country starts out closed and gradually opens to the big country.

Figure 9: Openness Parameters Path (Example 5)
1.0
Big Country

0.8

0.6

Small Country

0.4

0.2

0

0

10

20

30
Years

40

50

60

Figure 9 plots the paths of the openness parameter for the two countries, namely σ it ,
for i=1,2. For t ≥ 1, the openness parameter for the big country is σ 1,t = 0.99, which implies

23

ω 1,t = 0.85.4 In year 1, the small country is closed. Subsequently, the degree of openness
for the small country increases to that of the big country. This choice of paths is motivated
by evidence on the slow adjustments of GDP per hour after economic unions are formed.
The slow adjustment of σ 2t is due in part to political forces—which we treat exogenously
here—preventing an immediate opening to foreign multinational activity.5
We also need to set initial conditions for the capital stocks. We set the capital stocks
in year 0 to the balanced growth values for closed economies with N1 = 10 and N2 = 1.

Figure 10: Per Capita Consumption Relative to c2,0 (1 + γ y )t (Example 5)
%130

Big Country

115

Small Country

100

85

0

10

20

30
Years

40

50

60

Figure 10 shows the paths of per capita consumption for the two countries. Both series
are divided by the growth trend of per capita output (1+γ y )t times the small country’s initial
per capita consumption level c2,0 . The paths are clearly quite different. The consumption
4

Because of numerical issues with investment constraints near 1, we choose the maximum value for the
degree of openness σ it to be 0.99 for all i and t.
5
When the openness parameters are equal and fixed in all periods of the transition, the results can be
read off our steady-state formulas.

24

in the big country remains relatively stable, whereas that in the small country increases
dramatically as it opens up to foreign direct investment from the big country.
Initially, virtually all of the small country consumption gains are from returns on
its technology being used in the big country. Figure 11 shows the paths for technology
capital in the two countries relative to trend output in the small country. More specifically,
the figure plots technology capital stocks divided by the growth trend of aggregate output
(1 + γ Y )t times the small country’s initial output level. Although both countries start with
a technology capital share equal to 0.5, the big country is ten times bigger and, therefore,
does most of the world’s investment in technology capital. In year 1, when the big country
opens to FDI from the small country, investment in technology capital soars in the small
country because the small country takes advantage of the fact that its capital can now be
used in more locations.
As the small country opens to FDI by multinationals in the big country, it becomes
advantageous for the small country to exploit the large stock of technology capital from
abroad. Because of its size disadvantage, there comes a time during the transition when
the small country stops investing in technology capital and lets its own stock depreciate
thereafter. For this example, this occurs in year 23. When both countries are effectively open,
their per capita consumption and labor input are equal, but specialization in production
persists, with only the big country investing in technology capital.
The equilibrium path of the small country’s actual productivity, but not its measured
productivity, is similar to that of per capita consumption. As Figure 11 makes clear, measured and actual productivity have very different paths because measured output excludes
investment in technology capital. The large initial increases in the small country’s investment in technology capital implies that its measured productivity is initially low relative to
the period before opening up to foreign technologies. For two years, the small country does
no investment in plant-specific capital K but instead builds M . During this time, measured
productivity is roughly half of its initial level. After that, investment in technology capital

25

Figure 11: Technology Capital Relative to Y2,0 (1 + γ Y )t (Example 5)
7
6
Big Country

5
4
3
2

Small Country

1
0

0

10

20

30
Years

40

50

60

slows, but measured productivity does not recover to its initial level until after year 22.
Thus, measured productivity will seem to show that opening has an adverse effect on the
small country, when in fact it has a very positive effect. At the point where the small country’s technology capital starts to decline, there is rapid growth in measured productivity; it
takes five years to catch up to that of the big country. Eventually, measured productivity
surpasses that of the big country because true productivities are the same, but only the big
country invests in technology capital. This example thus shows that measured productivity
can give a distorted picture of actual economic performance.
Example 6. Opening at Different Times
Now we turn to a different situation: two similar-sized countries opening to each other
at different times. We think of this as the EU opening to FDI from the United States and later
the United States opening to FDI from the EU. That is because after World War II, the EU-6
countries had a population similar to that of the United States, but European companies
26

did little foreign direct investment in the United States compared to what U.S. companies
did in Europe.

Figure 12: Openness Parameters Path (Example 6)
1.0
Opens First

0.8

0.6
Opens Second

0.4

0.2

0

0

10

20

30
Years

40

50

60

Here, we set N1 = 10 and N2 = 10 and assume that the initial capital stocks are equal
for the two countries in year 0. In this example, the only difference between the countries is
the timing of their opening. The assumed paths of the openness parameters are plotted in
Figure 12.
Figure 13 shows how seemingly similar-sized economies, such as the United States
and the European Union, can be very different in terms of their multinational activity.
The country opening first exploits the more closed economy by using its technology capital.
Therefore, it drops its investment in technology capital during the period when the relative
σ’s are most different. Eventually, the country opening first does increase its investment
in technology capital, although the level of this investment is much lower than that in the
country opening second.

27

Figure 13: Technology Capital Relative to Y2,0 (1 + γ Y )t (Example 6)
0.7
Opens Second

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

Opens First

0

10

20

30
Years

40

50

60

If the countries were to open up further, then the paths of technology capital would
depend on the relative sizes of the parameter σ. When the countries are both fully open,
nothing in the theory pins down the relative sizes of the technology capital stocks. Thus,
it is possible for countries to have the same standard of living but very different levels of
foreign direct investment.
Transition with TFP Increasing with Openness
Recall that up to now, we have assumed that the TFP parameters in our economies
are unaffected by openness. Yet, there are at least three reasons why a country’s relative
TFP parameter might increase (relative to trend) when it becomes open. One is that the
TFP parameter is likely to be increased by the increased competition resulting from opening. Studies have examined the role of competition on productivity [3, 5, 6] and found that
competition leads to increased productivity. Others [1] have reviewed firm-level data which
suggest that when a country’s industry faces new foreign competition, its productivity in28

creases to world levels. A second reason to think that the TFP parameter increases with
opening is that the entry of foreign multinational production diffuses knowledge into the
opening country. A third reason is that when a country enters into a formal or informal
association of open countries, typically it is required or finds it in its interest to adopt regulatory labor market and other policies that foster productivity. In particular, to attract
FDI, a country must create a good environment for businesses. This is part of being open.
Example 7. Increasing Efficiency
In our final example, we assume that TFP rises in the economy that opens to foreign
direct investment. This example is motivated by the experience of the Central European
countries gaining efficiency as they have opened.
Here, we slightly modify Example 5 (where a small closed country joined a larger
open one) by assuming that the small country gains in efficiency as it opens up. We measure
that efficiency effect by A2,t /A1,t increasing over time, with the rate of increase proportional
to the rate of increase in σ 2,t , which we saw in Figure 9. In year 0, when closed, the
small country has a TFP parameter A2,0 = 0.9A1,0 . During the transition, we assume that
A2,t /A1,t = 0.9 + 0.1σ 2,t and that A1,t = (1 + γ A )t .
Figure 14 shows the result for per capita consumption. There we plot the consumption path of the small country joining the big country, again as a percentage of the initial
consumption in the small country. For comparison, we also plot the per capita consumption
path if the relative TFP parameters did not increase with openness. (See Figure 10.)
The gains from higher TFP are similar in magnitude to the gains from opening.
The gains in per capita consumption to opening are shown in the line marked A2,t = A1,t ,
which is a little over 22 percent by year 60. Comparing this to the line marked A2,t =
A1,t (0.9 + 0.1σ 2,t ), we see that the additional gains to an increase in TFP of 10 percentage
points is a little over 21 percent by year 60, implying an overall gain to the smaller country
joining the union of about 43 percent when compared to the consumption level when closed.

29

Figure 14: Per Capita Consumption Relative to c2,0 (1 + γ y )t (Examples 5,7)
%145

A2,t=A1,t(0.9+0.1σ2,t)

130

A2,t=A1,t

115

100

85

0

10

20

30
Years

40

50

60

In summary, we have demonstrated here and with our earlier examples that the
potential gains from opening to FDI are large, providing theoretical support for a widely
held view that the gains to economic integration are large.

4. Conclusions
In this paper, we extend the neoclassical growth model by introducing technology
capital, which is a firm’s unique know-how used simultaneously in many plants, and the
concept of location, which permits the introduction of technology capital without requiring
aggregate nonconvexities. The theoretical structure interacts well with the national accounts
and the international accounts.
We used our extended model to provide quantitative theoretical support buttressing
the empirical evidence that openness leads to large gains in the opening economy. The main
avenue for gains in our theory is the exploitation of other countries’ technology capital, which

30

is done by permitting FDI.
One conclusion that can be drawn from our work is that there are gains to openness
even for countries that do little or no investment in technology capital. If countries are open,
what matters is the world level of technology capital, not its distribution. Furthermore, as
countries open, those firms that are making technology capital investments have sufficient
private incentives to engage in direct investment abroad. Thus, our framework provides little
theoretical support for proposals such as the Barcelona European Council’s to provide direct
public funding to ensure that R&D spending is 3 percent of EU’s GDP.
We view the framework developed here as potentially useful for further theoretical
and applied research in the areas of economic development, international macroeconomics,
and trade. More detailed studies could and should be done to analyze the economic benefits
of economic integration in specific cases. Elsewhere [10], we use the model developed here to
address a puzzle in the U.S. current account and net asset position. With some extensions
to include different industries, the model may also prove useful for studying issues in trade,
especially as it relates to the trade-off of exporting versus direct investment.

31

Appendix: Data Details
1. Definitions and Units
Europe and the United States. For European countries and the United States, labor productivity is defined as total gross domestic product (GDP) per annual hour worked. The
labor productivity is calculated as
P
i∈I GDPi
P
,
i∈I Hours Workedi
where i denotes a country in the group considered—for example, EU-6. Hence, the implicit
assumption is that countries are weighted by their share of hours worked in total hours of
the group.
South America and Asia. Data for GDP per annual hour worked in South America and Asia
are scarce, so we measure productivity in these regions as GDP per person employed. This
labor productivity is calculated as
P
i∈I GDP per person employedi × Populationi
P
.
i∈I Populationi
The total GDP and GDP per person employed for a given country are measured in
millions of U.S. dollars (converted at Geary-Khamis PPPs). Hence, labor productivity is
expressed in 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars.

2. Sources
Before 1950. For all countries, data before 1950 are from [8]. Table C-16a (p. 249) reports
GDP in 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars, and Table J-5 (pp. 180–183) reports labor productivities
in 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars per hour.
1950–2005. For all countries, data for the years 1950–2005 are from Groningen Growth
and Development Center (GGDC), Total Economy Database. Go to http://www.ggdc.net/
then, Total Economy Database and download data. The data used here are Total Economy
Database, January 2007.

32

References
[1] M. Baily and R. Solow, International productivity comparisons built from the firm level,
J. Econ. Perspect. 15(2001) 151–172.
[2] R. Bourlès and G. Cette, A comparison of structural productivity levels in the major
industrialised countries, OECD Econ. Stud. 41(2005) 75–108.
[3] A. Burstein and A. Monge-Naranjo, Foreign know-how, firm control, and the income of
developing countries, NBER WP 13073, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2007.
[4] H. Cole, L. Ohanian, A. Riascos, and J. Schmitz, Latin America in the rearview mirror,
J. Monet. Econ. 52(2005) 69–107.
[5] T. Holmes and J. Schmitz, Resistance to new technology and trade between areas,
Fed. Reserve Bank Minneapolis Quart. Rev. 19(Winter 1995) 2–17.
[6] T. Holmes and J. Schmitz, A gain from trade: From unproductive to productive entrepreneurship, J. Monet. Econ. 47(2001) 417–446.
[7] R. Lucas, Trade and the diffusion of the industrial revolution, NBER WP 13286, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2007.
[8] A. Maddison, Monitoring the World Economy, 1820–1992, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Paris, 1995.
[9] E. R. McGrattan and E. C. Prescott, Technology capital and the U.S. current accounts,
Working Paper 646, Fed. Reserve Bank Minneapolis, 2007.
[10] J. Sachs and A. Warner, Economic reform and the process of global integration, Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 1 (1995) 1–95.

33

