NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHANGING NATURE OF WAGE INEQUALITY
Thomas Lemieux
Working Paper 13523
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13523

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the 20th Annual Conference of the European
Society for Population Economics held in Verona in June 2006. I would like to thank Christian Dustmann
and seminar participants for their comments, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Thomas Lemieux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Changing Nature of Wage Inequality
Thomas Lemieux
NBER Working Paper No. 13523
October 2007
JEL No. J24,J31,J51
ABSTRACT
The paper reviews recent developments in the literature on wage inequality, with a particular focus
on why inequality growth has been particularly concentrated in the top end of the wage distribution
over the last 15 years. Several possible institutional and demand-side explanations are discussed for
the secular growth in wage inequality in the United States and other advanced industrialized countries.
The paper concludes that three promising explanations for the growth in top-end wage inequality are
de-unionization, the increased prevalence of pay for performance, and changes in the relative demand
for the types of tasks performed by workers in high-paying occupations.

Thomas Lemieux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
Canada
and NBER
tlemieux@interchange.ubc.ca

1. Introduction
This paper reviews recent changes in the nature of wage inequality, and discusses
proposed explanations for these changes. Most of the discussion focuses on the case of
the United States that has been studied in much more detail than other countries. I first
discuss the consensus that emerged on the sources of changes in inequality in the 1980s
in Section 2, but raise several difficulties that were already apparent at the time. In
Section 3, I discuss in detail the more recent (since 1990) changes in inequality and
explain how they pose further challenges for the explanations that were suggested for the
1980s. I also present some evidence from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to
complement the discussion.
The main message of Section 3 is that the nature of the changes in inequality has
been dramatically altered over the last fifteen years. While the growth in inequality in the
1980s was pervasive, it has been concentrated at the top end of the distribution since
then. Sections 4 and 5 review possible explanations for these changes. Section 4
discusses the role of institutional factors, while Section 5 focuses on explanations based
on demand factors and, in particular, technological change. Finally, I conclude in Section
6.
2. The 1990s consensus
A representative view of inequality in 1980 is Blinder (1980, p. 416) who remarked that
“…when we turn to consider the distribution of economic welfare, --economic equality,
as it is commonly called, the stylized fact is one of constancy.” Blinder’s view was based
on the latest data available at the time he wrote his paper that showed that “income
inequality was just about the same in 1977… as in 1947.” In hindsight, we now realize
that as Blinder and other observers at the time correctly saw a remarkably constant
income distribution, the U.S. economy had entered a period of sharp increase in income
and earnings inequality.
Throughout the 1980s, a number of researchers started noticing a definite trend in
increasing inequality. For instance, Bluestone and Harrison (1988) pointed out that the
share of “low-wage” jobs had increased sharply in the first half of the 1980s. This
generated some controversy, in part because it was hard to tell at the time whether this

1

change was simply a consequence of the deep recession of 1981-1982. Even in the
second half of the 1980s, a number of papers concluded that recent changes in inequality
were, at best, modest. For example, using data up to 1985, Blackburn and Bloom (1987)
concluded that “The time profile of earnings inequality, measured across individual
workers, has been quite flat since the late 1960s”.
As interest grew for the issue of income and earnings inequality, the controversy
of the mid- to late-1980s was rapidly resolved as new data clearly showed a sharp and
continuing growth in inequality. By the early 1990s, a set of highly influential papers by
Bound and Johnson (1992), Katz and Murphy (1992), Levy and Murnane (1992), and
Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) established a wide consensus that i) inequality had been
growing sharply in the 1980s, and ii) the primary factor behind the growth was the
increase in the relative demand for skill. The consensus was also that the relative demand
for skill had been growing in the 1970s, but had been outstripped by the steep growth in
educational attainment --the relative supply for skills—linked to the entry of the highlyeducated baby boom generation in the labor market (Freeman, 1976). For instance, Juhn,
Murphy and Pierce (1993) argue that the within-group dimension of inequality had been
growing throughout the 1970s and 1980s, thereby providing evidence that the relative
demand for skills was already increasing in the 1970s.
While this first set of papers did not take a strong position on the source of the
increase in the relative demand for skills, it became widely accepted during the early
1990s that skill-biased technical change (SBTC), driven by the computer revolution, was
the primary source of growth in the relative demand for skill (Krueger, 1993, Bound,
Berman, and Griliches, 1994). The leading alternative explanation, international trade or
globalization, was generally rejected as the main source of the increase in the relative
demand for skill.1

1

Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994) dismiss the trade explanation on the basis that most of the increase
in the use of skilled labor happens within industries, while a traditional Heckscher-Ohlin would predict that
changes should happen between industries. More recently, however, authors such and Feenstra and Hanson
(2003) have pointed out that trade in intermediate inputs, which can lead to within-industry changes, was a
leading alternative explanation to SBTC for the increase in the relative demand for skill. Their focus on
intermediate, as opposed to final goods and services, is consistent with popular perceptions that off-shoring
is now the key way in which globalization affects domestic employment and inequality.

2

One last dimension of the 1990s consensus was that the increase in the relative
demand for skill was pervasive, or ubiquitous, in the sense that all dimensions of
inequality were growing. For example, in a simple human capital model, wage inequality
can increase because returns to education and experience increase, or because residual or
within-group inequality increases. Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) show that all of these
dimensions of inequality had been growing in the 1980s. They attributed this to a
pervasive increase in the relative demand for all dimensions of skill (education,
experience, unobserved ability, etc.), that was later interpreted as being driven by SBTC.
The consensus reached in the early 1990s about the importance of technological
change in the growth in inequality has remained central in most of the subsequent
research on inequality. For instance, ten years after Levy and Murnane (1992) was
published in the Journal of Economic Literature (JEL), the JEL published another survey
(Acemoglu, 2002) on inequality. Acemoglu (2002) again concludes that technological
change, or at least a more sophisticated form of endogenous technological change, was
the leading explanation for inequality growth in the United States throughout the 1970s,
1980s and 1990s.
Even back in the 1990s, however, it was already clear that a number of facts were
difficult to reconcile with the prevailing view that SBTC was driving the growth in
inequality in the United States. A first major challenge to the 1990s consensus was that
other large advanced economies like France, Japan, or Germany, had failed to experience
any significant growth in inequality during the 1980s. If technological change is the
explanation for growing inequality, how can it be that other advanced economies subject
to the same technological change do not experience an increase in inequality? The
response to this question suggested by Freeman and Katz (1995) was that supply and
demand (SBTC) were only one part of the explanation for changes in inequality. The
other part of the explanation was wage-setting institutions. Freeman and Katz (1995)
suggest a richer SDI (supply, demand, institutions) explanation for diverging patterns of
inequality across countries where common demand shock across countries are mitigated
by supply and institutional factors.
For example, in “Anglo-Saxon” countries like the United States, Britain, or
Canada where the wage-setting is decentralized and unions are weak, a negative demand

3

change depresses the wages of less-skilled workers. By contrast, in France or Germany
where the wage-setting is more centralized and unions are strong, wages of less-skilled
workers remain fixed despite the same negative demand change, and so does wage
inequality.
Another set of papers shows that, even in the United States, wage-setting
institutions appear to play a substantial role in the growth in inequality. For instance,
both Card (1992) and Freeman (1993) conclude that the decline in unionization accounts
for about 20 percent of the increase in the variance of log wages for U.S. males in the
1980s. Another important wage-setting institution is the minimum wage, which fell
sharply (in real terms) during the 1980s. DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) show that
the decline in the real value of the minimum wage had a very large impact on wage
inequality among women, and a smaller but still substantial impact among men. This
finding was later confirmed by Lee (1999) who concludes that all of the increase in
inequality in the lower end of the wage distribution during the 1980s was due to the
decline in the real value of the minimum wage. Taken together, these results are a
serious challenge to the view that, even in the United States, inequality growth in the
1980s was due to a pervasive increase in the relative demand for skill, or SBTC. Perhaps
what happened in the low- and high-end of the wage distribution in the 1980s was instead
a coincidence. This alternative view is that different factors affecting inequality at
different points of the distribution all happened to move in the same direction during the
1980s, giving the misleading impression that a single factor like SBTC was the sole
driving force behind the increase in wage inequality.
A final, but more technical, point is that, even in the mid-1990s, one main stylized
fact about inequality growth was known not to be robust to the choice of data. As
mentioned above, Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1993) argue that within-group inequality
had been growing in the 1970s, thereby providing evidence that the relative demand for
skills was already increasing in the 1970s, and that the growth in inequality in the 1980s
was not just an “episodic” phenomenon. This finding was based on data on weekly
earnings of full-time male workers from the March supplement of the Current Population
Survey (CPS). Using data on hourly wages from the May and Outgoing Rotation Group
(ORG) Supplements of the CPS instead, both Card and Lemieux (1996) and DiNardo,

4

Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) find that within-group wage inequality did not increase for
men (and declined for women) during the 1970s. Though this finding was the subject of
controversy for some time, it is now widely accepted that the growth in within-group
inequality in the 1970s is not robust to the choice of data.2 By contrast, the growth in
within-group inequality in the 1980s and the evolution of the college-high school wage
gap are very similar in the March and May-ORG CPS.
In summary, even at the time when SBTC emerged as the leading explanation for
the growth in inequality, the explanation was already known to have several important
shortcomings. First, it could not account for the diverging patterns of inequality growth
across advanced countries. Second, it failed to account for the fact that institutional
factors were also an important part of the story, especially in the lower end of the wage
distribution. Third, it relied in part on the unrobust fact that within-group inequality was
already increasing in the 1970s.
3. Recent evidence and further challenges to the 1990s consensus.
a. Recent Studies
More recently, a number of further challenges to this “1990s consensus” have emerged.
A first challenge has to do with the timing of the growth in wage inequality. In
particular, Card and DiNardo (2002) and Beaudry and Green (2005) argue that much of
the increase in the return to education was concentrated in the 1980s. In a similar vein,
Lemieux (2006b) shows that the growth in residual wage inequality also appears to be
concentrated in the 1980s once composition effects are controlled for. This evidence is
difficult to reconcile with a simple SBTC story that would likely predict a continuing and
steep growth in wage inequality throughout the 1990s. For instance, Card and DiNardo

2

Katz and Autor (1999) re-examined the May-ORG data and concluded that within-group inequality had
increased in the 1970s. Based on this evidence and the earlier findings from the March CPS data by Juhn,
Murphy, and Pierce (1993), Acemoglu (2002) concluded that “…there is considerable evidence that
residual and overall inequality started to increase during the 1970s”, while correctly noting that “there is
less uniformity among data sources regarding the behavior of residual inequality than the returns to
schooling.” (Acemoglu, 2002, page 65). This finding was based, however, on a comparison between May
1973 data where observations with missing wages were dropped from the sample, and May 1979 data
where missing wages were replaced by their allocated values. Both Lemieux (2006b) and Autor, Katz and
Kearney (2005) have now confirmed that within-group inequality does not increase in the 1970s when
allocated wages are dropped in 1979 too (as in Card and Lemieux, 1996, or DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux,
1996).

5

(2002) argue that “IT-related technological change has been going on since at least the
1970s and has continued throughout the 1980s and 1990s. Moreover, there is some
evidence … that the rate of technological change accelerated in the 1990s, relative to the
1980s.” (Card and DiNardo, 2002, page 740). Indeed, casual evidence suggests that the
internet revolution of the 1990s was at least as important, from the point of view of its
impact on the workplace, as the introduction of personal computers in the 1980s.
Mounting evidence also suggests that, far from being “ubiquitous”, the growth in
wage inequality is increasingly concentrated in the top end of the wage distribution. For
example, Mincer (1997) and Deschênes (2002) show that (log) wages are an increasingly
convex function of years of education. In other words, the wage gap between college
post-graduates and college graduates has increased more than the wage gap between
college graduates and high school graduates, which, in turn, increased more than the
wage gap between high school graduates and high school dropouts. Looking more
broadly at the distribution of taxable earnings, Piketty and Saez (2003) also find that
relative wage gains are disproportionally concentrated in the very top of the earnings
distribution. In more recent work, Piketty and Saez (2006) also show that the 1980s
puzzle of why some advanced countries experienced a sharp increase in inequality while
others did not has persisted over time. Once again, English-speaking countries (United
States, Canada and Britain) experienced a steep growth in inequality, as measured by the
share of income or earnings going to the top 10 or 1 percent of the distribution. By
contrast, these shares have remained remarkably stable in France and Japan over the postwar period.
Changes in residual inequality also appear to be concentrated at the top end. For
instance, Lemieux (2006b) shows that within-group inequality grew substantially among
college-educated workers but changed little for most other groups. A related finding by
Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2005) is that “top end” residual inequality (e.g. the difference
between the 90th and 50th percentile of the distribution of residuals, or the “90-50” gap)
increased substantially while residual inequality at the low end (the 50-10 gap) actually
decreased.
b. Direct evidence from the Current Population Survey.

6

I now present some results from the CPS to better illustrate how the main
inequality trends have changed over time. Figures 1 to 4 and Table 1 summarize the
recent developments in the wage distribution and contrast them to earlier changes from
the 1970s and 1980s. The table and figures are based on data on hourly wages from the
May 1973-78 and ORG 1979-2005 supplements of the CPS. The data files are processed
as in Lemieux (2006b) who provides detailed information on the relevant data issues.
Table 1 shows the evolution of broad measures of wage inequality, like the
standard deviation and the 90-10 gap in log wages, as well as wage differentials across
education groups. These education wage differentials are computed for each single year
of potential labor market experience, and then averaged out over all experience groups
using the average shares of experience over the whole 1973-2005 period.3 The measures
of inequality are computed separately for men and women at five different points in time:
1973-75, 1978-80, 1988-90, 1998-2000, and 2003-2005. The last two columns show the
changes in the different measures of wage dispersion over the first (1973-75 to 1988-90)
and second half (1988-90 to 2003-05) of the sample period.
A strong pattern of results emerge from these simple comparisons. First, the
change in broad measures of inequality (standard deviations and 90-10 gap) is three times
larger in the 1970s and 1980s than in the 1990s and 2000s. Furthermore, looking more
closely at the table indicates that all of the growth in inequality prior to 1988-90 is
actually concentrated in the 1980s. The pattern holds for both men and women.
A second interesting pattern is that while both “low-end” (50-10 gap) and “topend” (90-50 gap) inequality were growing prior to 1988-90, the situation changes
radically in the 1990s and 2000s. The 50-10 gap stagnates for women and actually
declines for men. By contrast, the 90-50 gap keeps growing as fast in the 1990s and
2000s as in the earlier period.
Education wage differentials (all measured relative to high school graduates)
exhibit essentially the same pattern as overall measures of wage inequality. Generally
speaking, there is a steep slowdown in the growth in these differentials after 1988-90, as
3

This is a more general way of adjusting for experience than in a standard Mincer-type regression where a
low level polynomial in experience is included in the regression. The approach used here is equivalent to
running separate regressions for each year with a full set of experience and education (five groups)
dummies, and then averaging out (using a fixed weighted average across experience groups) the returns to
education within each experience cell.

7

in the case of the standard deviation or the 90-10 gap. This general pattern hides
important differences, however, across education groups. At the low end of the education
distribution, the gap between high school dropouts and high school graduates expands by
0.045 and 0.085 in the 1970s and 1980s for men and women, respectively. As in the case
of the 50-10 gap, however, the growth completely stops, and even reverts itself in the
case of men after 1988-90. At the other end of the education spectrum, the gap between
college post-graduates and high school graduates keeps growing as fast after as before
1988-90. The gap between college graduates (with exactly 16 years of education) and
high school graduates falls somewhat in the middle, as the growth in the gap slows down
by about a half after 1988-90.
The precise timing of these changes is illustrated in more detail in Figures 1 to 3.
Figure 1 shows that, for men, both the 90-50 and the 50-10 gap were more or less stable
in the 1970s, grew steeply in the 1980s, and diverged sharply after the 1980s. While the
50-10 gap returned to its level of the early 1970s by the mid-1990s (and stayed more or
less constant since then), the 90-50 gap kept growing steadily and is now 40 percent
larger than in 1973.
Figure 2 shows that, as in the case of men, the 90-50 gap for women grew steadily
over most of the sample period, and is now 40 percent larger than back in 1973. The
story for the 50-10 gap is different, however. The 50-10 gap declined sharply in the
1970s before increasing even more dramatically between 1979 and 1986. Since then, the
50-10 gap has remained more or less stable around 20 to 30 percent above its 1973 level.
Figure 3 shows the evolution of the various education wage differentials, for men,
relative to their 1973 level. As in the case of the broader measures of inequality, all
education wage gaps are stable in the 1970s, increase in the early 1980s, and diverge
substantially after the mid-1980s. As a result, by 2005 the gap between high school
dropouts and high school graduates is only 20 percent above its 1973 level. By contrast,
the gap between college post-graduates and high school graduates in 2005 is more than
twice as large as in 1973. Under the assumption that a post-graduate degree requires, on
average, 18 years of education, the 0.36 wage gap between the two groups (Table 1) in
1973-75 corresponds to a yearly return to education of 6 percent, compared to 13 percent
(0.77 wage gap) in 2003-2005. Lemieux (2006a) shows that this enormous increase in

8

the return to “post-secondary” education accounts for a large share of the overall increase
in inequality.
In summary, the evidence from the CPS data strongly supports the findings of the
aforementioned studies that the nature of the growth in wage inequality has changed very
substantially over the last 15 years. All the recent growth in inequality is concentrated at
the top end of the distribution, in sharp contrast with the situation that prevailed prior to
1990. Figure 4 illustrates this dramatic change by showing the growth in real male wages
at each percentile of the wage distribution over the two sub-periods. As in Juhn, Murphy
and Pierce (1993), the increase in inequality prior to 1989 is pervasive, or ubiquitous, in
the sense that wage differentials increase at essentially all points of the distribution.
Interestingly, however, the resulting curve obtained using the May-ORG data is not quite
as linear as what Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) found using the March CPS. In fact,
the curve for 1974 to 1989 is already convex in the sense that wage differentials in the
low end are not expanding quite as fast as in the top end.
The situation changes radically after 1989. First, real wages increase at each and
every points of the distribution, unlike prior to 1989 when real wages decreased except
for the top 20 percent of the distribution. More importantly, the curve is U-shaped as
workers both in the lower and upper tails of the distribution experienced larger gains than
workers in the middle of the distribution.
4. Wage-setting institutions and the growth in top-end wage inequality
Explaining the continuing growth in top-end inequality in the United States over the last
15 years, in a context where inequality elsewhere in the distribution is not increasing, is
now attracting a lot of attention. In this section and the next, I discuss the main emerging
explanations that have been suggested for these changes. I stress, however, that these
explanations have to be evaluated in a broader comparative context where two important
factors have to be kept in mind. First, the nature of the changes in inequality prior to
1990 was very different from the more recent period. A “good” explanation the post1990 situation should also be able to account for the very different situation that prevailed
prior to 1990. Second, a “good” explanation should also have something to say, if

9

possible, about why the evolution of wage inequality has been so different across
different advanced countries.
In this section, I explore a number of possible explanations for the growth in topend inequality that revolve around the theme of wage setting institutions. I then explore
more standard demand and supply explanations in Section 5.
a. Wage setting institutions and social norms: top executives
The work by Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez and their co-authors has been very
influential in attracting attention to the issue of the growing inequality at the top end of
the distribution.4 The most important contribution of this branch of the literature is to
provide good quality and comparable tax data for several countries over a long period of
time. As mentioned above, the main finding is that top-end inequality started increasing
steadily in the 1980s in English-speaking countries, but remained relatively unchanged in
other advanced countries like Japan and France.
Piketty and Saez (2006) discuss several possible explanations for the growth in
top end inequality, focusing on the question of why the incomes of top end executives
increased so much over time. One first explanation that they end up dismissing is that
technological change has made managerial skills more general and less firm-specific,
thus increasing the global competition for the best executives. The problem with this
explanation is that it, presumably, represents a world wide phenomenon that fails to
explain why top-end earnings increased much more in some countries than in others.
The second, and more promising, explanation explored by Piketty and Saez is that
changes in pay-setting institutions and social norms have removed some implicit barriers
to higher wages in the United States, but not in other countries like France where paysetting institutions such as union power remained constant. The third, and related,
explanation is that executives got better at setting their own pay or extracting rents at the
expense of shareholders.
While all these explanations are plausible, they are difficult to test for a number of
reasons. First, it is not clear how to measure the social norms and general pay-setting

4

See, for example, Piketty (2003) for France, Piketty and Saez (2003) for the United States, Saez and Veall
(2005) for Canada, as well as the summary piece by Piketty and Saez (2006).

10

institutions that affect the pay of high executives, or to measure the capacity of
executives to set their pay or extract rents. Second, the major disadvantage of tax data is
that they are not based on detailed micro-data that can then be used to test for interesting
hypotheses. Other data sources have to be used to make progress on these issues.
For example, Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005) use detailed data from the
ExecuComp database for 1993 to 2003 to look explicitly at explanations for the large
increase in executive pay over this period. Using standard regression analysis, they find
that changes in firm size, performance and industry classification fail to explain most of
the growth in executive pay over this period. They conclude that mean compensation in
2003 would have only been half of its actual size had the relationship between
compensation and firm size, performance, and industry classification remained the same
as in 1993. The problem is that though large (or more performing) firms pay their
executives more than smaller firms, the elasticity is not nearly large enough for the
growth in firm size to account for the growth in executive pay.
Gabaix and Landier (2008) reach the very different conclusion that “The six-fold
increase of CEO pay between 1980 and 2003 can be fully attributed to the six-fold
increase in market capitalization of large U.S. companies during that period.” In other
words, they find that the elasticity of pay with respect to firm size (market capitalization
in their paper) is roughly equal to one, which is much larger than the elasticity estimated
by Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005). Their estimates are mostly based, however, on the
time-series relationship between executive pay and market capitalization, a questionable
identification strategy.5
b. Wage setting institutions for the broader workforce: unions and minimum wages
Although the focus on top executives can help explain some of the growth in earnings at
the very top of the distribution, executives are by no means the only workers driving
earnings growth at the top end. For instance, it was recently reported that Goldman and
5

Gabaix and Lanthier (2008) report a more standard elasticity of compensation with respect to market
capitalization of .3 in a standard panel data regression, which is more or less comparable to Bebchuk and
Grinstein (2005). They include an aggregate measure of market capitalization instead of standard year
dummies, however, and add the effect of that measure (.7) to get a “full” elasticity of about 1. The
problem, however, is that this purely time-series variable could also capture other proposed explanations
(social norms, etc.) for the change in executive pay. Without this questionable approach for estimating the
elasticity, their results would be very much in line with those of Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005).

11

Sachs average compensation for 2006 reached over $600,000.6 Literally thousands of
traders, investment bankers, and managers other than the top executives of this single
firm (those included in executive data bases) likely earned enough to put them in the top
0.1 percent of the earnings distribution.7 One must thus clearly broaden the analysis
beyond top executives to understand the sources of growing inequality at the very top end
of the distribution.
One major limitation of most micro data sets for understanding top end inequality
is top coding. For example, in the March CPS, reported wages and salaries were until
recently top-coded at $150,000 a year, which is barely above the 95th percentile of the
distribution of earnings in the tax data of Piketty and Saez ($125,471 in 2004).8 One well
known data set for which top-coding is not an issue is the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID), which is unfortunately not ideal either for studying top-end inequality
because of smaller sample sizes.9 But though these data sets are not very useful for
studying changes in inequality at the very top end, they remain extremely useful for
understanding the sources of wage movements up to, at least, the 95th percentile of the
wage distribution. In the remainder of the paper I will thus focus on analyses of
inequality based on standard data sets such as the CPS.
As mentioned above, Piketty and Saez (2003, 2006) argue that social norms and
institutional factors are a promising explanation for why top end inequality increased
much more in the United States than in many other countries. Since social norms and
other broad institutional factors presumably affect the whole labor market in a country, it
is not clear how one can successfully use micro data to test for the effect of these factors
on the wage distribution. By contrast, the more standard labor economics literature
6

International Herald Tribune, Dec. 13, 2006.
The updated numbers of the Piketty and Saez (2003) indicate that the 99.9th centile of the salary
distribution was $837,892 in 2004 (data accessed on Emmanuel Saez’s website at:
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2004.xls). See also Kaplan and Rauh (2007) for some estimates of the
contribution of high earners other than CEOs to the top end of the distribution.
8
This is the top-code on annual earnings on the main job in the March CPS that prevailed until 2002. The
top-code has been revised up to $200,000 for 2002 earnings which is still, however, below the 99th
percentile of the distribution of earnings in the tax data of Piketty and Saez ($251,000 in 2004). The topcode on earnings in the ORG supplement of the CPS is also $150,000 a year for individuals who have
worked for all 52 weeks of the year (top-code of $2884.61 a week), while the top-code in the 2000 census
is only slightly larger ($175,000 a year) than in the pre-2002 March CPS.
9
The top-code on annual earnings in the PSID was $99,999 until 1982, which was well within the top one
percent of the earnings distribution back then. It was subsequently increased to very large values that only
bind for a handful of individuals.
7

12

focuses on more narrowly defined institutions such as unions, minimum wages, and
deregulation that affect some workers but not others. As a result, the importance of these
factors in the recent evolution of wage inequality can be readily tested for using micro
data.
One institutional factor that can safely be ruled out as an explanation for the
continuing growth in top end inequality is the minimum wage. As mentioned in Section
2, there is strong evidence that the decline in the real value of the minimum wage played
a major role in the increase in low-end inequality in the 1980s. Figure 5 also shows the
remarkable coincidence between the evolution of the minimum wage and the 50-10 gap
for women from 1973 to 2005. DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) and Lee (1999)
only look at data for up to about 1990, and conclude that most of the growth in the 50-10
gap shown in the figure was due to the decline in the minimum wage. Figure 5 shows
that out-of-sample predictions from these studies are highly consistent with the post-1990
data, since both the minimum wage and the 50-10 gap remained more or less constant
over that period. Interestingly, both series still move together around this relatively flat
trend for 1990 to 2005. But since the minimum wage did not change much after 1990
and unlikely affects top-end inequality anyway, it simply cannot account for the growth
in top-end inequality over the last 15 years.
A second institutional factor that unlikely accounts for recent changes in top end
inequality after 1990 is deregulation. Fortin and Lemieux (1997) show that industries
that were deregulated in the late 1970s (airlines, trucking, etc.) did not experience more
growth in inequality than industries that were unaffected by deregulation. Given the lack
of effects of deregulation on inequality, and the fact that deregulation mostly happened
25 to 30 years ago, it is not a plausible explanation for recent changes in top-end
inequality.
A more promising explanation, at least in the case of men, is de-unionization. As
mentioned in Section 2, both Card (1992) and Freeman (1993) show that de-unionization
accounts for a sizable share (up to 20 percent) of the increase in the variance of wages in
the 1980s. DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) reach a similar conclusion but also
explore in more detail the distributional impacts of unions on wages. Interestingly, they
find that the 10.8 percentage point decline in male unionization accounts for 0.040, or a

13

third, of the 0.119 increase in the 90-50 gap between 1979 and 1988. By contrast, they
find that de-unionization has a negative effect on the 50-10 gap, reducing it by 0.019
during a period where the gap expanded by 0.076. In other words, the de-unionization
story was going the wrong way at the low end during the 1980s, though institutions as a
whole accounted for some of the increase in low-end inequality because of the
contribution of the declining minimum wage that accounted for 0.050 of the 0.076
increase in the 50-10 gap. The results from DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) thus
imply that the negative effect of de-unionization on low-end inequality was more than
offset by the large effect of the declining minimum wage over this period.
Since 1988, however, the rate of male unionization kept decreasing (by 8.6
percentage points between 1988 and 2005 in the ORG CPS) while the minimum wage
remained more or less constant (Figure 5). Extrapolating the DiNardo, Fortin, and
Lemieux (1996) results to the 1988-2005 period suggests that de-unionization can both
explain some of the increase in top-end inequality over this period, as well as some of the
decline in low-end inequality. Qualitatively speaking, de-unionization works very well
as an explanation for the changing nature of inequality since 1990 as in can both account
for increasing inequality at the top end, and decreasing inequality at the low end. From a
quantitative point of view, however, the question is whether the effect of unionization is
large enough to account for the magnitude of the recent changes in inequality?
To answer this type of question, one could simply redo a DiNardo, Fortin, and
Lemieux type analysis for the 1988-2005 period. A simpler “back-of-the-envelope”
calculation could also be performed if one knew what is the effect of unions on wages at
different quantiles of the wage distribution. As it turns out, Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux
(2007) recently proposed a new unconditional quantile regression method that precisely
yields these types of estimates. They also apply their method to the case of unions for
men in 1983-85, controlling for standard factors such as experience and education. Their
estimated effects are reproduced in Figure 6. Since it well known since Freeman (1980)
that unions tend to reduce wage dispersion among male workers, it is not surprising that
the union effects in Figure 6 are larger and the low end (say 10th percentile) than at the
high end (say 90th percentile) of the wage distribution. The standard “within” effect of

14

unions can account for this pattern of results.10 More interestingly, the effect is nonmonotonic. It first increases to reach the 0.30 to 0.40 range between the 20th and the 50th
percentiles, declines steadily after the 50th percentile, and eventually reaches negative
values above the 80th percentile. The effect is very large and negative (up to -0.30) by the
time we reach the highest percentile shown in the figure (98th percentile).
Visually speaking, the effect of unions plotted in Figure 6 looks like a mirror
image of the observed 1989-2004 change in wages (by percentiles) shown in Figure 4.
The back-of-the-envelope calculation presented in Table 2 indeed indicates that deunionization can account for about of third of both the increase in top-end inequality, and
of the decline in the low-end inequality. Remarkably, this is very similar to DiNardo,
Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) who also found that de-unionization accounts for a third of
the increase in the 90-50 gap between 1979 and 1988.
The other appealing feature of this “union” story is that the English-speaking
countries (U.S., U.K. and Canada) where top-end inequality increased the most
dramatically (Piketty and Saez, 2006), are also the ones where the role of collective
bargaining in wage setting decreased the most sharply (Card, Lemieux, and Riddell,
2003). Unlike alternative explanations like SBTC that should, presumably, affect all
advanced countries equally, de-unionization provides of powerful way of accounting for
some of the changing nature of inequality within the United States, and the differential
experience of different countries in this regard.
c. Another wage-setting institution: Performance Pay
Traditional labor market institutions like the minimum wage and unions tend to affect
workers predominantly at the bottom or middle of the wage distribution. By contrast,
pay-setting mechanisms of CEOs discussed by Piketty and Saez (2003, 2006) concern
workers at the very top of the distribution. This raises the question of whether some paysetting institutions may also be affecting workers in between these two polar cases.
10

The overall effect of unions on wage inequality is usually understood as the interplay between the effect
of the inequality enhancing “between” effect (union raise average wages of similar workers) and the
inequality reducing “within” effect (union reduce wage dispersion among similar workers). At the bottom
of the distribution, both the within and between effects go in the same direction (raise wages of low wage
workers), which explains why the overall effect is large of positive. At high enough percentiles, however,
(negative) within effects can eventually dominate (positive) between effects, explaining why the overall
effect eventually turns negative in Figure 6.

15

When looking at the way compensation of CEOs is set, it is clear that straight
salaries represent only a fraction of total compensation. Bonuses, stock options and other
forms of compensation linked (in principle) to CEO performance now account for most
of the compensation of top CEOs (Piketty and Saez, 2003). Interestingly, this movement
towards performance-pay schemes extends well beyond the small number of top CEOs.
Using data from the PSID, Lemieux, MacLeod, and Parent (2007) show that the fraction
of U.S. male workers on performance-pay jobs increased from about 30 percent in the
late 1970s to over 40 percent in the late 1990s.11 They also show that wages are less
equally distributed on performance-pay than non performance-pay jobs, in particular
because returns to education are higher in performance-pay jobs. They conclude that the
growth of performance-pay has contributed to about 25 percent of the increase in the
variance of log wages between the late 1970s and the early 1990s.
Interestingly, Lemieux, MacLeod, and Parent show that most of the contribution
of performance-pay to the growth in wage inequality is concentrated at the top end of the
distribution. This is consistent with their observation that workers on performance-pay
jobs tend to be more educated and to work in higher paid occupations (professionals,
managers, and sales workers) than workers not paid for performance. Note also that
since there is essentially no top-coding in the PSID (see above), that data set is well
suited for looking at what is happening even in the very top percentiles of the wage
distribution. The findings of Lemieux, MacLeod, and Parent are reproduced in Figure 7,
which shows that performance-pay accounts for very little of the changes in wage
dispersion up to the 80th percentile. By contrast, performance-pay accounts for
remarkably large share of the change in inequality above the 80th percentile. Simple
calculations based on the results reported in the Figure 7 indicate that performance-pay
accounts for only 3 percent of the growth in the 80-10 wage gap, but for 71 percent of the
growth in the 99-80 wage gap.
d. Institutions: An Overall Assessment

11

Performance pay is measured by looking at whether a worker received piece rates, commissions, or
bonuses on his current job (looking at all observations of a given worker-employer match). Bonuses are by
far the most important component (in terms of workers affected) of this performance-pay measure.

16

Wage setting institutions are a fairly successful explanation for recent changes in
inequality in the United States. De-unionization implies increasing inequality at the top
end but decreasing inequality at the low end, which is consistent with changes in the
wage distribution observed over the last 15 year. Adding another institutional factor, the
minimum wage, can also account for the fact that inequality also expanded in the low end
of the distribution in the 1980s, when the real value of the minimum fell sharply. Finally,
changes in the way wages are set due to the growth in performance-pay jobs can also help
explain a large share of the growth in inequality above the 80th percentile of the wage
distribution.
Two other advantages of the institutional explanation are that it is also consistent
with long-run trends in inequality in the United States, and with cross-country differences
in inequality changes over countries. On the historical side, Levy and Temin (2007)
provide both historical and quantitative evidence that institutional changes played both a
major role in the decline in inequality around and after World War II (the “Detroit
Treaty” era) and in the more recent growth in inequality since 1980 (the “Washington
Consensus” era).
In terms of international comparisons, Freeman and Katz (1995)'s view that
institutional factors are an important factor for explaining cross-country differences in
inequality changes has been confirmed in a number of recent studies. As mentioned
above, countries (U.S., U.K. and Canada) where top-end inequality increased the most
also experienced a decline in the importance of unions in wage setting (Card, Lemieux,
and Riddell, 2003). This being said, it would be incorrect to simply divide large
advanced countries in a group of English-speaking countries (U.S., U.K. and Canada)
that experienced institutional changes and growing wage inequality, and a group of other
countries where both of these factors remained stable.
For instance, Manacorda (2004) shows that inequality first declined in Italy in the
1970s, but subsequently increased starting in the mid-1980s. Manacorda shows
compelling evidence that these changes are linked to the “rise and fall” of the Scala
Mobile, a country-wide indexation system that compressed wages by awarding larger
cost-of-living adjustments to low wage than high wage workers. A more controversial
case is the one of Germany where it is generally believed that unions remained strong and

17

inequality remained stable over the last few decades. Dustmann, Ludsteck and Schönberg
(2007) challenge both of these views using new and better data indicating that inequality
in fact increased while the unionization rate declined substantially over the last twenty
years. They also show that these two factors are clearly linked and that de-unionization
accounts for a substantial part of the growth in inequality in Germany over this period. So
though the pattern of change in inequality and institutions across countries is more
complex than was previously though, the evidence remains that institutions are an
important determinant of wage and income inequality.
It should be stressed, however, that even though wage setting institutions account
well for the timing and the nature of changes in wage inequality, they typically do not
quantitatively account for most of the observed changes in wage dispersion. For
example, the effect of de-unionization in the United States discussed above accounts for
no more than a third of the change in (low-end or top-end) wage inequality. Similarly, the
decline in the minimum wage in the 1980s only affected the low end of the wage
distribution.
The evidence reported here is, thus, not inconsistent with Autor, Katz and
Kearney (2007)'s assessment that other factors beyond institutions have to account for the
bulk of changes in inequality. Their main argument is that neither changes in the
minimum wage nor composition effects can account for the continuing growth in top-end
wage inequality. One source of difference between this assessment and the evidence
presented here is that, like Lemieux (2006b), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2007) only focus
on composition effects due to standard human capital variables that indeed play mostly a
role in the low end of the distribution. By contrast, de-unionization and the growth in
performance-pay jobs can be viewed as a broader set of composition effects that also
effect top-end inequality.
A related point is that when Lemieux, MacLeod, and Parent (2007) separate the
pure composition effect (higher incidence of performance pay, holding the wage structure
constant) from the wage structure effect (faster growth in the return to skills in the
performance-pay sector) of performance pay, they conclude that the latter effect account
for most of the contribution of performance pay to the growth in top-end inequality. This
means that another explanation such as SBTC needs to be introduced to explain why

18

inequality grew faster in performance-pay than in non performance-pay jobs. For all
these reasons, I will explore in the next section other possible explanations for the
changing nature of wage inequality that are required to complement the institutional
explanation.
A potentially more serious criticism of the role of institutional factors is that they
may themselves be an endogenous response to more fundamental changes, such as
SBTC. In particular, Acemoglu, Aghion and Violante (2001) show that if unions
maintain strong wage compression policies in the face of declining demand for low skill
workers due to SBTC, this will result in de-unionization since the outside option of
skilled workers will grow, thus undermining the coalition between skilled and unskilled
workers in support of unions. A similar argument could be made that the growth in
performance pay is also an endogenous response to underlying technological change.
The main problem with this explanation is that it fails to account for long-run
trends and international differences in institutional change. For instance, it is difficult to
believe that the growth in the U.S. unionization rate in the 1930s and 1940s was due to
technological change, or that unions remained strong in countries like France over the last
20 years because there was no SBTC there. Furthermore, one could make the reverse
argument that institutions are the underlying exogenous factor, and the technological
change responds to constraints imposed by these institutions. For instance, firms where
less-skilled workers are overpriced because of unions have an incentive to invest in new
technologies that can effectively replace these less-skilled workers.
So while it would be important and useful to better understand why institutions or
other determinants of wage inequality differ over time and countries, these questions are
unfortunately beyond the scope of this paper. Following the bulk of the literature, I
simply assume that supply, demand, or institutional changes are exogenous.
5. Demand Side Explanations
As mentioned earlier, a simple and parsimonious explanation for the pervasive change in
wage inequality of the 1980s is that workers vary according to their skill level, and that
the price of skill increased in response to a growing relative demand for skill due, for
example, to SBTC. This simple model cannot account, however, for the more complex

19

change in inequality observed over the last 15 years. I now explore extensions to the
simple model that have been suggested to explain the changing nature of wage inequality.
a. Refining technological change: routine vs. skilled tasks.
Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006) propose a richer model for explaining why workers at
the top and bottom of the distribution did well since 1990, while workers in the “middle”
did not do so well. Their explanation builds on Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) who
convincingly argue that a simple distinction between skilled and unskilled worker is not
rich enough to capture the effect of technological change, and in particular the computer
revolution, on the labor market. Accordingly, they introduce an important distinction
between routine tasks that can now be executed by computers and non-routine tasks that
still require human labor.
To illustrate the workings of the model, consider three types of jobs. Type 1 jobs
are unskilled non-routine jobs such as truck drivers or nannies that do not require a high
level of schooling (skills) but cannot be replaced computer operated machineries. Type 2
jobs are more skilled but routine jobs such as traditional blue-collar jobs in the
manufacturing industry that can, to a large extent, be replaced by computer-operated
machinery. Type 3 jobs are non-routine high skill jobs such as doctors or executives that
are highly skilled and cannot be performed by computers. Since computers can be used
as substitutes for type 2 jobs but not for the two other job types, the introduction of
computers should depress the wages for these kinds of jobs relative to type 1 and type 3
jobs.
To see how the model can account for the changes observed over that last 15
years, assume that wages for type 2 jobs initially lie in-between those on type 1 (low
wage) and type 3 (high wage) jobs. The introduction of computers increases top-end
wage inequality by expanding the wage gap between middle-wage jobs (type 2) and highwage jobs (type 3). By contrast, low-end inequality decreases as wages in middle-wage
jobs (type 2) decline relative to those at the bottom (type 1), since computers cannot be
used as substitutes for type 1 jobs.
While this story based on the distinction between skilled and routine tasks is
appealing, there is not much direct empirical evidence on the precise contribution of this

20

explanation to the recent changes in wage inequality. Following Autor, Levy and
Murnane (2003), a natural way of approaching this issue empirically is to look at detailed
occupations. Using data from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), they show
that the share of the workforce in routine occupations has declined over time, confirming
the view that technological change is biased against these types of jobs (as opposed to
unskilled jobs).
Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006) also look at detailed occupations and show that,
since 1990, changes in occupational shares are U-shaped in the sense that it is
occupations in the middle of the skill (or wage) distribution that declined relative to
occupations both at the bottom and top end. Goos and Manning (2007) also observe the
same changes in the distribution of occupational employment in the U.K., and refer to
these changes as a polarization of the labor market into low- and high-paying
occupations.
Autor, Katz and Kearney then show that changes in occupational shares were
positively sloped (and not U-shaped) in the 1980s, suggesting that technological changes
was of a more traditional skill-biased nature during that earlier period. As the shapes of
the occupational change curves in the two sub-periods closely match the shapes of the
wage change curves (Figure 4), it is tempting to conclude that the technological change
imbedded in the occupational change curves can account for the changing nature of wage
inequality. This does not say, however, what is the quantitative contribution of this
proposed explanation to changes in wage inequality. As pointed out in Section 4, the
effect of de-unionization is also U-shaped. When the contribution of unionization is
directly estimated, however, it is found to account for about a third of the changes in
inequality. So although it is desirable for any explanation to account for the qualitative
features of inequality changes, whether it explains a small or a large fraction of the
observed changes in inequality can only be assessed using more direct empirical tests.12

12

One major criticism of the earlier SBTC literature is that it often tended to simply attribute changes
unexplained by other factors to technological change, instead of coming up with precise measures of
technological change that can then be tested on equal footing against other proposed explanations such as
de-unionization (see Card and DiNardo, 2002, for more discussion of this). So even though the more
sophisticated explanation of the effect of technological change based on the distinction between skilled and
routine tasks is intuitively appealing, there is not enough direct evidence yet to conclude that it is the main
source of change in wage inequality over the last 15 years.

21

While it is beyond the scope of this paper to estimate the contribution of
technological change to changes in inequality over the last fifteen year, Figures 8 and 9
present some simple evidence from the ORG CPS data on the contribution of different
occupations. This provides a rough way of seeing to what extent the pattern of wage
changes across occupations is consistent with the skill/routine technological change story.
Figure 8 shows relative wage changes by two-digit occupation as a function of average
education in the occupation in the base period, as well as a fitted regression of wage
changes on a quartic in education. Note that the base period is 1983-85 while the end
period is 2000-2002. These two periods are chosen because major changes in
occupational classification before 1983 and after 2002 make it difficult to compare
occupations over a longer time period.
Interestingly, the fitted regression function is U-shaped, as one would expect on
the basis of Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2006) who show that changes in relative demand
is U-shaped. Occupations that do the worst are those in the lower middle range of the
skill distribution, while occupations in the lower- and, especially, upper-end of the skill
distribution do much better.
Occupations at the higher end of the skill distribution (doctors, lawyers,
professors, scientists, etc.) almost all do better than average. It is also highly plausible to
argue that workers in these occupations mostly perform non-routine work. A more
disturbing pattern is that among high-skill occupations, the only ones that experience
negative relative wage changes are precisely the ones most closely linked to the computer
revolution. In particular computer programmers and engineers both experience negative
relative wage changes, despite the fact –indicated by the regression line—that
occupations with similar skills generally experience a large positive relative wage
change.13 The case of computer programmers is particularly striking since this is the twodigit occupation that experienced by far the largest increase in “relative demand” as
measured by its employment share that more than tripled (from 0.7 to 2.2 percent) over
this period. So while Figure 8 shows that high skill occupations where workers perform
non-routine work did very well in terms of relative wages, it is difficult to understand

13

This is consistent with Card and DiNardo (2002) who also argue that the relative poor wage performance
of technology-related occupations is hard to reconcile with the SBTC story.

22

why occupations at the core of the computer/technological revolution did relatively badly
compared to occupations like lawyers of even professors that are relatively more
peripheral to the computer revolution. One possible explanation for this phenomenon
discussed below in Section 5c is offshoring.
Figure 9 complements Figure 8 by looking more directly at which occupations
contribute the most to the growth in inequality at the top end of the distribution. This is
done by first computing the fraction of workers in each occupation who are in the top five
percent of the overall (all occupations) wage distribution, and then graphing the change in
this proportion over time.14 Note that this curve cannot be U-shaped since only a very
small fraction of workers in middle- and low-wage occupations earn more than the 95th
percentile. The change in the fraction of workers in the top five percent for these
occupations is thus very close, when not exactly equal, to zero.
As in the case of mean wages in Figure 8, science and technology occupations
fare relatively badly according to this alternative measure. Computer scientists,
engineers and natural scientists all experience a substantial decline in the fraction of their
workers in the top 5 percent of the distribution. By contrast, none of the four occupations
that experience the largest growth in the fraction of their workers in the top five percent
(doctors, lawyers, health treatment occupations and sales workers in finance, insurance,
and real estate (FIRE)) appears to be at the core of the computer/information technology
revolution.
In summary, although the more sophisticated form of technological change linked
to the distinction between skilled and routine tasks is an intuitively appealing explanation
for the polarization of the labor market, it is not yet clear how much it explains of recent
changes in wage inequality. Two important challenges are to come up with more direct
empirical tests of the effect of this type of technological change on wages, and to account
for the puzzling behavior of the wages of computer scientists and other technology
workers. A related point that needs to be explored in more detail has to do with the
timing of technological changes. In particular, it is not clear why it took until the 1990s
for technological change to be biased against routine (as opposed to skilled) tasks and

14

Redoing the graph for other wage thresholds such as the 90th percentile yield very similar results.

23

result in some polarization of the labor market, since the computer revolution is typically
believed to have played a major role in the 1980s as well.15
b. Heterogenous returns to human capital
An alternative demand-based explanation suggested by Lemieux (2006a) relies on
the idea that increases in the demand for skill can result in more inequality growth in the
top end than in the low end of the distribution when returns to skills are heterogenous
across workers. Another implication of this model is that the within-group variance
increases more for skilled than unskilled workers, an empirical regularity noted in
Section 3 (see Lemieux, 2006b).
To fix ideas, consider the standard human capital pricing equation:
(1)

wit = αtai + βtSi + γtXi + eit,

where ai is unobserved ability, Si is education, Xi is experience, and eit is a measurement
error. Si and Xi are entered linearly to simplify the exposition but could be replaced by
more flexible specifications.
This simple model is not consistent with the fact that residual wage dispersion
increases at higher values of education (suggesting that αt is increasing), but does not
increase at lower values of education (suggesting that αt is not increasing). A richer
model is clearly required to capture the changes in the wage structure observed over the
last 15 years.
As it turns out, equation (1) is a popular but highly restrictive version of a human
capital model as it imposes that the return to education (βt) and experience (γt) is the same
for all workers.16 Incorporating heterogeneity in the return to experience and education to
equation (1) yields the random coefficient model:
(2)

wit = αtai+ (βtbi)Si + (γtci)Xi + eit,

where bi and ci are the person-specific return to education and experience, respectively.
The key implication of this model is that, consistent with empirical evidence, an increase
15

By contrast, Goos and Manning (2007) find that the polarization of the labor market grew smoothly over
both the 1980s and the 1990s in Britain.
16
Mincer (1974) argues that returns to potential experience are higher for individuals who invest more in
on-the-job training than for workers who invest less. Similarly, Becker (1967) develops a human capital
investment model where workers have heterogenous returns to education and discount rates. The fact that
different people face different returns to education is also front and central in the literature on the
estimation of the causal effect of education on earnings (see, for example, Card, 2001).

24

in the price of education, βt, increases both the level and the wage dispersion of highlyrelative to less-educated workers. To see this, consider the conditional mean and
variance of wages under the assumption that the random effects ai, bi, and ci are
uncorrelated and that they have a mean of one (normalization):
(3)

E(wit | Si, Xi) = αt + βtSi + γtXi,

(4)

Var(wit | Si, Xi) = αt2σa2 + (βt2σb2)Si2 + (γt2σc2)Xi2 + σt2 .

Consider the variance term linked to education, (βt2σb2)Si2. Since this term depends on
education squared, it follows that i) the variance should be larger for more-educated
workers, and ii) there should be a larger increase in the variance of more-educated
workers when the price of education, βt, increases. In this model, an increase in the price
of education can, therefore, potentially explain the pattern of change in both betweenand within-group differentials without resorting to an increase in the price of unobserved
ability, αt.
Since the link between (log) wages and schooling has become increasingly
convex over the 1980s and 1990s (Mincer, 1997, and Deschênes, 2002), Lemieux
(2006a) implements empirically the model of equation (3) and (4) using either a quadratic
specification or a linear spline in education. His findings indicate that the increase in the
return to postsecondary education (more than high school) accounts for a substantial part
of the increase in both the between- and within-group components of wage inequality.
The main contribution to the within-group component is to explain why this component
increases much more among more- than less- educated workers.
While this approach is another appealing explanation for the fact that inequality
increased more at the top end than at the low end of the distribution over the last 15
years, it is not clear why the return to post-secondary education has increased so much
while returns to other dimensions of skill did not. One potential explanation is again the
model of technological change of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003). If jobs that require
post-secondary education are typically “non-routine” jobs, while jobs that only require
high school education tend to be more of the “routine” type, then computerization can
result in an increase in the demand for post-secondary (non-routine) skills.
Note that even if this more sophisticated source of technological change was
indeed the driving force behind recent changes in inequality, it would still be useful to

25

combine this explanation with the heterogenous returns story to account for changes in
the within-group variance across skill groups. To see this, consider Figure 10 that shows
the change in the within-group variance of wages for the same two-digit occupations used
in Figures 8 and 9. The figure shows a very strong link between the growth in the withinoccupation variance and the average level of education in the occupation. In fact, the Rsquare of the fitted regression shown in Figure 10 is larger than in corresponding
regression (shown in Figure 8) for the change in occupation mean wages. Understanding
why the pattern of change in the variance is so closely linked to education must be an
important element of any credible explanation for the observed changes in wage
inequality.
c. Other demand explanations
Some studies have suggested that Rosen (1981)’s famous theory of “Superstars”
could explain why some highly talented individuals at the very top end have done so well
over the last few decades.17 This is obviously a natural explanation for classic cases of
superstar markets like professional athletes, movies actors, or singers, though the most
important technological revolutions in these sectors (e.g. television) probably happened
quite some time ago. The one sector where more recent technological change may have
resulted in superstar effect is software development, for example the case of computer
game developers. As seen in Figures 8 and 9, however, computer programmers don’t
appear to have made much of a contribution to the growth in inequality at the top end.
By contrast, doctors did much better despite the fact that Rosen (1981) mentions that
profession as a leading example where superstar effects are unlikely to happen. The
paper by Gabaix and Landier mentioned earlier discusses another possible source of
superstar effects, this time in the global market for executives. One possible argument is
that globalization leads to much larger firms where it is more critical than before to have
a “star” CEOs. In addition to the empirical issues raised earlier, however, it is not clear
why this explanation is particularly well suited for the last 15 years since large
multinational firms have been around for a long time.

17

Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005) mention the superstar phenomena as a possible source of growth in topend inequality.

26

A perhaps more promising explanation linked to globalization is the more recent
phenomena of offshoring. In fact, Levy and Murnane (2006) argue that the offshoring
explanation to growing inequality is closely linked to the technological change
explanation based on the model of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003). The idea is that
routine jobs that can be “coded up” and replaced by computers are also typically the
easiest ones to offshore. Offshoring could also potentially explain some of the anomalies
documented in Figures 8 and 9. For instance, even if computer programmers and
scientists do skilled non-routine work, it may be relatively easy to offshore this R&D
work to India or Eastern Europe. By contrast, one cannot offshore the services performed
by doctors, lawyers, and professors nearly so easily.
Feenstra and Hanson (2003) show that offshoring and, more generally, trade in
intermediate goods provides a more compelling empirical role for the effect of trade on
wage inequality than more traditional explanations based on the trade in final goods. It
would be interesting to see whether this “new” trade channel can also help account for
the fact that the more recent growth in inequality has been concentrated at the top end of
the distribution.
One final demand side explanation suggested by Manning (2004) is that the
growth in earnings at the top end of the distribution due, for instance, to SBTC, has
resulted in an increased demand for services consumed by high-income people. To the
extent that these services are provided by low-income workers (gardeners, nannies, etc.),
the growing demand for these services may have increased wages at the bottom end, but
not in the middle end, of the distribution. The implied wage changes under this scenario
thus closely parallel those predicted by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003)’s model of
technological change.
5. Conclusion
During the 1980s, there was a pervasive growth in wage inequality throughout the whole
wage distribution. By contrast, inequality growth since 1990 has been concentrated in
the top end of the distribution, while inequality in the low end of the distribution
declined, at least for men. These recent developments are not consistent with standard
models of SBTC that were suggested as the leading explanation for the growth in

27

inequality in the 1980s. Another limitation of the SBTC explanation is that it cannot
explain very well why, unlike the United States and the United Kingdom, some advanced
countries experience little change in wage inequality during this period.
An alternative explanation that was suggested to explain inequality growth in the
1980s is based on changes in labor market institutions. I argue in this paper that, unlike
SBTC, the institutional change explanation can help explain why inequality changes
became concentrated in the top end after 1990, and why inequality grew more in the
United States and the United Kingdom than in other advanced countries. This being said,
just like in the 1980s, available estimates indicate that institutional change can only
account for about a third of the observed recent changes in wage inequality. I also show,
however, that broadening the traditional institutional explanation to include pay setting
mechanisms such as performance pay can help explain more of the growth in inequality
at the top end.
A number of other explanations have also been suggested for explaining the
changing nature of wage inequality. One possible way of “rescuing” the SBTC
explanation is to introduce a richer form of technological change based on the distinction
between skilled and routine tasks. A closely related explanation is linked to offshoring.
In both cases, however, we do not yet have detailed decompositions showing exactly how
much of the recent changes in inequality can be attributed to these factors. It will be
important to estimate the precise explanatory power of these explanations in future
research. To be empirically successful, these explanations will also have to explain why
the within-group variance increased so much more among highly-educated workers than
among less-educated workers. A promising way of addressing this issue is to use a
model where returns to skill are heterogeneous across workers.
For the time being, however, most of the growth in top-end inequality over the
last 15 years remains unaccounted for. It may be due to more general institutions and
social norms, technological change, offshoring, or something else. Short of coming up
with more direct empirical tests, there is no reason to privilege one explanation over
another a priori. I provide a number of possible research directions in the paper that may
hopefully help direct future empirical work. One of the most fruitful research direction
would be to study in more detail the recent experience of countries other than the United

28

States. International comparisons are a very powerful way of separating explanations that
have similar implications in all countries, like technological change, from those that have
more country-specific implications, like social norms and institutions.
References
Acemoglu D (2002) Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market. Journal
of Economic Literature 40(1): 7-72
Acemoglu D, Aghion P, and Violante G (2001) Technical Change,
Deunionization, and Inequality. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series On Public Policy
55(1): 229-264
Autor DH, Katz LF, Kearney MS (2005) Rising Wage Inequality: The Role of
Composition and Prices. NBER Working Paper No. 11628
Autor DH, Katz LF, Kearney MS (2006) The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
Market. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96(2): 189-194
Autor DH, Katz LF, Kearney MS (2007) Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
Revising the Revisionists. Harvard University mimeo.
Autor DH, Levy F, Murnane RJ (2003) The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics
118(4): 1279-1333
Beaudry P, Green DA (2005) Changes in US Wages, 1976-2000: Ongoing Skill
Bias or Major Technological Change? Journal of Labor Economics 23(3): 609-48
Bebchuk, L, Grinstein Y (2005) The Growth of Executive Pay. NBER Working
Paper No. 11443
Becker GS (1967). Woytinski Lecture, University of Michigan. Reproduced in
Human Capital (2nd Edition). University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Berman E, Bound J, Griliches Z (1994) Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor
within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2): 367-97
Blackburn ML, Bloom DE (1987) Earnings and Income Inequality in the United
States. Population and Development Review 13(4): 575-609
Blinder, AS (1980) The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being. In:
Feldstein M (ed) The American Economy in Transition. University of Chicago Press,
Chigago, 415-499
Bluestone B, Harrison B (1988) The Growth of Low-Wage Employment: 196386. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 78(2): 124-128
Bound J, Johnson G (1992) Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. American Economic Review 82(3): 371-92
Card, D (1992) The Effects of Unions on the Distribution of Wages:
Redistribution or Relabelling? NBER Working Paper No. 4195
Card D (2001) Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems. Econometrica 69(5): 1127-1160
Card D, DiNardo J (2002) Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles. Journal of Labor Economics 20(4): 733-83

29

Card D, Lemieux T (1996) Wage Dispersion, Returns to Skill, and Black-White
Wage Differentials. Journal of Econometrics 74(2): 319-361
Card D, Lemieux T, Riddell WC (2003) Unions and the Wage Structure. In:
Addison JT, Schnabel C (eds) The International Handbook of Trade Unions. Edward
Elgar, Cheltenham, 246-92
Deschênes O (2002) Unobserved Ability, Comparative Advantage and the Rising
Return to Education in the United States: A Cohort-Based Approach. UC Santa Barbara
mimeo
Dew-Becker I, Gordon RJ (2005) Where Did the Productivity Growth Go?
Inflation Dynamics and the Distribution of Income. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2005(2): 67-127
DiNardo J, Fortin NM, Lemieux T (1996) Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach. Econometrica 64(5):
1001-46
Dustmann C, Ludsteck J, Schönberg U (2007) Revisiting the German Wage
Structure. IZA Discussion Paper No. 2685
Feenstra RC, Hanson GH (2003): Global Production Sharing and Inequality: A
Survey of Trade and Wages. In: Choi EK, Harrigan J (eds) Handbook of International
Trade, Blackwell, Malden Oxford Victoria, 146-185
Firpo, S, Fortin NM, Lemieux T (2007) Unconditional Quantile Regressions.
NBER Technical Working Paper No. 339
Fortin NM, Lemieux T (1997) Institutional Changes and Wage Inequality: Is there
a Linkage? Journal of Economic Perspective 11(2): 75-96
Freeman, RB (1976) The Overeducated American. Academic Press, NewYork
Freeman, RB (1980) Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages. Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 34(1), 3-23
Freeman, RB (1993) How Much has Deunionization Contributed to the Rise of
Male Earnings Inequality? In: Danziger S, Gottschalk P (eds) Uneven Tides: Rising
Income Inequality in America, Russell Sage Foundation, New York, 133-163
Freeman, RB, Katz LF (1995) Differences and Changes in Wage Structures.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gabaix X, Landier A (2008) Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much? Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Goos M, Manning A (2007) Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of
Work in Britain. The Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1): 118-133.
Juhn C, Murphy KM, Pierce B. Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to Skill.
Journal of Political Economy 101(3): 410-42
Kaplan SN, Rauh J (2007) Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the
Rise in the Highest Incomes? NBER Working Paper No. 13270
Katz, LF, Autor DH (1999) Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality. In: Ashenfelter O, Card D (eds) Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3A.
Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1463-1555
Katz LF, Murphy KM (1992) Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 35-78
Krueger AB (1993) How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence
from Microdata, 1984-1989. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(1): 33-60

30

Lee DS (1999) Wage Inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising
Dispersion or Falling Minimum Wage. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3): 9771023
Lemieux T (2006a) Post-secondary Education and Increasing Wage Inequality.
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96(2): 195-199
Lemieux T (2006b) Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects,
Noisy Data, or Rising Demand for Skill? American Economic Review 96(3): 461-498
Lemieux, T, MacLeod WB, Parent D (2007) Performance Pay and Wage
Inequality. NBER Working Paper No. 13128
Levy F, Murnane RJ (1992) U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A
Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations. Journal of Economic Literature
30(3): 1333-81
Levy F, Murnane RJ (2006) How Computerized Work and Globalization Shape
Human Skill Demands. MIT and Harvard mimeo
Levy F, Temin P (2007) Inequality and Institutions in 20th Century America,
NBER Working Paper No. 13106
Manacorda M (2004) Can the Scala Mobile Explain the Fall and Rise of Earnings
Inequality in Italy? A Semiparametric Analysis, 1977-1993. Journal of Labor Economics
22(3): 585-613
Manning A (2004) We Can Work It Out: The Impact of Technological Change on
the Demand for Low-Skill Workers. Scottish Journal of Political Economy 51(5); 581608
Mincer, J (1974) Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. Columbia University
Press, New York
Mincer J (1997) Changes in Wage Inequality, 1970-1990. In: Polachek S (ed)
Research in Labor Economics 16. JAI Press, Greenwich 1-18
Piketty T (2003) Income inequality in France, 1901-1998. Journal of Political
Economy 111(5): 1004-1042
Piketty T, Saez E (2003) Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-98. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118(1): 1-39
Piketty T, Saez E (2006) The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical and
International Perspective. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 96(2):
200-205
Rosen, S (1981) The Economics of Superstars. American Economic Review 71(5):
845-58
Saez E, Veall M (2005) The Evolution of High Incomes in Northern America:
Lessons from Canadian Evidence. American Economic Review 95(3): 831-849

31

Table 1: Summary Measures of Wage Inequality
Change:
1974 to
1989 to
1989
2004

1974

1979

1989

1999

2004

0.501
1.266
0.681
0.585

0.499
1.262
0.693
0.569

0.571
1.486
0.787
0.699

0.580
1.487
0.721
0.767

0.598
1.557
0.729
0.828

0.072
0.224
0.094
0.130

0.027
0.071
-0.058
0.129

-0.246
0.116
0.369
0.365

-0.253
0.108
0.328
0.361

-0.297
0.165
0.466
0.568

-0.295
0.168
0.521
0.715

-0.287
0.183
0.545
0.766

-0.045
0.058
0.138
0.207

0.010
0.018
0.079
0.198

0.435
1.033
0.470
0.564

0.414
0.989
0.409
0.580

0.512
1.314
0.633
0.681

0.531
1.353
0.605
0.748

0.549
1.404
0.633
0.770

0.098
0.325
0.223
0.101

0.037
0.090
0.001
0.089

-0.221
0.164
0.376
0.558

-0.191
0.141
0.311
0.489

-0.275
0.212
0.459
0.629

-0.275
0.193
0.534
0.770

-0.281
0.204
0.547
0.790

-0.085
0.070
0.149
0.140

-0.005
-0.008
0.088
0.161

A. MEN
Standard deviation
90-10 gap
50-10 gap
90-50 gap
Gap relative to HS graduates
High school dropouts
Some college
College graduates
Post-graduates
B. WOMEN
Standard deviation
90-10 gap
50-10 gap
90-50 gap
Gap relative to HS graduates
High school dropouts
Some college
College graduates
Post-graduates

Notes: Measures computed by pooling groups of three year centered around the year listed in the
table. For example, “1974” corresponds to year 1973 to 1975, etc.

32

Table 2: De-unionization and 1988-2005 Changes in Male Wage Inequality
50-10

Wage gap:
90-50

90-10

Effect of Unions:

0.139

-0.469

-0.330

Change in wage gap

-0.037

0.119

0.082

Change in unionization rate

-0.086

-0.086

-0.086

Predicted effect of de-unionization
(effect in %)

-0.012
32.3

0.040
33.9

0.028
34.7

Notes: Changes in wage gap taken from Figure 4. Effect of unions computed using estimates
provided in Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2007). Change in unionization rate computed using
1988 and 2005 ORG supplements of the CPS. The predicated effect of de-unionization is the
product of the union effect (first column) and of the change in the unionization rate (third
column).

33

Figure 1: Low-end and Top-end Wage Inequality, Men
1.50
90-50

Wage differential (1973=1)

1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00

50-10

0.90
0.80
1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

2001

2005

Figure 2: Low-end and Top-end Wage Inequality, Women
1.40

Wage differential (1973=1)

1.30

1.20
90-50

1.10

1.00

0.90

0.80

0.70
1973

50-10

1977

1981

1985

1989

34

1993

1997

Figure 3: Education Wage Differentials Relative to High School
Graduates, Men
2.20

Wage differential (1973=1)

2.00
1.80

College postgraduates

1.60
Some college

1.40

College
graduates

1.20
High school dropouts
(inverted scale)

1.00
0.80
1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

Figure 4: Change in Real Wages by Percentile, Men
0.20
0.15

1989 to 2004

0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
1974 to 1989

-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
0

10

20

30

40

50

35

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 5: 50-10 Gap for Women vs. Minimum Wage
0.6

1.50
1.40

50-10 gap (1973=1)

1.30
0.8

1.20

0.9

1.10
1.00

1

0.90

Real Minimum wage (1973=1)

0.7

1.1

0.80
0.70
1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

50-10 gap

1993

1997

2001

1.2
2005

Minimum wage

Figure 6: Union Effect by Wage Percentile, Men
0.50
0.40

Union Wage Effect

0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
-0.10
-0.20
-0.30
-0.40

0

10

20

30

40

50
Percentile

36

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 7: Pay-for-Performance and the 1976-79 to 1990-93 Change in
Real Wages by Percentile, Male Heads in the PSID
0.25
0.20
0.15
Effect of pay-forperformance

0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10

Wage
changes

-0.15
-0.20
-0.25
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 8: Relative Wage Change by Two-Digit occupation, 1983-85 to
2000-02
0.40
Doctors

Relative wage change

0.30
Health
treatment

0.20

Lawyers

0.10

FIRE sales
Teachers

Professors

0.00
Computer
programmers

-0.10
-0.20

Engineers

Natural
scientists

Supervisors,
clerical

-0.30
10

11

12

13

14

15

Education in 1983-85

37

16

17

18

Figure 9: Change in the Fraction in the Top 5 percent by Two-Digit
Occupation, 1983-85 to 2000-2002

Change in top 5 percent

0.20

0.15

Doctors

0.10

Lawyers

0.05

Health
treatment

FIRE sales

Teachers
Professors

0.00

-0.05

Computer
scientists

Supervisors,
clerical

Public
administrators

Natural
Scientists

Engineers

-0.10
10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Education in 1983-85

Figure 10: Change in Within-Group Variance by Two-Digit
Occupation, 1983-85 to 2000-2002
0.10
FIRE sales

Change in within-group variance

0.08

Doctors
Teachers
Computer
programmers

0.06
0.04

Professors
Lawyers

0.02
Natural scientists

0.00
-0.02

Records
processing

-0.04

Other
laborers

-0.06

Public
administrators

Handlers

-0.08
10

11

12

13

14

15

Education in 1983-85

38

16

17

18

