                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SCHOOL FINANCE REFORM:
                       ASSESSING GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS

                                         Dennis N. Epple
                                        Maria Marta Ferreyra

                                        Working Paper 13524
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13524


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We thank David Arsen, Julie Berry Cullen, George Duncan, David Frame, Rich Romano, Stuart Rosenthal,
Molly Sherlock, and two anonymous referees for insightful comments. We also benefited from comments
by seminar participants at Duke, Syracuse and Florida, and from participants at the 2007 AEFA conference.
Epple thanks the National Science Foundation and Ferreyra thanks the Berkman Faculty Development
Fund at Carnegie Mellon University for financial support. We thank Julie Berry Cullen and Susanna
Loeb for providing us with data on pass rates for Michigan. We are also grateful to Mary Ann Cleary,
Jeff Guilfoyle and Glenda Rader from the government of the state of Michigan for helpful conversations
on Proposal A and for facilitating our access to data. Bill Buckingham from the Applied Population
Lab at University of Wisconsin-Madison provided Arc GIS support, and Surendra Bagde provided
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Dennis N. Epple and Maria Marta Ferreyra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
School Finance Reform: Assessing General Equilibrium Effects
Dennis N. Epple and Maria Marta Ferreyra
NBER Working Paper No. 13524
October 2007
JEL No. H42,H71,H73,I22

                                               ABSTRACT

In 1994 the state of Michigan implemented one of the most comprehensive school finance reforms
undertaken to date in any of the states. Understanding the effects of the reform is thus of value in informing
other potential reform initiatives. In addition, the reform and associated changes in the economic environment
provide an opportunity to assess whether a simple general equilibrium model can be of value in framing
the study of such reform initiatives. In this paper, we present and use such a model to derive predictions
about the effects of the reform on housing prices and neighborhood demographic compositions. Broadly,
our analysis implies that the effects of the reform and changes in the economic environment are likely
to have been reflected primarily in housing prices and only modestly on neighborhood demographics.
We find that evidence for the Detroit metropolitan area from the decade encompassing the reform
is largely consistent with the predictions of the model.


Dennis N. Epple
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu

Maria Marta Ferreyra
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 241
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mferrey@andrew.cmu.edu
                                                                                                        1


1. Introduction



The last thirty years have witnessed intense activity in school finance reform. Numerous
states have centralized, in varying degrees, the funding of their public schools. While
most states have done so prompted by their state courts, in 1993 Michigan centralized
public school funding through the decision of its Legislature. Instead of being determined
by individual school districts, school revenues are now determined by the state through a
foundation grant system. The new system has given large absolute and relative revenue
increases to low-revenue districts and has capped revenues of high-revenue districts. In
addition, property taxes have been dramatically reduced and state taxes increased.
           The reform had two clear goals: to lower property tax burdens and to reduce
variation in revenues across districts. Both goals were accomplished. However, a reform
of this kind and reach has the potential of leading to other effects as well. In metropolitan
areas where public schools have residence requirements, households choose locations and
schools jointly given the housing prices, property taxes and public school qualities that
prevail in the different jurisdictions. By affecting property tax rates and public school
revenues, this type of reform can alter housing prices and public school quality. In
addition, the changes in relative school funding levels (and possibly qualities) across
districts might induce households to move from one district to another.
           We examine whether these general equilibrium effects took place in the Detroit
metropolitan area,2 which is the largest metropolitan area in Michigan and comprises
about 41 percent of the state population. We use a multi-community equilibrium model to
develop qualitative predictions about the effects of the reform, and investigate whether
these predictions hold empirically. For analytical purposes we decompose the reform into
two elements: a tax reform, and a change in the level and distribution of revenue.
Furthermore, over the nineties the metropolitan area experienced a significant change in
the shape of the income distribution. Although all segments of the distribution
experienced an increase in real income, the lower and upper segments benefited from
greater proportional increases.3 To gain insight into the effects of these income changes,

2
    Throughout we define the Detroit metropolitan area as the counties of Wayne, Macomb and Oakland.
3
    Using national data, Autor et al (2005) document similar changes in the U.S. income distribution.
                                                                                           2

we decompose them into a proportional increase in all incomes, and a mean-preserving
income change. Controlling for the effects of changes in the metropolitan income
distribution proves to be important for empirically assessing the effects of the reform.
       We investigate the predictions of the model using data from the Detroit
metropolitan area before and after the Michigan school reform, and find empirical
support for them. This, in turn, has important policy implications. A central insight from
the model is that, unless the revenue component of the reform alters the preexisting
ordering of districts by revenue, the primary effects of the reform will be reflected in
property values with relatively little impact on household location. Changes in property
value may be accompanied by changes in school quality to the extent that expenditures
impact quality. However, absent household relocation, such expenditure changes will not
be accompanied by demographic changes that might affect peer qualities. This prediction
rests on assumptions about the geographic distribution of housing, assumptions that we
argue are likely to hold at least approximately in many metropolitan areas.
       The Michigan reform created little incentive for relocation in the Detroit
metropolitan area because it did not alter the pre-reform ranking of revenue across
districts. In all fairness, the expenditure changes mostly aimed at small, rural districts
(Courant and Loeb (1997)), so it should not come as a surprise that the Detroit
metropolitan area did not see greater revenue gains. However, the very design of the
reform limited the kind of general equilibrium relocation effects described above, which,
via peer quality changes, might have further helped low-achieving urban districts such as
Detroit Public Schools. Although the district’s fourth grade pass rate in math tests rose
from 16 to 50 percent between 1991 and 1999, and the seventh grade pass rate in math
tests rose from 8.6 to 34.5 percent, this only meant going from the sixth to the thirteenth
lowest place in fourth grade math among the 83 districts in the metropolitan area, and
from the third to the fourth lowest place in seventh grade math. Moreover, as we discuss
later, there is reason for caution in taking these measured gains at face value.
       This paper makes several contributions to the analysis of school finance reform.
First, we build on the work of researchers who have examined the general equilibrium
effects of school finance reform using calibrated models (see, for instance, Nechyba
                                                                                                           3

(2004), Fernandez and Rogerson (1998, 2003)), by empirically evaluating these effects.4
Second, we extend the work of researchers who have focused on specific types of effects
emerging from the Michigan reform (achievement in Cullen and Loeb (2004), Papke
(2005) and Roy (2003), capitalization in Guilfoyle (1998a, 1998b)), by studying general
equilibrium effects and providing an analytical framework to this end. Third, we study a
specific metropolitan area, Detroit, rather than the entire state (Roy (2004)) in order to
focus on a geographic context in which households have access to roughly the same set
of residential and school choices. Finally, our analysis provides insights that are relevant
not only to Michigan but also to other states, given that a number of recent state aid
reforms have reduced property taxes while increasing state funding, and have embraced a
state aid system with some similarities to the one adopted in Michigan (Yinger (2004)).
        Furthermore, this paper makes a contribution to the analysis of the effects of
changes in the metropolitan area income distribution on house prices, an issue which has
not been, to our knowledge, systematically explored thus far. This framework may prove
helpful in shedding light on the dynamics of house value appreciation and its variation
across metropolitan areas. While being of interest in its own right, this analysis also
provides a method for studying the effects of school reform while controlling empirically
for changes in the income distribution.
        The rest of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes public school
funding in Michigan. Section 3 presents our theoretical model and Section 4 presents
some stylized evidence that support our theoretical predictions. Section 5 concludes.

2. Public School Funding in Michigan


In 1990,5 the Detroit metropolitan area, which comprises eighty-three school districts,
had a population of about 3.93 million. The largest district is Detroit Public Schools,
which overlaps with the city of Detroit and had a population of about a million and a K-

4
  Loeb (2001) calibrates her model to Michigan data in a partial equilibrium framework.
5
  In what follows, demographic data refer to Census year, and school-related data to the Fall of the
corresponding school year. Since demographic data are only available for Census years, 1990 data are the
closest available measure for the pre-reform period. For consistency, pre-reform revenues are also
measured as of 1989, and pre-reform achievement is measured as of 1991, since the series of comparable
achievement data begin in 1991. “Revenue”, “spending” and “aid” are per-student measures. Throughout
this paper, all dollar figures are expressed in dollars of 2000, unless otherwise indicated.
                                                                                                             4

12 enrollment of about 182,000 in 1990. As Figures 1a and 1b show, there was
considerable variation in income and housing value across districts, with Detroit Public
Schools ranking almost at the bottom. Similarly, local and state revenues differed widely
across districts (see Figure 1c), as did school achievement measured by the pass rate for
the fourth grade math test.6 District average income, housing value, per-pupil revenue,
and pass rates were highly and positively correlated. Furthermore, the districts with the
highest property values had the lowest millages7 (see Figure 1d).
         The school finance reform implemented in the Fall of 1994 represented a drastic
departure from the previous funding system, a district power equalization program that
had been in effect since 1973.8 Sales and use taxes rose from 4 to 6 percent, and
homestead property taxes fell from a state average of 34 mills to a statewide uniform rate
of 6 mills on all property. The Michigan School Aid Fund now includes revenues from
the sales tax, a 6-mill state uniform property tax on homestead and non-homestead
property, revenues from the state income tax, and other revenues. The state share of
funding rose from 35 to 80 percent. A reduction of local property taxes and concomitant
increase of state funding was also a feature of the recent school finance reforms in
Kentucky, Texas and Vermont. Furthermore, voter dissatisfaction with high property
taxes was a crucial motivation for the reforms in Michigan and Vermont (Yinger (2004)).
         Proposal A implemented a foundation grant system guaranteeing each district a
per-student revenue equal to the district’s foundation allowance.9 Districts are not
allowed to supplement their foundation allowance. As Yinger (2004) reports, foundation
aid formulas were employed in forty-one states as of 2004. A district’s foundation
allowance is based on its local and state revenue prior to Proposal A (“base revenue”). In
1994, foundation allowances were determined according to the following formula:

6
  The pass rate is computed as the percent of students who obtain a grade of “satisfactory” in the state’s
math test, which is graded according to three categories: “low”, “moderate” and “satisfactory.” Although
we report results for fourth grade math exams, the results for seventh grade are qualitatively similar, except
that pass rates are consistently lower for 7th grade.
7
  Property tax rates are expressed in mills (dollars paid per $1,000 of assessed value). We only consider
mills raised for operational purposes (“operating mills”) given that Proposal A refers exclusively to them.
8
  For background on alternative state aid mechanisms, see Yinger (2004). For further details on the
Michigan reform, see Addonizio et al (1995) and Cullen and Loeb (2004).
9
  To districts with foundation allowances above a certain threshold (equal to $6,500 in 1994), the state
guarantees a per-student revenue equal only to that threshold, yet allows them to raise additional property
taxes in order to reach their full foundation allowances. The revenue of these districts, however, continues
to be capped by the magnitude of the foundation allowance.
                                                                                                            5


               ⎧4,200                            if x ≤ 3,950
               ⎪ x + 250                           if x ∈ (3,950,4,200)
               ⎪
          fa = ⎨                                                                  (1)
               ⎪.961x + 414.35                    if x ∈ (4,200,6,500 )
               ⎪⎩ x + 160                         if x ≥ 6,500
where fa is the foundation allowance and x is base revenue in 1993 dollars. The state
requires each district to levy 18 mills on non-homestead property, and covers the
difference between this local revenue and the foundation allowance through state taxes.
As (1) shows, Proposal A reduced the variation in revenue by raising revenue at the
bottom of the distribution and limiting it at the top. Although foundation allowances were
adjusted every year between 1994 and 2000, the weak ordering of districts by revenue
remained the same as before the reform (see Figure 2). Furthermore, real revenues at the
end of the decade differed only slightly from those before the reform.10

3. Model


The model takes as its point of departure the framework of Nechyba (1999), extended to
encompass the preference and achievement structure of Epple and Romano (2003). The
metropolitan area is populated by a continuum of households. Each household has one
child. Household endowed income is denoted ye and child ability is denoted b. The
population is normalized to one. The joint distribution of ability and endowed income,
f(b,ye), is continuous and strictly positive on support [bm, bx]x[ym,yx].
         There is a continuum of houses partitioned into school districts, with the
population of houses normalized to one. Every district i is in turn partitioned into
neighborhoods, indexed by j. There are K neighborhoods in the economy. Houses may


10
   The foundation allowance is the state’s mechanism to deliver basic aid, the use of which is discretionary
for the districts, as opposed to categorical aid which can only be used for specific purposes. A district’s
foundation allowance is a function of its 1993 base revenue, which includes, among others, property tax
revenues, state basic aid, and most categorical aid components (Addonizio et al (1995)). Categorical aid
was also overhauled in 1994, and a large number of categoricals previoulsy included in the foundation
allowance were eliminated. The largest was the state’s contribution to teachers’ social security and
retirement. These funds were transferred to the local districts via the foundation allowance to shift this
rising burden away from the state, and districts must now make the corresponding contributions. In our
empirical analysis we quantify the increase in revenue between 1989 and 1999 as the difference between
the 1999 foundation allowance and the 1989 local and state revenue. Although the former is for basic aid
and the latter includes basic and categorical aid, the bulk of these categoricals correspond to expenses that
are not discretionary from the point of view of the districts, as explained above.
                                                                                                           6

differ in quality h (units of housing services involving features such as size, age, etc.)
across neighborhoods, but within a given neighborhood they have the same quality. The
housing stock cannot be varied in quantity or quality. The exogenously determined
housing service provided by a house located in neighborhood j and district i is denoted
hij, and the fraction of the population that can be housed in that neighborhood is nij.
         Each child must attend public school. Education is provided locally by school
districts. There is one public school per neighborhood. A child may attend only the public
school located in the neighborhood where the child’s household resides.
         All households are renters, and rental proceeds in the metropolitan area are paid to
an investment fund. Shares in the investment fund are owned by metropolitan residents,
with ownership shares proportional to income endowment. We let rye denote the income
received from the housing investment fund by a household with endowed income ye,
where r, equal to the ratio between the metropolitan area’s total value of the housing
stock and aggregate endowed income, is determined in equilibrium.11
         Households’ preferences are represented by the utility function u(g,h,c;b), where
h is consumption of housing services, c is consumption of the numeraire, g is the quality
of the school attended by the child, and b is the ability of the child in the household.
Following Epple and Romano (2003), we interpret b broadly as school capability, which
encompasses contributions of the student’s home environment to school readiness.
         Educational expenditures are financed by state income and sales taxes at rates τ
and ω respectively, and by local property taxes at rates tˆ , with the mix of funding
differing before and after the reform. We assume for simplicity that proceeds from the
housing investment fund are not subject to state taxes. The income tax is imposed on
endowed income, ye, and the sales tax is applied to after-tax endowed income inclusive of
earnings from the investment fund and net of housing expenditure, implying budget
constraint: ye (1 − τ + r ) = c(1 + ω ) + pˆ (1 + tˆ)h where c is numeraire consumption and p̂ is the


11
   In this type of model, properties could either be owned by an absentee landlord or by the households in
the economy. We adopt the latter option because it is better suited to the study of capitalization. Some
initial allocation of houses to households is then needed. One alternative is to endow each household with a
house whose value is independent of the household endowed income, as in Nechyba (1999). Another is to
endow each household with a share of the total housing stock whose value is proportional to the household
endowed income, as is done here. The income effects derived from the capitalization of Michigan’s tax
reform are small in the first case (see below), whereas they are zero in the second case (see Proposition 1).
                                                                                                         7

net-of-tax per price per unit of housing. We can then write the budget constraint
        (1 − τ + r )     pˆ (1 + tˆ)                                                      pˆ (1 + tˆ)
as ye                =c+             h . Let p be the tax-inclusive price of housing: p =             . Let
          (1 + ω )        (1 + ω )                                                         (1 + ω )

                                                                                     ˆ ˆ be
v=ph be the tax-inclusive value of a house with h units of housing services, and t = pt
the property tax bill per unit of housing. Notice that p, p̂ , t and h will generally differ
across neighborhoods, and hence v will vary across                     neighborhoods as well. The
household budget constraint is then:
           c+v = y                                                              (2)
where y is net-of-tax endowed income inclusive of earnings from the housing investment
                 (1 − τ + r )
fund: y = ye                  . In what follows we refer to y as income. Let the CDF’s for the
                   (1 + ω )

marginal distribution of y in the initial (1990) and final (2000) periods be F(y) and G(y).
          It is convenient to define the utility function derived from substituting the budget
constraint into the utility function as:
           U (v, g , h; y, b) = u ( g , h, y − v; b)                            (3)
          Schools produce school quality g according to the quasi-concave production
function g=g(θ,s), where θ is peer quality, defined as the average ability of students
attending the school, and s is spending per student in the school’s district. Spending per
student is the same for all schools within a district.
           When choosing locations (and hence schools) households take public school
qualities gij = g(θij,si) and housing prices in all neighborhoods pij as given. Migrating
among locations is costless. Thus, a household with income y chooses a location (i,j) to:
           MaxijU (vij , gij , hij ; y, b)                                      (4)

where, recall, hij is the quality of house type j in district i, and vij is the tax-inclusive
market value of house type j in district i.
          The analysis that follows does not require modeling of the political process that
determines local property tax rates, state income tax rates, or the decision to reform the
system of school finance. Instead, the initial tax rates and expenditure levels in each
district are taken as given as is the state educational reform. The analysis focuses on
developing predictions about the effects of the reform and other factors (e.g., changes in
                                                                                                       8

the income distribution) that occurred over the time interval for which outcome measures
are available. The latter is the decade between the 1990 and 2000 decennial Census years.
          Given tax rates and expenditures per student in each district, an equilibrium is a
partition of the population into districts and neighborhoods, school qualities gij=g(θij,si),
and tax-inclusive house value vij such that every house is occupied and no household can
gain utility by moving. We prove that equilibrium exists before and after the reform, and
characterize the equilibrium and equilibrium changes that are predicted by the model.
          It is useful to characterize the Michigan reform as having two distinct elements-
the change in financing, and the change in expenditures across districts. The following
neutrality result characterizes the effects of changing the financing of public schools from
district property taxes to state income and sales taxes while holding constant spending per
pupil in all districts.


Proposition 1: (Tax-instrument neutrality) An allocation that is an equilibrium before
school finance reform is also an equilibrium after the school finance reform if state
revenues are generated by a combination of income and sales taxes. All property tax
changes are capitalized into housing prices with no change in tax-inclusive housing
prices.
Proof: Let t ∗ and s * be respectively the vector of residential property tax bills and per
student expenditures in all locations prior to the reform, and let τ* and ω∗ be respectively
the income and sales tax rates before the reform. Similarly, let tˆ' and t′ be the property
tax rates and bills after the reform, and τ′ and ω′ the income and sales tax rates after the
tax reform. Let p̂* and pˆ ' be the net-of-tax housing prices before and after the reform
respectively. The gross-of-tax housing price in the equilibrium preceding the tax change
               pˆ * (1 + tˆ* )             pˆ '(1 + tˆ ')
is then p* =                   , and p ' =                is the gross-of-tax price following the reform.
                (1 + ω ) *
                                            (1 + ω ')

Finally, let r* and r’ be the return from the housing investment fund before and after the
reform. These are the ratios of the metropolitan area’s total value of the housing stock to
aggregate income before and after the reform, respectively.
                                                                                                                          9


By hypothesis, tˆ' , τ ' , and ω’ are chosen to keep s ∗ unchanged. Thus, the change in
income, sales, and property tax revenues must be equal to zero:
                                   ⎡ (1 − τ '+ r ')      (1 − τ * + r*) ⎤
          (τ   '
                    − τ *) Ye + Ye ⎢ω '
                                        (1 + ω ')
                                                    −ω *
                                                           (1 + ω*) ⎥⎦
                                   ⎣                                                                     (5)
          −∑ i ∑ j (ω ' pij '− ω * p ) H ij + ∑ i ∑ j ( t − t
                                                 *
                                                 ij
                                                                     '
                                                                     ij
                                                                          *
                                                                          ij   )H   ij   =0

where Ye is aggregate endowed income and H ij = nij hij .

Suppose gross-of-tax prices are unchanged by the reform: p ' = p * . Substituting this
equality into (5) and simplifying, we obtain:
                                   ⎡ (1 − τ '+ r ')      (1 − τ * + r*) ⎤
          (τ   '
                    − τ *) Ye + Ye ⎢ω '
                                        (1 + ω ')
                                                    −ω *
                                                           (1 + ω*) ⎥⎦
                                   ⎣                                                                     (6)
          − (ω '− ω *) ∑ i ∑ j pij H ij + ∑ i ∑ j ( tij' − tij* ) H ij = 0

The change in payments from the investment fund must equal the change in property
rentals. Hence:
          (r '− r*)Ye = ∑ i ∑ j ( pˆ ij' − pˆ ij* ) H ij                                                 (7)

                   pˆ (1+ tˆ )
Now p =             (1+ω )       implies p(1 + ω ) = pˆ + t , or p(1 + ω ) − t = pˆ . This result in (7) implies:
                                      (                                   )
(r ′ − r∗)Ye = ∑ i ∑ j pij′ (1 + ω ′ ) − tij′ − p ∗ij (1 + ω ∗) + t ∗ij H ij                            (8)
Substituting (8) into (6) and simplifying, we obtain:
        ω∗ +τ ∗ − r∗ ) ω′ +τ ′ − r′
                      =                                                                                  (9)
           (1 + ω ∗ )     (1 + ω ′ )
                                                                                         (1−τ + r )
Recall that the household budget constraint is: ye                                        (1+ω )      = c + ph . Now (9) and
pij′ = pij∗ = p imply that the household budget constraint is unchanged by the reform.


         We have thus shown that if gross-of-tax housing prices do not change in response
to the finance reform, then incomes of all households, net of tax payments and inclusive
of investment fund receipts, are also unaffected by the tax reform, and government
budgets are balanced. Hence, the choice that was optimal for each household before the
reform will be optimal after the reform. Thus, the equilibrium prevailing before the
reform will also be an equilibrium after the reform. The tax policy change is irrelevant in
the sense that per se it has no effect on household choices. Tax "reform" only has effects
if the proceeds of the tax are distributed differently after than before the reform.                                 ■
                                                                                                              10

Remarks:
1. The preceding result applies regardless of how property tax rates in individual districts
are changed. There is no necessity that such changes be uniform. They can be completely
arbitrary, even random. Furthermore, the assumption that property revenues accrue to an
investment fund is a convenient device for illustrating that, at most, property tax reform
has income effects that would arise to the extent that household ownership of the returns
to property is not exactly proportional to income. Such idiosyncratic income effects are
surely of second order.12 Moreover, some initial allocation of properties to households is
required. Endowing individuals with property shares whose value is proportional to their
endowed incomes seems quite natural.
2. The assumption of inelastic housing supply is key to the capitalization results. Hence,
we may view the proposition as characterizing short-run implications of the tax reform.
In the longer term, reduced property tax rates would induce an increase in housing
supply, which would in turn lead to lower housing prices in such locations.13 The
assumption of inelastic supply may apply over a longer time frame in metropolitan areas
that have stable or declining populations. The average metropolitan area in the United
States grew at a rate of 16 percent over the decade, with construction and destruction
rates of 22 and 6 percent respectively. Among the twenty largest metropolitan areas, the
fastest-growing were Phoenix and Atlanta, which grew by approximately 40 percent. In
contrast, Detroit’s net growth was 6.5 percent, with construction and destruction rates of
11.9 and 5.4 percent respectively. Thus, while the size of the housing stock in Detroit did
change over the decade, the change was relatively small. Furthermore, as Glaeser and
Gyourko (2005) have noted, housing is a durable good that grows fast but declines
slowly, and whose supply is hence rather inelastic in areas that have stable or declining




12
   For example, consider a household with income y owning a house worth 1.6 times the household’s
income—our sample’s average. Suppose the property tax reduction for this dwelling is fully capitalized,
with no offsetting loss from increased sales or income taxes. Given the observed reduction in property tax
rates under Proposal A, the household then has a capital gain of about 3 percent of house value, or .048y.
While this is a non-trivial wealth increase, it will give rise to modest income effects. If this capital gain is
annuitized at a real rate on the order of 5 to 10 percent, it translates to an annual income increase of .2 to .5
percent of y. Other households will have income losses of similar order. The income effects on housing
demand and location choice of idiosyncratic income changes of this order of magnitude will be small.
13
   This type of long-run result would be captured, for example, in the Epple and Sieg (1999) framework.
                                                                                                          11

populations. Therefore, the assumption of inelastic housing supply over the decade seems
a relatively good approximation for Detroit.
3. Of particular importance in urban districts is the presence of non-residential property.
The capitalization results extend when non-residential property is included in the model
as a fixed stock owned by metropolitan residents.14
         From an empirical perspective, Proposition 1 implies that the only effect of the
change in financing is on housing prices. Hence, only the other component, the change in
the level and distribution of expenditures, could potentially give rise to either
demographic changes or school quality effects.15 To investigate such effects, we adopt
the following additional assumptions on the preference function U(v,g,h,y;b).
         A1. Separability: The utility function can be written U(w(g,h),y-v;b),16 where w is
         the “local bundle” of goods accessed by living in a particular location.
         Preferences satisfy the following single-crossing conditions:
                                                ∂ ( ∂∂wv )
         A2. Single-crossing in income:               ∂y
                                                         U =U
                                                                    > 0 (SCI)
                                                ∂ ( ∂∂wv )
         A3. Neutral crossing in ability:              ∂b
                                                             U =U
                                                                    = 0 (NCB)
         Condition SCI implies that, holding housing quantity fixed, high-income
households are willing to pay a higher increment for housing than a low-income
household to obtain an increase in the quality of education. The SCI condition also
implies that, holding the quality of education constant, a high income household will pay
more for a larger house than will a low income household. Condition NCB implies
neutral crossing with respect to ability for education and for housing.17
         Following Epple and Romano (2003), we adopt the following assumption
regarding the joint distribution of ability and income:
         A4. E(b|y) is strictly increasing in y.

14
   Proof is available on request.
15
   If there are multiple equilibrium, it is possible that a switch to another equilibrium might occur. Of
course, this possibility is also present absent the reform.
16
   This is satisfied by many commonly used utility functions including, for example, the Cobb-Douglas
function, a utility function that is additively separable, or a nested CES function.
17
   As discussed further in Epple and Romano (1998), there is limited evidence regarding the effect of own
ability on the willingness to pay for education quality, and we know of no evidence linking own ability and
willingness to pay for housing. Hence, neutral assumptions in this regard are quite natural, and they greatly
simplify the analysis that follows.
                                                                                          12

A4 carries the realistic implication that “school readiness” is increasing in income.


Proposition 2: Necessary conditions for equilibrium. Index all neighborhoods in the
metropolitan area in order of ascending local bundles wk, k=1,…,K. Then equilibrium
exhibits the following properties:
       a. Ascending (wk,vk) pairs: House value ascends in the same order as wk across
       neighborhoods.
       b. Income Stratification: Given two households with equal student ability, if
       household with income y2 resides in a higher-numbered neighborhood than
       household with income y1, then y2 ≥ y1 with equality for at most one income
       level.
       c. Ascending peer quality: Peer quality θk ascends in the same order as wk across
       neighborhoods.
       d. Boundary indifference and strict preference for non-boundary households: For
       each pair of adjacent neighborhoods k and k+1, a household with income level
        y k exists that is indifferent between residing in neighborhood k and k+1. All
       other households in the district strictly prefer their residential choice.
Proof: Results a, b, and d follow from proof of the analogous results in Epple and
Romano (2003). While Epple and Romano take housing to be homogeneous and divisible
with each individual consuming exactly one unit of housing, their proofs of the above
results nonetheless generalize to the environment studied here. Result c follows from b
(income stratification) and Assumption A4. ■
       For the following proposition, we employ the following additional assumption:
       A5: Given any si, sj, hi, hj, and θ such that w(g(θ,si),hi) ≥ w(g(θ,sj),hj), if θi>θj,
       then w(g(θι,si),hi) > w(g(θj,sj),hj).
To interpret A5, consider two local bundles i and j with a common peer quality and with
bundle j at least weakly preferred to bundle i. Holding unchanged other components of
the bundles, replace the common peer quality with any pair of peer qualities that ascend
between i and j. Then the dominance of i by j is preserved and becomes strict. A5 holds
trivially when both sj ≥ si and hj ≥ hi. The value of the assumption is for cases when s and
h do not ascend in the same order.
                                                                                                       13



Proposition 3: Equilibrium exists.18
Proof: We present a constructive proof. Exploiting Proposition 1, we can, without loss of
generality, treat expenditures on education as financed by a proportional income tax.
Hence, let τ be the rate required to finance the combined educational expenditures of all
districts. Recall that income y is endowed income net of the income tax plus revenues
from housing: y=ye(1-τ+R/Ye) where R is aggregate revenue from housing and Ye is
aggregate endowed income of all households in the metropolitan area. Index
neighborhoods by ascending w(g( θ ,sk),hk) where θ is mean ability of the population of
students in the metropolitan area, and sk is expenditure per student in the district in which
neighborhood k is located. Next, stratify the population across neighborhoods by income,
with boundary incomes, yk, ascending in the same order as k. A4 then implies that peer
average abilities, θk, ascend in the same order as k. From A5 it then follows that
w(g(θk,sk),hk) ascends in the same order as k. Since the size of the metropolitan
population equals the size of the metropolitan housing stock, a price normalization is
required. We set the price, v1, in community k=1 so that 0<v1<(1-τ)ym. This assures that
it is feasible for the poorest household in the metropolitan area to purchase housing, and
hence it is feasible for all households in the metropolitan area to purchase housing.
        The boundary-indifference condition between communities k and k+1 is:
        U(w(g(θk,sk),hk),yk-vk)= U(w(g(θk+1,sk+1),hk+1),yk-vk+1)              (10)
For k=1, the only unknown in the above condition is v2. Hence, solve this equation for v2.
Proceeding recursively, solve the boundary-indifferences conditions for v3,…,vK. By
construction, then, housing markets clear in all neighborhoods, district budgets are
balanced, and the necessary conditions of Proposition 2 hold. The latter necessary
conditions embody optimal school and housing choice by all households.
        It only remains to show that these conditions are satisfied when the revenues
distributed from housing, R, equal revenues collected from housing. Let revenues
collected from housing be denoted φ(R) where:


18
  Nechyba (1999) proves existence in his framework while also allowing voting over local public good
levels. We cannot simply invoke his proof because of extensions of the preference and achievement
discussed earlier in this section.
                                                                                              14

                 K
        φ ( R) = ∑ nk vk ( R)                                           (11)
                k =1

The dependence of house prices on R, vj(R), arises via the distribution of house rents that
households receive. Appendix A establishes that there is a fixed point R* such that:
        R*=φ( R*)                                                       (12)    ■
Remarks: The proof provides a computationally simple method of computing
equilibrium. Array the w(g( θ ,sk),hk) in ascending order. Allocate households to
neighborhoods in the same order. For a given R, recursive application of the boundary
indifference conditions determines all housing prices. A line search on R, calculating
prices recursively on each trial value of R, can be used to find R*.
Corollary 1: If there are no peer effects, the equilibrium is unique.
Proof: This result follows directly from the argument in Proposition 2. ■
Corollary 2: There is an equilibrium before the reform and an equilibrium after the
reform such that the ordering of incomes across neighborhoods within each district is the
same before and after the reform. If peer effects operate at the district level, then incomes
ascend across neighborhoods in the same order as house qualities in all equilibria.
Proof: In the equilibrium constructed in Proposition 3, incomes ascend in the same order
as housing qualities within districts. Since the reform does not alter the ordering of house
qualities, the first claim then follows. The second claim follows from observing that the
order of w(g( θ ι,si),hij) within district i depends only on the ordering of house qualities, hij
in the district. ■
        We next present two further results which suggest that demographic effects are
likely modest. Coupled with Proposition 1, this suggests that the effects of expenditure
equalization will be reflected primarily in property value and school quality changes,
with little impact on the demographic composition of district populations. Absent change
in population demographics, there will be no changes in peer qualities. Hence, school
quality changes will be due to expenditure changes. We employ the following definition.
Definition: Index districts in order of ascending mean house quality. Housing is stratified
across districts if the highest-quality house in district i has quality no higher than the
lowest-quality house in i+1.
                                                                                              15

Proposition 4: (Across-District Income and Ability Stratification) If housing stocks are
stratified across districts and school expenditure ascends in the same order as house
quality, there exists an equilibrium in which households are stratified by income and peer
average ability ascends in the same order as income.
Proof: This follows immediately from Proposition 3.
Remarks:
1. Proposition 4 implies that, following a school finance equalization that preserves the
ordering of school expenditures, there is an equilibrium in which household
demographics are unchanged by the reform.
2. Proposition 4 relies on the strong assumption of housing stratification across districts.
In reality, there is generally incomplete stratification of housing across districts. Indeed,
an attractive feature of the Nechyba (1999) framework is that incomplete income
stratification across districts can arise because of imperfect housing stratification.
Nonetheless, the proposition is of interest since school districts with higher spending per
student also typically have higher quality housing.
3. If housing is imperfectly stratified, then the school reform may induce demographic
changes, though it need not.
        We have assumed thus far that peer effects operate at the school level, which is a
natural characterization with a neighborhood school system. However, with frictionless
open enrollment within each district, peer qualities would be equalized across schools in
a district. When peer qualities equalize across schools in a district, the following holds.
Corollary 3: Suppose peer qualities equalize across all schools in a district and housing
is stratified across districts. Then, for all equilibria in which school qualities ascend in the
same order as housing qualities, there is a unique allocation of households to districts and
to housing qualities.
Proof: Order all neighborhoods in the metropolitan area in order of ascending housing
quality, and index neighborhoods by k =1,…,K. With school qualities ascending in the
same order as housing qualities, households stratify by income in the same order as k.
Uniqueness of the equilibrium then follows from the uniqueness of the ordering of k. ■
Remark: This corollary does not establish that there is a unique equilibrium. If house
qualities and school expenditures are similar in two districts, peer effects may be large
                                                                                                         16

enough to offset those differences creating an additional equilibrium in which the district
with the lower housing and school expenditure is occupied by higher income
households.19 In what follows, we focus on the case in which higher income households
occupy the higher quality houses.
         Proposition 4’s implication of unchanging household demographics follows from
the relatively strong assumptions that housing stratification and housing quality
ascending in the same order as school spending. We note and emphasize that the
assumption of housing stratification is used only in the proof of Proposition 4 and
Corollary 3. No other results invoke this strong assumption. Furthermore, conditions we
have shown to rule out demographic changes are sufficient but not necessary. Even
absent housing stratification, school reform may not provide incentives that induce
demographic changes. Also, as a practical matter, locations with higher spending tend to
have higher housing quality as well. Hence, we believe our assumptions are likely to be a
relatively good approximation in many metropolitan areas.
         Another important change that took place over the decade under consideration in
Detroit is the growth of household income in real terms, with proportionately greater
gains at the lower and upper ends of the income distribution (see Figure 3).20 It is useful
to analyze this change in two steps. First we consider a mean-preserving change in the
income distribution that reflects the relative increase in incomes by lower- and upper-
income households. Then we consider a proportionate increase in all incomes.
         Figure 4 shows the mean-adjusted cumulative distributions of income for 1990
and 2000 in Detroit. As the figure shows, the 2000 distribution crosses the 1990
distribution first from below and then from above, although the second crossing is less
pronounced than the first. Recall that F(.) and G(.) denote respectively the distributions in
the initial (1990) and final (2000) periods. Figures 3 and 4 motivate our focus, in the




19
  See also Rothstein (2006) for a model in which high quality peers may offset low school effectiveness.
20
   In comparing the 1990 and 2000 income distributions, we faced the challenge that the income bins
differed across Census years and were expressed in current rather than constant dollars. To create Figure 4,
we increased the bounds of all 1990 income bins by 50.43 percent (the amount by which average
metropolitan current income increased from 1990 to 2000). We then fitted each CDF using a high order
polynomial, obtaining an essentially perfect fit for each. The fitted CDF’s, which have the same mean, are
plotted in Figure 4 and were inverted to construct Figure 3.
                                                                                                         17

development that follows, on understanding the effect on housing prices of a shift in the
income distribution in which F(.) and G(.) cross at least once.
         To set the stage for this analysis, we strengthen assumption A2 by requiring not
only that indifference curves in the (w,v) plane of households with different incomes
cross only once, but also that the vertical difference between two such indifference curves
is monotone increasing in the local bundle w. Hence, consider households with incomes
y′ and y″ where y′ < y″. Let (w0,v0) be the point at which an indifference curve of y′ and
an indifference of y″ cross, and let (w,v′) and (w,v′′) be defined by:
         U(w,y″-v″;b) = U(w0,y″-v0;b)                                            (13)
         U(w,y′-v′;b) = U(w0,y′-v0;b)                                            (14)
                                              ∂ (v"-v')
         A2S. Strong Single Crossing:            ∂w       >0   (SSC)
Common parametric utility functions that satisfy single-crossing (e.g., Cobb-Douglas,
CES) also satisfy Strong Single Crossing (SSC).
         We continue to choose k=1,…,K such that all neighborhoods in the metropolitan
area are indexed in ascending order of wk. For ease of reference, we will use “left” and
“right” to indicate the relative positions of neighborhoods in this ordering, i.e.,
neighborhood a is left of b if a has a lower index than b . Neighborhoods that are next
to each other in this ordering will be termed “adjacent.”


Proposition 5: Suppose G(y) crosses F(y) twice, once from below at yc1 and once from
above at yc2 where yc1 < yc2. Suppose, in addition, that peer quality changes associated
with a change in the income distribution do not change the relative desirability of the
housing-local public good pairs across neighborhoods.21 Then the change in housing
prices will exhibit two peaks.
Proof: Let kc1 and kc2 be the indices of communities occupied by yc1 and yc2 respectively.
Let yk and yk′ be the incomes of the households indifferent between adjacent
neighborhoods k-1 and k before and after the change in income distribution. Now


21
   If b and y were independent, peer quality changes would not accompany income changes. However, we
have assumed (A4) that b and y are positively correlated. Hence, changes in peer quality may arise via this
correlation when the income distribution changes. We assume for Proposition 5 that such changes are not
large enough to change the relative desirability of local bundles.
                                                                                                                                                  18


yk′ > yk for all k ≤ kc1 and for all k > kc2. SSC then implies that Δvk −1 < Δvk for all k ≤ kc1

and for all k > kc2. Similarly, SSC implies that Δvk −1 > Δvk for all k ∈ (kc1, kc2]. It follows

that there is a peak at kc1 and a “valley” at kc2, i.e. Δvkc 2 −1 > Δvkc 2 < Δvkc 2 +1 .                                                      ■

Corollary 4: The change in housing prices will exhibit as many peaks as there are
crossings of the mean-adjusted income distributions.
Proof: The proof extends the approach to the proof of Proposition 5.


                   For our final result, we specialize to Cobb-Douglas utility and production
functions. Hence, the utility function is: u(g,h,c;b)=gαcγhδbβ, and the school production
function is g = s1− ρθ ρ . In addition, we assume that the distribution of [ln(y), ln(b)] prior
to the policy change is bivariate normal.22


Proposition 6: An equilibrium of this model is also an equilibrium if all incomes
increase by the same proportion, m, all house prices increase by proportion m, and
spending on education is unchanged in all districts.
Proof: Consider a household n with income yn and ability bn for which (i,j) is its preferred
location in the initial equilibrium. Then:

     (θ   ρ 1− ρ α
                        )   [ yn − pij hij ]γ hijδ bnβ ≥ (θiρ' si1'− ρ ) [ yn − pi ' j ' hi ' j ' ]γ hiδ' j 'bnβ
                                                                           α
          i   si                                                                                                   ∀i ' ≠ i and ∀j ' ≠ j      (15)

Now, suppose all incomes and house prices increase by proportion m, which implies that
all abilities and peer qualities increase by proportion m’.23 If no household other than n
relocates, then for household n, the preceding expression implies:

     ((m'θ ) s ) [my
                   i
                        ρ   1− ρ α
                            i              n   − mpij hij ] hijδ (m' b ) ≥
                                                              γ                β

                                                                                                                                       (16)
     ((m'θ ) s ) [my
                   i'
                        ρ   1− ρ α
                            i'             n   − mpi ' j ' hi ' j ' ] hiδ' j ' (m' b ) ∀i ' ≠ i and j ' ≠ j
                                                                  γ                 β



Thus (i,j) continues to be household n’s most preferred location. Since this argument
applies for all n, the initial equilibrium is also an equilibrium when all incomes and house
prices increase by proportion m.                                                                                                              ■

22
   See Nechyba (2000) and Epple and Romano (1998) for computational models with induced Cobb-
Douglas utilities. Epple and Romano (1998) also use the above joint distribution of income and ability.
23
   Under the assumption that [ln(y), ln(b)] is normally distributed, it can be shown that in response to a
proportionate increase in all incomes, the increase in abilities is proportional to the increase in incomes, and
mean peer ability increases by the same proportion in all neighborhoods. Details are available on request.
                                                                                         19

Remark: The preceding proof also applies if expenditure on education increases by
proportion m everywhere, which would be the case if each district’s education
expenditure were financed entirely by the district’s property tax revenue. An important
implication of this proposition is that, absent other changes, house prices rise by a given
proportion when all incomes increase by the same proportion even though the
equilibrium allocations do not change. In particular, then, if all incomes increase by the
same proportion between two successive time periods and housing stocks do not change,
house prices will increase by the same proportion.
       To summarize, our analysis implies that the reform will lead to limited changes in
demographic compositions across districts and neighborhoods, and capitalization of
property tax and expenditure changes. The model also implies that changes in the level
and distribution of income will result in house value changes that incorporate two
components. One component is appreciation associated with the increase in the level of
income (Proposition 6). The other component is comprised of relative price changes
induced by changes in the income distribution (Proposition 5). When neighborhoods are
ordered by 1990 income rank, changes in house values will exhibit as many peaks as
there are crossings of the pre- and post-reform mean-adjusted income distributions. In the
next section we present empirical evidence related to these predictions.

4. Empirical Evidence

In this section we begin by examining evidence related to the model’s predictions on
ordering, stratification and demographic compositions. Then we analyze whether the
predictions for property values hold in the data. We conclude by exploring the
implications of our findings for school quality.

Evidence on Ordering and Stratification

Our model delivers predictions for ordering and stratification across neighborhoods and
districts as well as changes in property values. To assess these predictions, we use data at
both geographic levels. In the Census Bureau’s geography, the closest approximation to a
neighborhood is a Census tract. Hence, we collected 1990 and 2000 data at the tract level.
                                                                                                         20

Since 36 percent of Census tracts in Detroit changed boundaries over the decade, all our
data are normalized to the 2000 boundaries as we use Census data from the 1990 Long
Form in 2000 Boundaries and the 2000 Long Form. Our data include 1,122 tracts with at
least fifty specified owner-occupied housing units in 1990 and 2000. We used
Geographic Information Software to associate Census tracts and school districts. As for
the district-level data, demographics and house values come from the School District
Data Book; achievement comes from the Michigan Department of Education and is
measured by the fourth-grade average pass rate in the math exam, and financial data
come from the Bulletin 1014 published by the Michigan Department of Treasury. All
monetary values are expressed in 2000 dollars. In what follows, “income”, “house value”
and “rental value” refer to averages at the corresponding geographic level.
         In our theoretical, one-period model the value of a house, v, equals its per-period
tax-inclusive rental price p times the units of housing services h. Since a house is actually
a durable good whose price equals the net present value of its services net of property tax
payments (Yinger et al (1988)), we need to derive our theoretical value, v, from observed
house prices, V. Following Poterba’s (1992) relationship between implicit rent v and
house value V for an owner who itemizes income tax deductions, and adjusting for the
sales tax to conform to our theoretical definition of rental price, we obtain the following:

                (
           ⎡ 1 −τ f
         v=⎢
                         ) ( i + tˆ ) + η + μ + χ − π ⎤⎥ V
                                                                                 (17)
           ⎢                    1+ ω                    ⎥
           ⎣                                            ⎦
where the term in brackets is the user cost rate, τ f is the marginal federal income tax

rate, i is the nominal mortgage interest rate, tˆ is the property tax rate, η is risk premium
for housing investments, μ and χ are maintenance and depreciation respectively, π is

the rate of expected house appreciation, and ω is the sales tax rate.24 In the Detroit
metropolitan area, the average marginal federal income tax rate τ f for a household was

equal to 19.16 percent and 18.13 percent in 1990 and 2000 respectively; the mortgage
rate i was equal to 10.22 percent and 7.26 percent respectively; the five-year average
appreciation rate π was equal to 6.8 percent and 8.62 percent respectively, and the sales

24
  Note that state income taxes do not affect the relationship between house value and implicit rent unless
housing expenses are deducted for the state income tax, which is not the case in Michigan.
                                                                                                           21


tax ω was equal to 4 and 6 percent respectively. Local property tax rates ranged between
1.7 and 3.9 percent in 1990, and were equal to 0.6 percent in 2000. Following Poterba,
we use η = .04 and χ = μ = .02 . Finally, we compute 1990 and 2000 tract average rental
values v by applying (17) to the corresponding tract-level average house values V and the
user cost rate. 25
         Since we do not observe house quality h or local bundles w, we construct
measures for them as follows. Following Ferreyra (2007), we construct a tract-level
housing quality index that captures housing physical characteristics and neighborhood
amenities, excluding public school quality. We do so by regressing the logarithm of tract
average rental price on a set of neighborhood characteristics and school district fixed
effects, then making each tract’s neighborhood quality index equal to the tract's fitted
rental value net of school district fixed effects.26 The motivation for this regression is
that, broadly speaking, rental prices reflect housing characteristics, neighborhood
amenities, and public school quality. To construct the tract-level local index w we adopt
the following parameterization: w = g α hδ , with α = 0.12 and δ = 0.16 .27 In this index, g
(achievement) is constant within a district while h varies across tracts and districts.
         According to Proposition 2, income, rental value and the local bundle ascend in
the same order across neighborhoods in equilibrium. Hence, panel (a) of Table 1 shows
tract-level correlations of income, rental value and the local index, w, for 1990 and 2000.
Corollary 2 of Proposition 3 implies that the within-district ordering of income, rental
value and the local index is the same before and after the reform. Thus, panel (b) in Table
1 shows the partial correlation of each of these variables across the years 1990 and 2000

25
   We calculated the average marginal federal income tax rate using Taxsim from www.nber.org along with
the 1990 and 2000 distributions of household income for Detroit. Mortgage rates are from the Federal
Housing Board. We calculated the five-year average appreciation rates using data from the Office of
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. The property tax rates used in these calculations equal half of the
actual rates because property is assessed at half of its market value in Michigan, although the results do not
vary substantially when using the actual rates.
26
   For 1990, we use 1990 tract-level data from the 1990 Long Form in 2000 Boundaries. As neighborhood
characteristics in the regression, we use tract average housing characteristics from the Census, and linear
and quadratic terms in tract distance to the metropolitan area center. See Ferreyra (2002) for more details
on the computation of the housing qualities.
27
   These parameter values come from column (1) of Table 3 in Ferreyra (2007), who structurally estimates
a general equilibrium model of residential and school choice closely related to the one presented in this
paper. To construct h for 2000, we use the 1990 coefficients from the rental value regression described
above and apply them to 2000 data. Results are robust to the use of spending per student rather than
achievement in the w index.
                                                                                                         22

controlling for district fixed effects. The high correlations of incomes and rental values in
panels (a) and (b) lend support to Propositions 2 and 3.
         Proposition 4 establishes conditions such that house quality, income, achievement
and rental values ascend in the same order across districts. Hence, panel (c) of Table 1
displays 1990 and 2000 district-level correlations among these variables. Since
Proposition 4 also establishes conditions such that the ordering of each of these variables
across districts is the same in both years, Panel (d) of Table 1 shows the correlation
between the 1990 and 2000 values for each of these variables. The high correlations in
panels (c) and (d) provide evidence in favor of Proposition 4. The correlations with
respect to achievement test scores are less strong.28 Provided the conditions established in
Proposition 4 hold, the across-neighborhood ordering of income, rental value and the
local index should be the same in 1990 and 2000. To assess this implication, panel (e) of
Table 1 displays the tract-level correlation for these variables between 1990 and 2000.
The high correlations in panel (e) support the implication.
         An alternative way to assess the ordering and stratification predictions is the
analysis of rank order violations (see Table 2). Proposition 2, for instance, predicts that
income, rental value and the local bundle have the same ordering across neighborhoods.
If this prediction holds in the data, then the ranking of tracts by the local index should be
the same as the ranking by income. Thus, counting the number of pair wise rank order
violations between the local index and income provides an empirical assessment of the
prediction. A similar reasoning can be applied to assess the remaining predictions. Since
the metropolitan area contains 1,122 tracts and 83 districts, there are 628,881 possible
pair wise rank order violations in tract-level data and 3,402 in district-level data.29
         Columns (1) and (2) investigate rank order violations of income and rental value
with respect to the local index at the tract level for 1990 and 2000, respectively. As


28
   Although Table 1’s correlations involving achievement are comparatively low, it should be kept in mind
that the achievement measure is likely to be affected by substantial measurement error, as Kane and Staiger
(2002) have documented. In principle, such error would tend to decline with district size. Indeed, when we
compute weighted correlations taking into account district size, all the correlations involving achievement
rise. Perhaps a more serious issue is the imperfect measure that achievement scores provide of the
underlying construct of interest, discussed further in the section below on school quality.
29
   From a list of N elements, N(N-1) pairs of distinct elements can be formed. In half of them the first
element will be no smaller than the second, and in the other half the first element will be smaller than the
second. Hence, N(N-1)/2 is the maximum number of pair wise rank order violations in a set of N elements.
                                                                                                      23

column (1) indicates, in 1990 the income ordering of only 14.1 percent of tracts in 1990
differs from the local index ordering, and the rental value ordering of only 10.8 percent of
tracts differs from the local index ordering. The results are very similar for 2000. Thus,
columns (1) and (2) provide additional support for Proposition 2. Also consistent with our
correlation analysis, column (3) provides evidence that income, rental value and the local
index have approximately the same ranking in 1990 and 2000.
        Since Proposition 4 relies on the assumption of housing stratification, columns (4)
and (5) investigate the validity of this assumption through the following procedure. First,
we sort districts by increasing order of district average housing quality. Then, within each
district we sort tracts by increasing order of housing quality. If there were stratification
across districts, the resulting list of tracts should be perfectly sorted by housing quality –
equivalently, each tract’s position in the list should be equal to its quality ranking in the
metropolitan area. Thus, counting the number of pair wise rank order violations in the
tract-level housing quality list offers an assessment of the stratification assumption. The
small percent of pair wise rank order violations each year provides reasonable evidence
that the assumption holds in the data. Addressing Proposition 4, columns (6) and (7)
investigate rank order violations of income, rental value and achievement relative to
housing quality at the district level. These results, illustrated in Figure 5 for 1990,
indicate that the ordering of these variables is approximately the same across districts
each year. Finally, column (8) provides evidence that housing quality, income, rental
value and achievement have the same ordering across years.
        The prediction that the income ordering across districts and neighborhoods is the
same before and after the reform suggests that each period the demographic cross section
will be a replica of the previous one. Given that people age, this does not rule out
household relocation across neighborhoods and districts. Rather, it implies that arrivals of
young households and departures of old households are such that neighborhood and
district demographics are maintained. The evidence presented in Tables 1 and 2 indicates
that district and neighborhood demographics are indeed highly stable.30


30
  To our knowledge, the only other studies that examine the impact of school finance reform on
community demographics are Aaronson (1999), who uses panel data from several states, Keely (2005),
who focuses on the Kentucky school finance reform, and Roy (2004), who studies the Michigan reform.
None of these studies finds evidence of demographic changes.
                                                                                                            24

         To summarize, our correlation and rank order violation analyses lend considerable
support to our ordering and stratification predictions, particularly with respect to incomes
and rental values. The correlations of the local index with income are also relatively
supportive. The evidence with respect to achievement scores is less strong. However, as
we noted earlier, achievement is the most difficult of the model’s constructs to measure
accurately. We now turn to the predictions for house values and capitalization.


Evidence on Property Values and Capitalization


Our model suggests that the following regression, run on neighborhood level data, should
capture the changes in house values predicted by Propositions 1, 3, 5 and 6:

         Δˆ V = aV + b1ΔtV
                        ˆ + b2 Δs + b3 rank + b4 rank 2                            (18)
where Δ represents changes between 1990 and 2000, V stands for 1990 neighborhood
average value, tˆ is effective property tax rate, s is average local and state revenue, and
rank is the 1990 tract rank by average household income.31 Coefficients b1 and b2 capture
the capitalization of the property tax and spending reform, respectively, and b3 and b4
capture the effect of the mean-preserving change in the income distribution. Parameter a
is the percentage rate of growth of property values not associated with changes in
property taxes, education spending, or income rank. We normalize (18) by dividing by V:

           Δˆ V          ˆ      Δs      rank      rank 2
                = a + b1Δt + b2    + b3      + b4                                  (19)
            V                   V        V          V
where the constant term represents the proportionate change in housing price associated
with a proportionate increase in income.32,33


31
   The effective property tax rate is half of the nominal tax rate because property is assessed at half of its
market value. Since average house value in 1990 is only reported for specified owner-occupied housing
units (one-family houses on less than 10 acres without a business or medical office on the property), our
1990 and 2000 data on house value pertain to specified owner-occupied housing units. In the average tract
in our sample, these account for about 87 percent of all owner-occupied housing units. Although an
alternative summary of tract value is the median, we chose to focus on the average because the
normalization of the 1990 data to 2000 boundaries did not have access to individual-level data but to block
level data, which were then aggregated up to the tract level. Hence, the resulting tract medians are not the
actual medians which would be obtained through access to the original individual-level data but rather the
weighted averages of block-level medians.
32
   Hu and Yinger (2007) also exploit the difference in tract-level average house value between 1990 and
2000 to study the capitalization of school district consolidation in the state of New York.
                                                                                                           25

         Columns (1) and (3) of Table 3 present the results for regression (19) for the full
sample. To interpret the coefficient on millage change, consider an unanticipated small
change in tˆ in a short run interval when the tax-inclusive implicit rent v does not change
and the house value V changes only because of changes in tˆ . Then the rate of change in
V with respect to tˆ is: 34

         1 ∂V
               =−
                                     (1 − τ )
                                          f
                                                                                  (20)
         V ∂tˆ        (
                  ⎡ 1−τ f
                  ⎣           ) ( i + tˆ ) + η + μ + χ − π ⎤⎦
Given our measures for the components of the user cost rate, the rate of change in V with
respect to tˆ implied by equation (20) is -7.49 and -14.70 for 1990 and 2000, respectively.
Thus, other things constant, our regression should yield a value for b1 on the order of -
1500 to -700 if property taxes were fully capitalized. Our coefficients on millage change
in columns (1) and (3) fall in this range and hence are consistent with full capitalization.35
They imply an average increase in property values close to 10 percent.
                                                                                                     Δs
         To interpret the coefficient on the normalized revenue change, note that b2                    can
                                                                                                     V
                   s Δs                                                             s
be written as b2        , implying that the elasticity of house value is given by b2 . Since
                   V s                                                              V
the district average spending in 1990 was equal to $6,323, and the tract average value
was equal to $105,304, our estimates of the elasticity of house value with respect to
revenue equal 0.48 and 0.41 respectively in columns (1) and (3) of Table 3.36

33
   We do not conduct a similar analysis for renter-occupied housing because rental property is categorized
as non-homestead in Michigan (Lockwood (2002)), and the tax reform was less favorable to non-
homestead than homestead property (see Section 2). In our sample, for instance, the average district
achieved a non-homestead property tax reduction of approximately 6 mills. The effect of such a small
change would hardly be identified with any precision. Also the increase in the taxable value of homestead
property was capped at the lower of the rate of inflation or 5% per year. Given the low post-reform millage
rate, the effect of this tax cap on properties that appreciated faster than the cap is quite small.
34
   We believe this approach, employing the user cost of housing, has not previously been used to deriving
implications for capitalization. Yinger et al (1998) presents the conventional derivation.
35
   In their review of capitalization studies, Yinger et al (1998) document modest rates of tax capitalization.
In a study published shortly afterwards, Palmon and Smith (1998) find evidence of full capitalization. More
recently, Fischel (2001) reviews capitalization studies and points to flaws and limitations in their design
that drive the partial capitalization result.
36
   In judging this correlation, it is important to bear in mind that education expenditure is an annualized
value whereas property value measures the present value of the flow of housing services. When the
elasticity estimates are interpreted with this in mind, the estimates are quite plausible. For instance, based
on Table’s 3 column 1, the predicted increase in value for a tract with the district average increase in
revenue ($650) is about $5,200. Annuitized with a rate of 5 or 10 percent, this increase in revenue is
                                                                                                           26

         Proposition 5 and the associated corollary establish that, relative to neighborhood
income rank, the changes in house value should have the same number of peaks as there
are crossings of the CDF’s in Figure 4. There is a crossing of the CDF’s toward the lower
end of the income distribution, implying that there should be at least one peak. We find a
second crossing at approximately the 90th percentile of the income distribution. When we
employ a quadratic function of rank, the coefficients on the normalized income rank and
rank squared in column (1) of Table 3 suggest that the change in house prices follows an
inverted U-shaped form. The coefficients of the rank variables in column (3) indicate
another peak at the very top end. The latter is consistent with the second crossing toward
the high end of the income distribution. The model implies that the peaks should occur at
the income levels at which the CDF’s cross. The peaks implied by the regressions in
columns (1) and (3) are broadly consistent with this prediction. Given that our
polynomial function is an approximation to the unknown function characterizing the
pattern of price changes, we view the shape of the polynomial as quite encouraging
evidence in support of this prediction.37 Finally, the constants indicate the estimated
proportionate change in house values. According to Proposition 6, the estimated constant
should be of similar magnitude to the increase in real net-of-tax average income, which
was approximately 12 percent between 1990 and 2000. The estimated constant terms in
columns (1) and (3) of Table 3 are not significantly different from 12.
         Note that all coefficients in Table 3 are statistically significant at the 5 percent
level when the errors are not corrected for clustering. Correcting the standard errors for
arbitrary within-district correlation and heteroskedasticity causes our standard errors rise,
particularly for the two district-level variables and the constant (millage and expenditure
changes are invariant across neighborhoods in a district). While the coefficients on
expenditure change remain significant when standard errors are cluster corrected, the
coefficients on the millage change and the constant terms do not. Nonetheless, we view
the correct magnitude of these coefficients as encouraging, while recognizing the lack of

between $6,500 and $13,000. Hence, the increase in revenue is capitalized at a rate between 40 and 80
percent ($5,200/$13,000 and $5,200/$6,500 respectively). Dee (2000) conducts a similar calculation to
study the capitalization of school finance reform. Using discount rates of 5 or 10 percent, his results imply
capitalization rates between 50 and 100 percent, which are comparable to ours.
37
   When we estimate the regression in column (1) of Table 3 without the functions of income rank, the
coefficients on tax and revenue change rise by about 50 percent. These results highlight the importance of
controlling for the effects of changes in the income distribution.
                                                                                         27

precision of the estimated effects of tax changes that arises due to the intra-district
correlation of the observations.
       The investigation of the robustness of our findings proves to be reassuring. There
are seven Census tracts with appreciation rates above 200 percent, which is higher than
the 99th percentile of appreciation rates. To verify that these outliers do not dominate our
regression results, columns (2) and (4) present estimates for the dataset that excludes
them. The results differ little from those in columns (1) and (3).
       In our experimentation with higher order polynomials of rank, we find, not
surprisingly, that the estimate of the constant term is sensitive to the order of the
polynomial (compare columns (1) and (3), and (2) and (4)) of Table 3). For instance,
Figure 6 displays the predicted increases in house values associated with estimating a
cubic regression while imposing alternative values for the constant term. Since
Proposition 6 implies that a value of 12 would be consistent with the observed increase in
average household income, we use estimates from a regression including a cubic function
of income rank and an intercept of 12 to calculate the predicted effects of income rank on
house value. These effects imply median and mean changes in house prices of 6.6 percent
and 9.6 percent respectively. Hence, the effects of changes in the shape of the income
distribution are non-trivial in magnitude.
       We repeat our analysis using Weighted Least Squares (see Table 4) with the
square root of the number of specified owner-occupied housing units as our weighting
variable. The WLS results tell qualitatively the same story as the OLS results, reinforcing
the robustness of our findings. Nonetheless, since our analysis employs aggregate data,
the concern exists that changes in the composition of the housing stock might be driving
our results. Thus, we repeat our analysis only for tracts with low construction and
destruction rates, low vacancy and high ownership, and small changes in vacancy and
ownership. While we do not report the details in the interest of space, the results prove to
be quite robust to these screenings of the data.
       Although our evidence is consistent with full capitalization, this evidence faces
two substantive limitations – namely, the use of aggregate rather than individual-level
data, and a broad time window (1990-2000) around the reform. Ideally, we would
circumvent these problems by observing housing units sold twice, once before and once
                                                                                                           28

after the reform, during a small window of time around it. Such an analysis was carried
out by Guilfoyle (1998a, 1998b), who used data on houses sold both in 1992 and 1996.
His preferred specification using house-level data yields evidence of a capitalization rate
below full capitalization. His estimates using mean sales prices for each community in
Oakland County between 1990 and 1996, which are more comparable to ours because
they rely on aggregate data, are closer to full capitalization.38
         To summarize, our empirical results provide evidence of full capitalization of the
property tax reduction, capitalization of the revenue reform, and changes in house values
associated with changes in the income distribution over the decade. This evidence is
consistent with the theoretical predictions emerging from our model.


Effects on School Quality


The evidence that indicates limited changes in district demographics implies that peer
quality in public schools should not have changed much. Absent changes in peer quality,
the observed changes in school quality should be solely related with changes in revenue
according to our model. Hence, we now investigate changes in school achievement over
the decade using fourth grade math pass rates in 1991 and 1999, depicted in Figure 7.
Column (1) of Table 5 shows the regression of the change in pass rate on the change in
revenues. According to this coefficient, an extra thousand dollars is associated with about
six additional percentage points in the fourth grade pass rate. This is close to 40 percent
of the standard deviation in 1991 test scores, similar to the 40 or 50 percent obtained by
Roy (2004) and slightly above some of the estimates from Papke (2005).
         Nonetheless, column (2) of Table 5 suggests some caution, as similar evidence
presented by Cullen and Loeb (2004) does for the entire state. Once we control for the
1991 pass rate, the coefficient on revenue falls due to the negative correlation between
the increase in revenue and the initial pass rate. Thus, at least part of the positive
association between revenue and achievement gains might be driven by the fact that the

38
  Since Guilfoyle’s effective property tax rate is divided by a real interest rate of 3 percent, we divide his
tax rate coefficients by 0.03 to compare to ours. Given that his dependent variable is the log of property
values, these coefficients should be between -15 and -7 to be consistent with full capitalization. After
dividing by 0.03, the resulting coefficients are between -5.5 and -3.5 for his dual sales sample, and between
-9 and -8 for his aggregate data.
                                                                                                          29

districts with the largest revenue gains had the highest potential for academic gains
because they had the lowest initial achievement. Furthermore, the mere magnitude of the
decade’s improvement suggests that factors other than the revenue increase may have
been associated with the achievement gains, not least of which might be the progressive
learning about the test, first administered in 1991, on the part of students and teachers.39
         To summarize, the data provide evidence of capitalization of the property tax and
revenue reform, and of the house value changes associated with changes in the income
distribution. Furthermore, the data suggest that although the reform favored the low-
revenue districts, demographics in these (or other) districts did not change much.
Nonetheless, low-revenue districts experienced the largest achievement gains, although
these might not have been fully associated with revenue gains.


6. Concluding Remarks


We investigate whether the school funding and property tax reform implemented in
Michigan in 1994 caused general equilibrium effects in the Detroit metropolitan area.
Our stylized model of the reform implies that we should primarily expect changes in
house values and revenues, capitalization of the tax and revenue reform, no demographic
changes, and school quality improvement associated to the revenue increase. These
predictions are broadly consistent with the data. While the predictions on demographics
and school quality rely on the initial equilibrium satisfying certain conditions, these are
not overly restrictive. A further contribution of the paper is the analysis of the effects of
the shift of the income distribution in the Detroit metropolitan area. We have decomposed
these changes into a change in the mean and a mean-preserving change for analytical
purposes, and have found empirical support for the predicted effect of such changes. The
analysis of the effects of changes in the income distribution is of interest in its own right,
and further research might apply the theoretical framework presented here to shed light

39
   Fuller et. al. (2006) provide extensive evidence that state achievement tests often register improvements
when little or no improvement is found on national tests of the same student population, reporting
“…yawning gaps between federal and state test results…”. Roy (2003) provides evidence that Michigan’s
academic gains are much smaller when measured by federal rather than state tests. Whereas the adoption
of public school choice, charter schools and accountability measures may have boosted achievement,
Courant et al (2003) document little activity in this regard in the Detroit metropolitan area by 2000.
                                                                                        30

on some of the dramatic differences in house value appreciation across different
metropolitan areas over the past decade.
       Our analysis does not incorporate private schools. Some results such as
Proposition 1 extend immediately when there are private schools. Thus, our model
predicts that the tax instrument changes associated with the Michigan reforms would not
affect the allocation between public and private schools. Other results can be extended
when suitably amended. For example, the ascending bundles property applies if all
neighborhood public schools continue to attract students, i.e., no neighborhood school is
entirely supplanted by private schools. Other results do not extend. In particular, as
Nechyba (1999, 2000) has emphasized, households attending private schools locate
without regard to public school quality. Thus, the income stratification property in
Proposition 2(b) need not hold in the presence of private schools. However, private
schools serve a small proportion of students, and we would expect that the modest
changes in public school expenditure from the Michigan reform would have little impact
on the allocation of students between public and private schools. Indeed, the change in
the proportion of students attending private schools in the Detroit metropolitan area was
only 0.7 percentage points over the period from 1990 to 2000. Given the relatively small
“market share” of private schools, we would not expect the effects of the Michigan public
school reforms to be significantly altered by the presence of private schools.
       Our analysis rests, inter alia, on the assumption that housing stocks are fixed. In
the long run, this assumption is clearly untenable. Indeed, recent research (Brueckner and
Rosenthal (2005)) suggests that, over the long term, redevelopment may have a
transformative effect on urban areas. As we noted in the discussion of our empirical
analysis, substantial redevelopment may have occurred in some Census tracts in the
Detroit metropolitan area. Thus, the decade-long interval to which we are restricted by
data may be stretching the limits of the fixed-stock assumption. Nonetheless, the broad
congruence between the model’s predictions and our empirical findings suggests that the
framework can be helpful in assessing short- to medium-term effects of policy changes.
Hence, we believe that our analytical perspective is useful in understanding the effects of
the Michigan reform and that similar analyses can prove useful more generally in
anticipating effects of actual and prospective school finance reforms.
                                                                                       31


References


Aaronson, D., 1999. The Effect of School Finance Reform on Population Heterogeneity.
        National Tax Journal 52, 5-29.
Addonizio, M., Kearney, P., Prince, H., 1995. Michigan’s High Wire Act. Journal of
        Education Finance 20, 235-269.
Autor, D., Katz, L., Kearney, M., 2005. Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing
        the Revisionists. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11627.
Brueckner, J., Rosenthal, S., 2005. Gentrification and Neighborhood Housing Cycles:
        Will America’s Future Downtowns Be Rich? Working Paper, Syracuse
        University.
Courant, P., Loeb, S., 1997. Centralization of School Finance in Michigan. Journal of
        Policy Analysis and Management 16(1), 114-136.
Courant, P., Cullen, J., Loeb, S., 2003. K-12 Education in Michigan. In: Ballard, C.,
        Courant, P., Drake, D., Fischer, R., Gerber E. (eds.), Michigan at the Millennium:
        A Benchmark and Analysis Of Its Fiscal and Economic Structure. Lansing, MI:
        Michigan State University Press, 299-321.
Cullen, J., Loeb, S., 2004. School Finance Reform in Michigan: Evaluating Proposal A.
        In: John Yinger (ed.), Helping Children Left Behind: State Aid and the Pursuit of
        Educational Equity, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 215-249.
Dee, T., 2000. The Capitalization of Education Finance Reforms. Journal of Law and
        Economics 43, 185-214.
Epple, D., Romano, R., 1998. Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
        Vouchers, and Peer-Group Effects. American Economic Review 88(1), 33-62.
Epple, D., Romano, R., 2003. Neighborhood Schools, Choice, and the Distribution of
        Educational Benefits. In: Caroline Hoxby, ed., The Economics of School Choice.
        Chicago, IL: U. of Chicago Press, 227-286.
Epple, D., Sieg, H., 1999. Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal
        of Political Economy 107(4), 645-681.
Fernandez, R., Rogerson, R., 1998. Public Education and Income Distribution: A
        Dynamic Quantitative Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform, American
        Economic Review 88(4), 813-33.
Fernandez, R., Rogerson, R., 2003. Equity and Resources: An Analysis of Education
        Finance Systems. Journal of Political Economy 111(4), 858-897.
Ferreyra, M., 2002. Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District
        Economies. PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Ferreyra, M., 2007. Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District
        Economies. American Economic Review 97(3), 789-817.
Fischel, W., 2001. The Homevoter Hypothesis: How Home Values Influence Local
        Government Taxation, School Finance, and Land-Use Policies. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
Fuller, B., Gesicki, K., Kang, E., Wright, J., 2006. Is the No Child Left Behind Act
        Working? The Reliability of How States Track Achievement. PACE, University
        of California at Berkeley, Working Paper 06-01.
                                                                                       32

Glaeser, E., Gyourko, J., 2005. Urban Decline and Durable Housing. Journal of Political
        Economy 113(2), 345-375.
Guilfoyle, J., 1998a. The Effect of Property Taxes and School Spending on House Prices:
        Evidence from Michigan’s Proposal A. Mimeo, Michigan Department of
        Treasury.
Guilfoyle, J., 1998b. The Incidence and Housing Market Effects of Michigan’s 1994
        School Finance Reforms. National Tax Association Proceedings, 223-229.
Hu, Y., Yinger, J., 2007. The Impact of School District Consolidation on Housing
        Values. Working Paper, Syracuse University.
Kane, T., Staiger, D., 2002. The Promise and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise School
        Accountability Measures. Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(4), 91-114.
Keely, L., 2005. The Myth of School Finance Equalization, as told by Kentucky and
        North Carolina. University of Wisconsin-Madison Working Paper, 2005.
Loeb, S., 2001. Estimating the Effects of a School Finance Reform: A Framework for a
        Federalist System, Journal of Public Economics 80, 225-247.
Lockwood, A., 2002. School Finance Reform in Michigan. Proposal A: A Retrospective.
        Mimeo, Michigan Department of Treasury.
Nechyba, T., 1999. School Finance Induced Migration Patterns: The Case of Private
        School Vouchers. Journal of Public Economic Theory 1(1), 5-50.
Nechyba, T., 2000. Mobility, Targeting, and Private-School Vouchers. American
        Economic Review 90(1), 130-46.
Nechyba, T., 2004. Prospects for Achieving Equity or Adequacy in Education: The
        Limits of State Aid in General Equilibrium. In: Yinger, J. (ed.), Helping Children
        Left Behind: State Aid and the Pursuit of Educational Equity. Cambridge, MA:
        MIT Press, 111-143.
Palmon, O., Smith, B. New Evidence on Property Tax Capitalization. Journal of Political
        Economy 106(5), 1099-1111.
Papke, L., 2005. The Effects of Spending on Test Pass Rates: Evidence From Michigan.
        Journal of Public Economics 89(5-6), 821-839.
Poterba, J., 1992. Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers. American
        Economic Review 82(2), Papers and Proceedings, 237-242.
Rothstein, J., 2006. Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuations of School
        Characteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition
        among Jurisdictions. American Economic Review 96(4), 1333-1350.
Roy, J., 2004. Effect of a School Finance Reform on Housing Variables and
        Socieconomic Segregation: Evidence from Michigan. Mimeo, Princeton
        University.
Roy, J., 2003. Impact of School Finance Reform on Resource Equalization and Academic
        Performance: Evidence From Michigan. Mimeo, Princeton University.
Yinger, J., 2004. State Aid and the Pursuit of Educational Equity: An Overview. In:
        Yinger J. (ed.), Helping Children Left Behind: State Aid and the Pursuit of
        Educational Equity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 3-58
Yinger, J., Bloom, H., Borsch-Supan, A., Ladd, H., 1988. Property Taxes and House
        Value: The Theory and Estimation of Intrajurisdictional Property Tax
        Capitalization. Boston, MA: Academic Press, Inc..
                                                                                              33

                                       TABLE 1
                          Tract- and District-Level Correlations

        a. 1990 and 2000 Tract-Level Correlations (2000 correlations in italics)

                                    Income Rental Value Local Index

                     Income          1.000

                     Rental Value    0.939        1.000
                                     0.920
                     Local Index     0.842        0.881         1.000
                                     0.840        0.826

           b. Within-District Tract-Level Correlations Across 1990 and 2000

                              Income Rental Value Local Index
                               0.865    0.881       0.861

       c. 1990 and 2000 District-Level Correlations (2000 correlations in italics)

                               Housing Income Rental Value Achievement
                               Quality
               Housing          1.000
               Quality
               Income           0.932     1.000
                                0.879
               Rental Value     0.901     0.969        1.000
                                0.817     0.978
               Achievement      0.674     0.709        0.771          1.000
                                0.487     0.566        0.581

                   d. District-Level Correlations Across 1990 and 2000

                       Housing Income Rental Value Achievement
                       Quality
                        0.951   0.976    0.981        0.739

                    e. Tract-Level Correlations Across 1990 and 2000

                              Income Rental Value Local Index
                               0.944    0.953       0.900


Number of observations: 1122 Census tracts, 83 schools districts. Source: 1990 Long Form in
2000 Boundaries, 2000 Long Form, School District Data Book, Michigan Department of
Education, and authors’ own calculations.
                                                                                                                                                34

                                                                    TABLE 2
                                          Tract- and District-Level Rank Order Violations (in percents)

                                                              1990       2000 1990 and 2000 1990       2000      1990        2000        1990
                                                              tracts     tracts   tracts    tracts     tracts   districts   districts     and
                                                                (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)       2000
                         variables                                                                                                      districts
                                                                                                                                           (8)
Income, Local Index                                            14.1      17.4
Rental Value, Local Index                                      10.8      15.2
2000 Income, 1990 Income                                                                 10.3
2000 Rental Value, 1990 Rental Value                                                     7.2
2000 Local Index, 1990 Local Index                                                       14.6
Housing Quality40                                                                               16.9   17.7
Income, Housing Quality                                                                                           10.2        14.6
Rental Value, Housing Quality                                                                                     16.3        19.5
Achievement, Housing Quality                                                                                     25.8         32.6
2000 Housing Quality, 1990 Housing Quality                                                                                                9.5
2000 Income, 1990 Income                                                                                                                  7.1
2000 Rental Value, 1990 Rental Value                                                                                                       8
2000 Achievement, 1990 Achievement                                                                                                        20.8

Source: authors’ own calculations based on the sources for Table 1.




40
     For an explanation of the rank order violations listed on this row, see the text.
                                                                                                                                                                35



                                                          TABLE 3
                                         Percent Change in Tract Average House Value
                                                                          OLS                                     OLS               OLS             OLS
Independent Variable                                                      Estimates                               Estimates         Estimates       Estimates
                                                                          (1)                                     (2)               (3)             (4)
millage change between 1989 and 1999                                      -1459.745                               -887.060          -1464.941       -890.613
                                                                          (547.294)                               (424.592)         (546.017)       (422.227)
                                                                          [1359.745]                              [1031.058]        [1369.592]      [1034.978]
normalized change in average revenue between 1989 and 1999                8.011                                   7.736             6.998           6.578
                                                                          (1.408)                                 (1.094)           (1.463)         (1.133)
                                                                          [2.300]                                 [2.471]           [2.395]         [2.559]
normalized 1989 average income rank                                       3.961                                   5.037             6.772           8.240
                                                                          (0.709)                                 (0.552)           (1.328)         (1.031)
                                                                          [0.587]                                 [0.562]           [2.071]         [1.486]
normalized 1989 average income rank squared                               -0.005                                  -0.005            -0.014          -0.015
                                                                          (0.001)                                 (0.001)           (0.004)         (0.003)
                                                                          [0.001]                                 [0.001]           [0.006]         [0.005]
normalized 1989 average income rank cubic                                                                                           7.00e-06        7.96e-06
                                                                                                                                    (2.80e-06)      (2.17e-06)
                                                                                                                                    [3.84e-06]      [3.17e-06]
Constant                                                                       22.012                             21.465            19.153          18.212
                                                                               (6.829)                            (5.291)           (6.908)         (5.336)
                                                                               [15.054]                           [14.048]          [13.636]        [12.783]
number of observations                                                         1122                               1115              1122            1115
R2                                                                             0.194                              0.267             0.199           0.276
s.e. of regression                                                             33.417                             25.889            33.339          25.745
mean of dependent variable (in percentage points)                              52.605                             51.012            52.605          51.012
include tracts with percent change in tract average house value > 200 percent? Yes                                No                Yes             No
Unit of observation: Census tract with at least 50 specified owner-occupied housing units in 1990 and 2000.
Millage reduction computed as described in the text. “Normalized” means divided by 1989 tract average house value.
Ordinary Least Squares. Conventional standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors robust to arbitrary within-district correlation in brackets. Data: 1990 Long
Form in 2000 Boundaries and 2000 Long Form
                                                                                                                                                               36



                                                          TABLE 4
                                         Percent Change in Tract Average House Value
                                                                          WLS                                   WLS             WLS                  WLS
Independent Variable                                                      Estimates                             Estimates       Estimates            Estimates
                                                                          (1)                                   (2)             (3)                  (4)
millage change between 1989 and 1999                                      -1173.656                             -996.087        -1101.840            -917.081
                                                                          (362.837)                             (326.588)       (357.341)            (319.537)
                                                                          [922.480]                             [821.129]       [908.548]            [801.012]
normalized change in average revenue between 1989 and 1999                6.899                                 6.308           5.046                4.329
                                                                          (1.042)                               (0.939)         (1.070)              (0.958)
                                                                          [2.630]                               [2.408]         [2.606]              [2.300]
normalized 1989 average income rank                                       5.839                                 6.407           11.312               12.227
                                                                          (0.532)                               (0.480)         (1.042)              (0.934)
                                                                          [0.686]                               [0.859]         [1.418]              [1.152]
normalized 1989 average income rank squared                               -0.006                                -0.006          -0.021               -0.022
                                                                          (0.001)                               (0.001)         (0.003)              (0.002)
                                                                          [0.001]                               [0.001]         [0.004]              [0.003]
normalized 1989 average income rank cubic                                                                                       .0000121             .0000129
                                                                                                                                (2.00e-06)           (1.79e-06)
                                                                                                                                [2.58e-06]           [2.34e-06]
Constant                                                                       14.156                           13.416          7.972                6.840
                                                                               (4.441)                          (3.995)         (4.488)              (4.012)
                                                                               [12.974]                         [12.868]        [11.342]             [11.394]
number of observations                                                         1122                             1115            1122                 1115
R2                                                                             0.329                            0.374           0.350                0.402
s.e. of regression                                                             23.289                           20.903          22.924               20.439
mean of dependent variable (in percentage points)                              47.69                            47.27           47.69                47.27
include tracts with percent change in tract average house value > 200 percent? Yes                              no              Yes                  No
Unit of observation: Census tract with at least 50 specified owner-occupied housing units in 1990 and 2000.
Millage reduction computed as described in the text. “Normalized” means divided by 1989 tract average house value
Weighted Least Squares. Conventional standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors robust to arbitrary within-district correlation in brackets. Data: 1990 Long
Form in 2000 Boundaries and 2000 Long Form
                                                                                                     37



                                      TABLE 5
           Change in Fourth Grade Math Passing Rate Between 1991 and 1999
                               (passing rate in percent)

 Independent Variable                                                                  Estimates   Estimates
                                                                                       (1)         (2)
 change in average revenue between 1989 and 1999                                       6.106       4.682
 (in thousands of dollars)                                                             (1.859)     (1.854)
 1991 fourth grade math passing rate                                                               -0.211
                                                                                                   (0.075)
 Constant                                                                              35.050      44.147
                                                                                       (1.627)     (3.589)
 number of observations                                                                83          83
 R2                                                                                    0.118       0.197
 s.e. of regression                                                                    9.890       9.492
 mean of dependent variable                                                            39.028      39.028

Unit of observation: school district. Ordinary Least Squares. Standard errors in parentheses.
Data: Michigan Bulletin 1014 and Michigan Department of Education.
                                                                                                                            38

                                                 FIGURE 1
                                      Detroit Metropolitan Area in 1990
a                                                                           b
       1990 District Average                                                    1990 District Average House Value
        Household Income                                                           for Owner-Occupied Units




                                       Detroit Public Schools




      Less than $30,000
      $30,000 - $40,000
      $40,000 - $50,000
      $50,000 - $60,000                                                           Less than $40,000
      $60,000 - $70,000                                                           $40,000 - $80,000
      $70,000 - $80,000                                                           $80,000 - $120,000
      $80,000 - $90,000                                                           $120,000 - $160,000
      $90,000 - $100,000                                                          $160,000 - $200,000
                                                0        5       10 Miles                                           0   5    10 Miles
      Greater than $100,000                                                       Greater than $200,000




c                                                                           d
    1989/90 State and Local Revenue                                               1989 Property Tax Millage
              Per Student




      $4,000 - $5,000
      $5,000 - $6,000
      $6,000 - $7,000
      $7,000 - $8,000
                                                                                   15 - 20
      $8,000 - $9,000
                                                                                   20 - 25
      $9,000 - $10,000
                                                                                   25 - 30
      $10,000 - $11,000
                                            0        5          10 Miles           30 - 35
      $11,000 - $12,000
                                                                                   35 - 40                          0   5    10 Miles




Source: SDDB, MI Bulletin 1014, and MI Dept. of Education. Property tax rates expressed in mills.
                                                                                                                             39

                                                                 FIGURE 2
                                           1999 Real Foundation Allowance and 1993 Base Revenue
                                                         Detroit Metropolitan Area




                                                          14
                                                          12
                                                     1999 Revenue
                                                       8  6
                                                          4   10




                                                                    4    6          8        10      12      14
                                                                              1993 Real Base Revenue

                                                                                       1999 FA
                                                                                       45-Deg. Line



        FA: Foundation Allowance. Revenue and foundation allowance expressed in thousands of 2000
        dollars. Source: Michigan Bulletin 1014.

                                      FIGURE 3
          Proportional Change in Real Household Income by Income Percentile
                                between 1990 and 2000
                                           0.3


                                          0.25
             Proportional Income Change




                                           0.2


                                          0.15


                                           0.1


                                          0.05


                                            0
                                                 0   10             20   30      40     50      60      70   80   90   100
                                                                         Percentile of Income Distribution


Solid line represents proportional change in real household income by income percentile between 1990 and
2000. Dashed line represents proportional change in real average household income between 1990 and
2000. Source: Authors’ calculations using data from US Census for the Detroit metropolitan area.
                                                                                                      40



                                       FIGURE 4
                     Cumulative Income Distributions in 1990 and 2000


    E sti ma te d C umulative Density Functions in 1 9 9 0 and 2000
          100

            90

            80

            70

            60

            50

            40

            30

            20

            10
                 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 12.5 13.0
                                       Logarithm of Income

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from US Census. Solid line represents the 1990 CDF; dashed line
represents the 2000 CDF.
                                                                                                            41

                                     FIGURE 5
        1990 District Average Household Income, Rental Value and Passing Rate
                                   by District Rank




                                        200
                        District Average Household Income
                            50          100
                                        0           150




                                                            10   20   30      40        50   60   70   80
                                                                           District Rank
                                        40
                        District Average Rental Value
                        10            200         30




                                                            10   20   30      40        50   60   70   80
                                                                           District Rank
                                        80
                        4th Grade Math Passing Rate
                         20         40  0       60




                                                            10   20   30      40        50   60   70   80
                                                                           District Rank



Income and rental value are expressed in thousands of dollars; 4th grade math passing rate is in percent.
“District rank” refers to rank by district average housing quality. Data source: 1990 Long Form in 2000
Boundaries and Michigan Department of Education.
                                                                                                                                                     42

                                                                                                          FIGURE 6
                                                Predicted Patterns of Housing Price Change for
                                                          Three Different Intercepts
                                                12



           Predicted Housing Price Change (%)
                                                10

                                                 8                                                                              Intercepts
                                                                                                                                    |
                                                 6
                                                                                                                                     6
                                                 4

                                                 2                                                                                       12

                                                 0
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                -2
                                                     0                                         200        400       600        800       1000 1200
                                                                                                         Income Rank 1990



                                FIGURE 7
District Average Pass Rate for Fourth Grade Math Exam in 1991 and 1999
                                                                        100
                                                     Fourth Grade Math Pass Rate (in %),1999
                                                            25         50
                                                                        0           75




                                                                                               0          25         50           75         100
                                                                                                   Fourth Grade Math Pass Rate (in %),1991



        Districts weighted by number students taking math test in 1991.
        Source: Michigan Department of Education.
                                                                                                                                           43

                                                                                  Appendix A


Proposition A-1: There exists a fixed point R* such that R*=φ(R*)

Proof: Rental income as a function of R is:
                            J
A-1. φ ( R) = ∑ n j v j ( R )
                            j =1

where n j is the fraction of metropolitan housing located in neighborhood j . Now
                              J
A-2. φ ′ ( R) = ∑ n j v′j ( R )
                             j =1

where φ ( R) and v′j ( R ) denote the derivatives of φ and v j with respect to R . To
           ′


calculate the derivative in the summation in (A-2), we use the boundary-indifference
conditions:
A-3. U ( w j , (1 + τ + yR ) yej − v j ) = U ( w j +1 , (1 + τ + yR ) yej − v j +1 ) j = 1,..., J − 1
                                            e                                                        e

where y e is mean endowed income in the metropolitan area.41 Differentiating (A-3) with
respect to R we obtain:
              j                      j
A-4. U j ( yye − v′j ) = U j +1 ( yye − v′j +1 )
               e                                      e


Here, U (⋅) denotes the derivative of U (⋅) with respect to its second argument. Solving
           j


(A-4) we obtain:
                 j
A-5. v′j +1 = yye (1 − UUj+1 ) + UUj+1 v′j
                          j         j

                        e


A price normalization is required. We fix v1 ,such that 0 < v1 < ym . Hence v1′ = 0 .
                                                                                         yej
We now prove by induction that v′j +1 <                                                  ye
                                                                                               for all j = 2,..., J − 1 . Evaluating (A-5) for
 j = 1 , we obtain
               y1e                              y1e
A-6. v2′ =           (1 − UU 2 ) <
                                    1

               ye                               ye

The inequality follows from U j > 0 for all j . Continuing with the induction, we assume
               yej −1
A-7. v′j <      ye

and demonstrate that the result then holds for j + 1 . Equations (A-5) and (A-7) imply the
first inequality below. The second inequality follows from income stratification:
 yej > yej −1 .
                     yej                                  yej −1       yej                               yej       yej
A-8. v′j +1 <               (1 − UUj+1 ) + UUj+1                   <         (1 − UUj+1 ) + UUj+1              =
                                        j             j                              j           j

                     ye                                    ye          ye                                ye        ye

This concludes the proof that:
                 j
A-9. v′j +1 < yye for all j = 1,..., J − 1
                       e




41
   The metropolitan population is normalized to one, hence aggregate endowed income equals mean
endowed income: Ye= y e .
                                                                                                                               44

Now (A-9) and (A-2) imply the first inequality below. The second inequality follows
from observing that the n j sum to one, and the lowest endowed income in each
community j , yej −1 , is less than the average endowed income in each community:
 yej −1 < yej . The third inequality follows from addition of a positive term to the preceding
sum:
                  J           J                   J             J
A-10. φ ′ ( R ) = ∑ n j v′j < ∑ n j   yej −1
                                       ye
                                               < ∑ nj
                                                        yej
                                                        ye
                                                              < ∑ nj
                                                                              yej
                                                                              ye
                                                                                        =1
                  j =1       j =2                j =2           j =1

Define Δ( R) as follows:
A-11. Δ( R) = R − φ ( R)
Single-crossing in y implies that the v j ascend in order j . This and v1 > 0 imply that
φ ( R) > 0 when R=0, implying:
A-12. Δ(0) = −φ (0) < 0
Differentiating (A-11) with respect to R and using (A-10), we have:
A-13. Δ′ ( R) = 1 − φ ′ ( R) > 0
                                                                        J
Moreover, φ ′ ( R) is strictly less than a constant,                   ∑n
                                                                       j =2
                                                                                    j
                                                                                        yej −1
                                                                                         ye
                                                                                                 , that is less than one. This and

(A-12) imply that there is an R∗ such that Δ( R∗ ) = 0 .
