                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EVOLUTION OF INEQUALITY, HETEROGENEITY AND UNCERTAINTY
                 IN LABOR EARNINGS IN THE U.S. ECONOMY

                                              Flavio Cunha
                                            James J. Heckman

                                          Working Paper 13526
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13526


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2007


This research was supported by NIH R01-HD-043411 and NSF SES-0241858. Cunha is grateful to
the Claudio Haddad Dissertation Fund at the University of Chicago and Rob Dugger for research support.
This article builds on research reported in Cunha, Heckman and Navarro (2005). We are grateful to
Ray Fair, Lars Hansen, Pat Kehoe, Robert Lucas, Salvador Navarro, Tom Sargent, Robert Shimer,
Robert Townsend and Kenneth Wolpin for comments on various drafts. This version has benefited
from comments received at the Money and Banking Workshop, University of Chicago, November
21, 2006. We have also benefited from comments received from participants at the Ely Lectures at
Johns Hopkins University, April 2005, the 9th Econometric Society World Congress at University
College London, August 2005, the Economic Dynamics Working Group at the University of Chicago,
October 2005, the Empirical Dynamic General Equilibrium Conference at the Centre for Applied Microeconometrics,
December 2005, the Macroeconomics of Imperfect Risk Sharing Conference at the University of California
at Santa Barbara, May 2006, the 2006 Meetings of the Society for Economic Dynamics, July 2006,
the Koopmans Memorial Lectures at Yale, September 2006, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Applied Micro Workshop, October 2006, and Tom Sargent's Macro Reading Group at New York University,
October 2006. The website for the supplementary material to this paper is http://jenni.uchicago.edu/evo-earn/.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Inequality, Heterogeneity and Uncertainty in Labor Earnings in the U.S.
Economy
Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 13526
October 2007
JEL No. D3,J08

                                              ABSTRACT

A large empirical literature documents a rise in wage inequality in the American economy. It is silent
on whether the increase in inequality is due to greater heterogeneity in the components of earnings
that are predictable by agents or whether it is due to greater uncertainty faced by agents. Applying
the methodology of Cunha, Heckman and Navarro (2005) to data on agents making schooling decisions
in different economic environments, we join choice data with earnings data to estimate the fraction
of future earnings that is forecastable and how this fraction has changed over time. We find that both
predictable and unpredictable components of earnings have increased in recent years. The increase
in uncertainty is substantially greater for unskilled workers. For less skilled workers, roughly 60%
of the increase in wage variability is due to uncertainty. For more skilled workers, only 8% of the increase
in wage variability is due to uncertainty. Roughly 26% of the increase in the variance of returns to
schooling is due to increased uncertainty. Using conventional measures of income inequality masks
the contribution of rising uncertainty to the rise in the inequality of earnings for less educated groups.


Flavio Cunha
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA 19104
fcunha@sas.upenn.edu

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction

A large literature documents an increase in wage inequality in the American economy over
the 1970’s and 1980’s (see Katz and Autor, 1999). This increase in wage inequality has
occurred both within and between education-experience groups.
    Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro (2005), henceforth CHN, note that variability in wages
across people over time is not the same as uncertainty in wages. Some of the variability may
be due to variability in predictable components observed by agents but not observed by the
observing economist. CHN estimate that roughly half of all variability is due to uncertainty.
They look at uncertainty at a point in time. In this paper, we apply their methodology
to estimate how much of the recent increase in wage inequality is due to an increase in
components predictable by the agents at the age they make their college attendance decisions
and how much is due to components that are unpredictable at that age.
    A large literature in empirical labor economics starting with the pioneering work of
Friedman and Kuznets (1945) uses panel data to decompose earnings into permanent and
transitory components. Using such statistical decompositions, Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994)
document an increase in measured earnings instability in recent decades. The variance of
transitory components greatly increases from the period 1970–1978 to the period 1979–
1987. However, purely statistical decompositions cannot distinguish uncertainty from other
sources of variability. Transitory components as measured by a statistical decomposition
may be perfectly predictable by agents, partially predictable or totally unpredictable.
    This paper uses cross-cohort data on schooling choices and future earnings to estimate
the evolution of uncertainty in the labor market. We show that unforecastable components in
labor income have increased in recent years, especially for less skilled workers. Our findings
support the claim of Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004) that turbulence has increased in unskilled
labor markets. This increase is not revealed in traditional measures of earnings inequality
which do not distinguish between predictable and unpredictable components.
    Our approach is based on the following simple idea. A decision variable D1 determined

                                              2
in period 1, say consumption in the first period, may depend on outcomes Y1 , . . . , YT over
horizon T of another variable, say income, that is realized after the choice is taken. The
correlation between D1 and future Yt is a measure of how much of future Yt is known and
acted on when agents make their choices about D1 .
       When making their decisions, agents only imperfectly predict their future earnings using
information I. Suppose that D1 depends on future Yt only through expected present value,
E (P V | I) , where “E” denotes expectation, P V = Tt=1 (1+ρ)
                                                           Yt
                                                  P
                                                              t−1 , and ρ is the discount rate.


If, after the choice of D1 is made, we actually observe Y1 , . . . , YT , we can construct P V ex
post. If the information set is properly specified, the residual corresponding to the component
of P V that is not forecastable in the first period, V = P V − E (P V | I), should not predict
D1 . E (P V | I) is predictable. V is a measure of uncertainty. The variance in P V that is
unpredictable using I is a measure of uncertainty.1
       This paper uses college attendance choices as D1 . Following Becker (1964), these choices
depend on comparisons of earnings in the schooling level chosen and in alternative states.
We must modify the simple test just described to account for the economist’s inability to
measure realized earnings in schooling states not selected that govern choice.
       Using choice data combined with earnings data, we find that both predictable and un-
predictable components of earnings variance have increased in recent years. The increase
in uncertainty is microeconomic, and is much greater for unskilled workers. Macroeconomic
uncertainty has decreased, especially for less skilled workers. For less skilled workers, roughly
60% of the increase in wage variability within schooling groups is due to uncertainty. For
more skilled workers, only 8% of the increase in inequality is due to uncertainty. Roughly
26% of the increase in the variance of returns to schooling is due to increased uncertainty.
       The rest of this paper is in five parts. Part 2 summarizes the model of CHN used to
obtain our estimates. A web supplement presents semiparametric proofs of identification
   1
    The Sims (1972) test for noncausality is based on a related idea in a linear prediction framework. Whereas
Sims tests whether future Yt predict current D1 , we measure what fraction of future Yt predict current D1
and use a more general prediction process.



                                                      3
based on their work. Part 3 presents empirical results. Part 4 concludes.



2       The CHN Model

To identify the forecastable components of future earnings and how they have changed over
time, we draw on the analysis of CHN, which we briefly summarize.


2.1     Earnings Equations

Using the Roy model (1951) and its generalizations, agents possess two ex post earnings
streams, (Y0,t , Y1,t ), t = 1, . . . , T , for schooling levels “0” and “1” respectively. They are
assumed to have finite means. For conditioning variables X, we write:


                              Y0,t = Xβ0,t + U0,t                                                     (1)

                              Y1,t = Xβ1,t + U1,t ,          t = 1, . . . , T.                        (2)


The error terms Us,t are assumed to satisfy E (Us,t | X) = 0, s = 0, 1.2 Allowing for age-
specific returns incorporates post-school investment as a determinant of earnings.


2.2     Choice Equations

The human capital model of Becker (1964) is based on present value income maximization.
We extend that model by assuming that agents are risk neutral and make schooling choices
based on expected present value income maximization given information set I. Write the
index I of present values as

                               T 
                                  "    t−1                     #
                              X     1
                          I=E               (Y1,t − Y0,t ) − C I ,                                    (3)
                              t=1
                                   1+ρ
    2
    Our analysis does not require linearity of the model in terms of parameters. See CHN. We use linearity
because of its familiarity and simplicity.



                                                    4
where C is the cost of attending college. Z and UC denote, respectively, the observable and
unobservable determinants of costs. Assume that costs can be written as


                                        C = Zγ + UC .                                        (4)


Defining

                                    T        t−1
                                   X      1
                       µI (X, Z) =                 X (β1,t − β0,t ) − Zγ
                                   t=1
                                        1 + ρ

and

                                T        t−1
                               X      1
                          UI =                 (U1,t − U0,t ) − UC ,
                               t=1
                                    1 + ρ


and substituting in (1), (2), and (4) into (3) we obtain


                                  I = E [µI (X, Z) + UI | I] .                               (5)


E (UI |I) is the error term in the choice equation and it may or may not include U1,t , U0,t , or
UC , depending on what is in the agent’s information set. Similarly, µI (X, Z) may only be
based on expectations of future X and Z at the time schooling decisions are made. People
go to college if the expected present value of earnings is positive:


                                         S = 1 [I ≥ 0] .                                     (6)



2.3    Test Score Equations

In addition to data on earnings and choices, we also have access to data on a set of cognitive
test score equations. Let Mk denote the agent’s score on the k th test. Assume that the Mk




                                               5
have finite means and can be expressed in terms of conditioning variables X M . Write


                Mk = X M βkM + UkM and E UkM | X M = 0, k = 1, 2, . . . , K.
                                                  
                                                                                           (7)


Both the decision to attend college and realized earnings likely depend on the cognitive skills
that agents have at the time their schooling choices are made. Test scores facilitate but are
not essential to our identification strategy.


2.4    Heterogeneity and Uncertainty

The earnings of agents of schooling level s at age t can be decomposed into predictable and
unpredictable components


                     Ys,t = E (Ys,t | I) + Vs,t ,       s = 0, 1, t = 1, . . . , T.


The component E (Ys,t | I) is available to the agent to help make schooling choices. It is a
component of realized earnings. The component Vs,t does not enter the schooling equation
because it is unknown at the time schooling decisions are made. However, it determines
realized earnings.
   To determine which components are in the information set of the agent, we need to
determine which specification of the information set I best characterizes the dependence
between schooling choices and future earnings. CHN use factor structure approximations to
decompose earnings into predictable and unpredictable components. Other approximations
might be used (see, e.g., MaCurdy, 1982, 2007) but factor structures are computationally
and conceptually convenient and can approximate general error processes. The advantage
of factor models is that they enable analysts to partition realized earnings into orthogonal
components. Some of these components may be known by the agent when schooling choices
are made and some components may not. By factor analyzing earnings and choice equa-
tions we can determine which components (factors) of realized earnings appear in the choice

                                                    6
equations. To show this, following CHN, we introduce an explicit factor structure for the
disturbance terms, starting with the test score equations.


2.5     Factor Models

Break the error term UkM in the test score equations into two components. The first compo-
nent is a factor, θ1 , that is common across all test score equations. The second component
is unique to test score equation k, εM
                                     k . In this notation, we can write equation (7) as




                              Mk = X M βkM + θ1 αkM + εM
                                                       k , k = 1, . . . , K                               (8)


where the αkM are “factor loadings”, i.e. coefficients that map θ1 into Mk .
    Following the psychometric literature, the factor θ1 might be interpreted as a latent
cognitive ability which potentially affects all test scores but that interpretation is not essential
to our analysis. We assume that θ1 is independent of X M and εM        M
                                                              k . The εk are mutually

independent and independent of θ1 . Modeling test scores in this fashion allows them to be
noisy measures of cognitive ability.3


2.5.1    Earnings and Choice Equations

We decompose the error terms in the earnings equations into factors and idiosyncratic errors.
Let factors and factor loadings be θ = (θ1 , . . . , θK ) and αs,t = (α1,s,t , . . . , αK,s,t ), respectively.
The idiosyncratic error term, εs,t , affects only the period-t, schooling-s earnings equation.
We assume that U0,t and U1,t can be written in factor-structure form


                                      0
                             Us,t = θαs,t + εs,t    s = 0, 1,    t = 1, . . . , T.                        (9)
   3
     Applying the analysis of Schennach (2004), identification of the model can be secured under much weaker
conditions.




                                                      7
We assume that factor components are mutually independent and independent of X and εs,t
for all s, t. The ε`,t , ` = 0, 1 and t = 1, . . . , T , are mutually independent. The cost equation
is decomposed in a fashion similar to the earnings equations, so that (4) can be rewritten as


                                            C = Zγ + θαC0 + εC ,                                                  (10)


where εC is independent of θ, X, Z, εs,t , s = 0, 1, t = 1, . . . , T . Given the factor representa-
tion (9) and (10), we can represent the choice index I for schooling as

                          t−1                                                      t−1                             
             PT                                                        PT 
 I=E           t=1
                      1
                     1+ρ
                                  X (β1,t − β0,t ) − Zγ +    θαI0   +    t=1
                                                                                1
                                                                               1+ρ
                                                                                            (ε1,t − ε0,t ) − εC   I
                                                                                                                  (11)
where we define
                                          T
                                          X         1
                                   αI =                    (α1,t − α0,t ) − αC .
                                          t=1
                                                (1 + ρ)t−1


2.6     The Estimation of Predictable Components of Future Earn-

        ings

We now illustrate how to apply the method of CHN to determine which components of
realized earnings are known to the agent when schooling choices are made. For expositional
simplicity, in this section alone we assume that X, Z, βs,t (s = 0, 1, t = 1, . . . , T ) and εC are
in the information set I.4 To fix ideas, suppose that there are two factors, θ1 and θ2 . In our
empirical work reported below we use more factors.
    Suppose that it is claimed that both θ1 and θ2 are known by the agent when schooling
choices are made but the εs,t are not, i.e. {θ1 , θ2 } ⊂ I, but εs,t ∈
                                                                     / I. If this is true, the index
function governing schooling choices is


                                    I = µI (X, Z) + α1,I θ1 + α2,I θ2 + εC .                                      (12)
   4
     In our empirical analysis, we test for the presence or absence of ex post observables in X that are in ex
ante information sets.


                                                         8
       Using standard results in discrete choice analysis (see Matzkin, 1992, for precise con-
ditions), we can proceed as if we observed I in equations (6) and (12) up to an unknown
positive scale, i.e., from the discrete choices on schooling we observe the index generating the
choices up to scale. From the correlation between S and realized incomes, we can identify
(up to scale) the covariance between I and Ys,t , t = 1, . . . , T for s = 0 or 1. Conditional on
X, Z this covariance is


                      Cov (I, Ys,t |X, Z) = α1,I α1,s,t σθ21 + α2,I α2,s,t σθ22 , s = 0, 1.


If θ2 is not known, or is known and not acted on by the agent when schooling choices are
made, α2,I = 0. If neither θ2 nor θ1 is known, or acted on, by the agent, α1,I = α2,I = 0.
       Extending standard results in factor analysis, CHN show how to use test score data and
earnings data to identify the factor loadings and the distribution of the factors in test score
and earnings equations (8), (9) and (10) using self-selected samples.5 Self selection arises
because analysts only observe the earnings stream associated with s for persons who choose
s. CHN establish conditions for identifying σθ21 , σθ22 , α1,s,t and α2,s,t s = 0, 1, t = 1, . . . , T .
We review their conditions in our web appendix.6
       Putting these ingredients together, we can determine which components (factors) that
determine realized Ys,t , s = 0, 1, t = 1, . . . , T are correlated with I. If component (factor) θ1
is correlated with I and is acted on by the agent in making schooling choices, then α1,I 6= 0.
If component θ2 is uncorrelated with I, then α2,I = 0 and θ2 is not acted on by the agent in
making schooling choices.7
   5
      In our web supplement, we restate their formal proofs of identification. They identify the distributions
of factors nonparametrically. Test score data are not required to secure identification. See, e.g., Heckman,
Lochner, and Todd (2006).
    6
      See Part III of the web supplement.
    7
      CHN interpret the factor loadings in the earnings equations as prices of unobserved skills that they
interpret as factors. In this paper we do not adopt their interpretation. We allow agents to be uncertain
about their future skills, future prices, or both. We interpret the factor loadings as convenient statistical
devices for representing the components of realized earnings no matter what their source. Thus we do not
maintain the perfect foresight assumption about future skill prices used by CHN.




                                                       9
3         Empirical Results

In order to study the evolution of uncertainty and inequality in labor earnings in the U.S.
economy, we analyze and compare two demographically comparable, temporally separated
samples. We study white males born between 1957 and 1964, sampled by the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY/1979).8 We also study an earlier sample of white males
born between 1941 and 1952, surveyed in the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS/1966).9
In what follows, we refer to the samples as NLSY/1979 and NLS/1966, respectively. These
data are described in detail in the data web appendix.10 Because we analyze only white
males, we do not present a comprehensive investigation of the rise of inequality in the U.S.
coming all within-group and between-group comparisons. However, we can abstract from
influences that operate differentially on various demographic groups and focus on the rise of
inequality that is due to forecastable versus unforecastable components.11
        We analyze two schooling choices: high school and college graduation. Use s = 0 to
denote those who stop at high school and s = 1 to denote those who graduate college. The
Web Data Appendix Tables I-1 and I-2 present descriptive statistics on the NLSY/1979 and
NLS/1966 samples, respectively. In both samples, college graduates have higher test scores,
fewer siblings and parents with higher levels of education than those who stop at high school.
In the NLSY/1979, college graduates are more likely to live in locations where the tuition
for four-year college is lower. This is not true for the college graduates in NLS/1966.12
        We analyze the evolution of labor income from ages 22 to 36. For the NLS/1966 sample,
    8
     See Miller (2004) for a description of the NLSY data.
    9
     See documentation at http://www.nlsinfo.org/web-investigator/docs.php?mychrt=boys for a description
of the NLS data.
  10
     http://jenni.uchicago.edu/evo-earn/. The Web Appendix has five parts: Web Supplement I contains a
description of the samples; Web Supplement II presents a description of the estimated model, including the
goodness of fit tests; Web Supplement III provides a thorough review on the identification of the model; Web
Supplement IV discusses the estimates of the joint distribution of outcomes; Web Supplement V presents
the results of the schooling choice on our measures of aggregate inequality.
  11
     See Katz and Autor (1999) for a discussion of other factors contributing to the observed rise in wage
inequality.
  12
     See Cameron and Heckman (2001) for details on the construction of the tuition variables used in this
paper.



                                                    10
reliable data are not available after that age. Figures 1 and 2 display, respectively, the mean
earnings by age of high school and college graduates for NLSY/1979 and NLS/1966.13 In
both data sets, college graduates start off with lower mean labor income than high-school
graduates but overtake them. This is consistent with earlier evidence by Mincer (1974).
We plot the standard deviation of earnings by age for high school (Figure 3) and college
(Figure 4) graduates for both cohorts. The standard deviation of earnings increases with
age for high school and college graduates in both data sets. The standard deviation of
earnings by age is uniformly greater in the later cohort, for both high school and college
graduates.
       Both data sets have measures of cognitive test scores.14 For the NLSY/1979, we use five
components of the ASVAB test battery: arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, math knowledge and coding speed. We dedicate the first factor (θ1 ) to this
test system, and exclude other factors from it. Thus θ1 is a measure of cognitive ability.
       In the NLS/1966 there are many different achievement tests, but in our empirical work we
use the two most commonly reported ones: the OTIS/BETA/GAMMA and the California
Test of Mental Maturity (CTMM). One problem with the NLS/1966 sample is that there
are no respondents for whom we observe scores from two or more achievement tests. That
is, for each respondent we observe at most one test score. We supplement the information
from these test scores by using additional proxies for cognitive achievement.15
       We model the test score j, Mj by equation (8). The covariates X M include family
  13
      Earnings figures are adjusted for inflation using the CPI and we take the year 2000 as the base year.
  14
      M in the notation of section 2.
   15
      We use information from three different tests from the “Knowledge of the World of Work” survey. The
first is a question regarding occupation: the respondent is asked about the duties of a given profession, say
draftsman. For this specific example, there are three possible answers: (a) makes scale drawings of products
or equipment for engineering or manufacturing purposes, (b) mixes and serves drinks in a bar or tavern, (c)
pushes or pulls a cart in a factory or warehouse. The second test is a test that asks for each occupation in the
first test, the level of education associated with that occupation. The third test is an earnings comparison
test. Specifically, it asks the respondent who he/she believes makes more in a year, comparing two different
occupations. In Web Data Appendix Table I-3 we show that even after controlling for parental education,
number of siblings, urban residence at age 14, and dummies for year of birth, the “Knowledge of the World of
Work” test scores are correlated with the cognitive test scores. The correlation with OTIS/BETA/GAMMA
and CTMM is stronger for the occupation and education tests than for the earnings-comparison test.



                                                      11
background variables, year of birth dummies, and characteristics of the individuals at the
time of the test.16 To set the scale of θ1 , we normalize α1M = 1. Using factor models instead
of working directly with test scores, recognizes that test scores may be noisy measures of
cognitive skills.
       Salient features of our data are presented in Table 1. Fewer males graduate college in
the later cohort. This is consistent with a large body of evidence that shows enhanced
college participation in earlier cohorts to avoid the Vietnam War draft.17 For a variety of
specifications, Mincer returns increase for the later cohorts. This is consistent with a large
body of evidence on the returns to schooling (Katz and Autor, 1999).
       Qualitatively similar models characterize both samples. For both cohorts, a three factor
model is sufficient to fit the data on ex post earnings, test scores and schooling choice.18
The identification of the model requires the normalization of some factor loadings because
the scale of θ is otherwise indeterminate. Web Supplement Appendix Table II-1 shows the
factor loading normalizations imposed in both data sets. In both samples, the covariates X
are urban residence at age 14, year effects, and an intercept.
       The covariates Z in the cost function are urban residence at age 14, dummies for year
of birth, and variables that affect the costs of going to college but do not affect outcomes
Ys,t after controlling for ability, such as mother’s education, father’s education, number of
siblings, and local tuition.19 Because in both samples we only have earnings data into the
middle 30s, the truncated discounted earnings after the periods of observation (denoted
t = 1, . . . , T ∗ ) are absorbed into the definition of expected C in equation (3). Thus C
  16
      In our analyses of both the NLSY/1979 and NLS/1966 data we include mother’s education, father’s
education, number of siblings, urban residence at age 14, dummies for year effects and an intercept. In the
NLSY/1979 sample we also control for whether the test taker is enrolled in school and the highest grade
completed at the time of the test. In the NLS/1966 all of the respondents were enrolled in school at the
time of the test (in fact, the test score is obtained in a survey from schools). We do not know the highest
grade completed at the time of the test for the NLS/1966 sample.
   17
      See e.g. Heckman and LaFontaine (2007)
   18
      In the next subsection and at our website, we discuss the goodness-of-fit measures used to select the
appropriate model for each sample.
   19
      Because we control for ability and other unobservables captured by the factors, our parsimonious speci-
fication of the earnings equations is less controversial.



                                                     12
estimated from the choice equation is not a pure measure of costs. We discuss this further
in Section 3.3.
       Each factor θk is assumed to be generated by a mixture of Jk normal distributions,

                                          Jk
                                          X
                                   θk ∼         pk,j φ (θk | µk,j , λk,j ) ,
                                          j=1


                                                                                           Jk
                                                                                           P
where φ (η | µj , λj ) is a normal density for η with mean µj and variance λj and               pk,j = 1,
                                                                                          j=1
and pk,j > 0.20 The εs,t are also assumed to be generated by mixtures of normals. We
estimate the model using Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods as described in Carneiro,
Hansen, and Heckman (2003). For all factors, a four-component model (Jk = 4, k = 1, . . . , 3)
is adequate. For all εs,t we use a three-component model.21
       The dependent variable in our analysis is earnings and not log earnings. Under risk
neutrality, agents act on expected earnings. The traditional argument for fitting log earnings
is based on goodness of fit considerations.22 Using a nonparametric estimation method for
determining the error distribution, our model fits the earnings data.


3.1       How the model fits the data

Figure 5 compares actual and predicted densities of earnings at age 33 for the overall sample
for the NLSY/1979. The fit is good overall and in subsamples disaggregated by education
and for all of the other age groups.23 When we perform formal tests of equality of predicted
versus actual densities, we pass these tests within schooling groups for most ages.24 The
model fits the NLS/1966 data marginally better than it fits the NLSY/1979 data. The
  20
     Ferguson (1983) shows that mixtures of normals with a large number of components approximate any
distribution of θk arbitrarily well in the `1 norm.
  21
     Additional components do not improve the goodness of fit of the model to the data.
  22
     See Heckman and Polachek (1974).
  23
     The Web Supplement Appendix shows fits for all ages. See Web Supplement Appendix Figures II-1.1
through II-3.30 for the overall, high-school, and college earnings, for both the NLSY/1979 and NLS/1966.
  24
     See Web Supplement Appendix Table II-2.




                                                      13
estimated factor distributions are non-normal.25 Our tests reveal that agents know θ1 and
θ2 but not θ3 at the time that they make their schooling decisions. Thus the third factor is
revealed after schooling choices are made. In addition, they do not know the εs,t , s = 0, 1,
t = 1, . . . , T ∗ , or the year dummies in the earnings equations.


3.2       The Evolution of Joint Distributions of Earnings and the Re-

          turns to College

A standard approach to estimating the distribution of earnings in counterfactual schooling
states (e.g., the distributions of college earnings for people who choose to be high school
graduates under a particular policy regime) assumes that college and high school distribu-
tions are the same except for an additive constant — the coefficient of a schooling dummy in
an earnings regression conditioned on covariates. Using the methods developed in CHN and
reviewed in Part III of the web supplement, we can identify both ex ante and ex post joint
distributions without making this strong assumption or the other strong assumptions con-
ventionally used to identify joint distributions of counterfactuals.26 We discuss our estimates
of ex ante and ex post joint distributions in Web Appendix IV.
       Knowledge of the joint distributions allows analysts to compare factual with counterfac-
tual distributions. Take agents who choose to be high-school graduates. We can compare
the density of the present value of truncated ex post earnings in the high-school sector with
the density of the truncated present value of earnings in the college sector earnings for the
high-school graduates. Both densities are plotted in Figures 6A and 6B for the NLSY/1979
and NLS/1966, respectively. For both data sets, the high-school attenders would have higher
earnings if they had chosen to be college graduates. For college graduates, we compare the
actual density of present value of truncated earnings in the college sector with that in the
  25
     Figures II-5.1–5.6 plot the estimated densities of the factors for the NLS 1966 and 1979 NLSY samples
by attained schooling level.
  26
     Abbring and Heckman (2007) discuss a variety of alternative assumptions used to identify joint coun-
terfactual distributions, including the work of CHN on which we draw.



                                                   14
high-school sector. We display these densities in Figures 7A and 7B for the NLSY/1979
and NLS/1966, respectively. Again, in both data sets the densities of high-school truncated
present value of earnings is to the left of the college density.
      From such distributions, we can generate the distribution of ex post gross rate of return
                                               Y1 −Y0 27
R to college (excluding costs) as R =            Y0
                                                     .     The typical high school student would have
annual gross returns of around 6% for a college education in the earlier cohort and around
9.5% for the later cohort. (See Table 2.) For the typical college graduate, the annual return
is around 8.7% for the earlier cohort and 13.5% for the later cohort. For individuals at the
margin, these figures are 7.5% and 11.8% respectively.


3.3       The Evolution of Uncertainty and Heterogeneity

Under risk neutrality, the valuation or net utility function for schooling is

                                          T∗                 !
                                         X   Y1,t − Y0,t
                               I=E                       I       − E (CT ∗ | I) ,
                                         t=1
                                             (1 + ρ)t−1

where
                                          T̄
                                          X           1
                              CT ∗ = −                       (Y1,t − Y0,t ) + C.
                                         t=T ∗ +1
                                                  (1 + ρ)t−1

Because of the truncation of lifetime earnings in our data, the estimated cost includes a
component due to the expected return realized after period T ∗ . Individuals go to college if
I > 0. As previously explained, the correlation between schooling choices and realized future
income allows the analyst to disentangle predictable components from uncertainty. For both
cohorts, we test, and do not reject, the hypothesis that, at the time they make college going
decisions, individuals know their Z and the factors θ1 and θ2 . They do not know the time
dummies (year effects) in X and the factor θ3 or εs,t , s = 0, 1, t = 1, . . . , T ∗ , at the time
they make their educational choices. We now explore the implications of our estimates for
the growth of uncertainty in the American economy.
 27
      See Web Appendix II–4.1–4.8 for plots of the densities of returns and costs.


                                                      15
3.3.1    Total Residual Variance and Variance of Unforecastable Components

The unforecastable component of the residual is the sum of the components that are not in
the information set of the agent at the time schooling choices are made. For both data sets,
the unforecastable component of the present value of earnings estimates up to age T ∗ is

                                       T ∗
                                       X θ3 α3,s,t + Tt φ + εs,t
                                Ps =                               ,                     (13)
                                       t=1
                                                (1 + ρ)t−1

where the Tt are the year dummies in the future earnings equation that we estimate to
be unknown to agents at the time they make their schooling choices. The variance of the
unforecastable component in the present value of earnings up to age T ∗ for schooling level s
is Var (Ps ).
    Table 3 displays the total variance and the variance of the unforecastable components
for each schooling level for both NLS/1966 and NLSY/1979. Total variance of the present
value of earnings up to age T ∗ increases from 195.9 (NLS/1966) to 292.4 (NLSY/1979).
This implies an increase of almost 50% in the total variance. The increase is smaller for
the variance of the present value of high school earnings up to age 36: it goes from 137 in
NLS/1966 to 165, an increase of almost 21%.
    The variance of the unforecastable components up to age 36 has also increased. For
college earnings, it is 76.3 in the early cohort and becomes 84.4 in the more recent cohort.
For high school earnings, it is 31.6 in the NLS/1966 and becomes 48.1 in the NLSY/1979. In
percentage terms, this implies that the variance of the unforecastable component increased
10.6% for college and 52% for high school. Table 3 shows that total variance in the present
value of gross returns to college up to age 36 increased from 611 in NLS/1966 to 823 in
NLSY/1979, an increase of about 35%. The variance of the unforecastable components
increased from 167 to 222, or roughly 33%.
    The increase in the variance of the unforecastable components of earnings is a key element
in explaining the increase in the total variance in earnings for high school graduates. It is


                                               16
much less of a driving force in explaining the increase in the variance of college earnings.
   Figures 9A and 9B plot the densities of realized and unforecastable high-school earnings
for the 1979 and 1966 samples, respectively. Figures 10A and 10B make the analogous com-
parison for college earnings for the 1979 and 1966 samples, respectively. Finally, Figures 11A
and 11B show the corresponding figures for returns. Unforecastable components are a major
component of total earnings variance.
   Table 3 also presents the total variance and the variance of forecastable components for
each schooling level for both NLS/1966 and NLSY/1979. In the recent cohort, individuals
who attend college have become more diverse in predictable ways possibly associated with
greater possibilities for specialization in the modern economy. There is only a small change
in the predictability of high school earnings. For college earnings, the variance of forecastable
components is 119.5 for the NLS/1966 and 207.9 for the NLSY/1979 corresponding to a 74%
increase. For high school earnings, it is 105 for the NLS/1966 and 117.2 for the NLSY/1979,
which implies an increase of only 11%. There is a substantial increase in the variance of
predictable returns to college for the more recent cohort.
   In summary, this analysis shows that about 8% of the increase in the variability in college
earnings, 60% of the increase in the variability in high school earnings, and about 26% of
the increase in the variability of gross returns to college is due to an increase in uncertainty
in the American labor market. We next turn to an analysis of how the increase in variance
is apportioned by age.


3.3.2   The Variance of the Unforecastable and Forecastable Components by Age

The increase in uncertainty is not uniform across age groups. Figure 12A plots the variances
of unforecastable components by age in high school earnings in NLS/1966, and NLSY/1979.
They are flat until age 27/28. A similar pattern characterizes college earnings (Figure 12B).
After age 27/28, college and high school variances in both cohorts increase with age. Until
age 36 the NLSY/1979 cohort experiences a much more rapid increase in variances with


                                               17
age than does the NLS/1966 cohort. The college sample shows a similar flat and identical
pattern until age 27. Again, components due to uncertainty increase with age but the only
divergence between the younger cohort and the older cohort is in the 28-31 age range.
       The age profile of the variance of forecastable components is different. (See Figures 13A
and 13B.) For both college and high school graduates it rises up to age 27 and then declines
somewhat. For high school graduates, the increase is greater for the more recent cohort up to
age 27 but then the two curves coincide. For college graduates, the predictable components
of variance are uniformly higher at each age for the more recent cohort.


3.3.3      Accounting for Macro Uncertainty

The literature in macroeconomics documents that aggregate instability has decreased in the
past 30 years (see Gordon, 2005). To capture reduced macro uncertainty, we have introduced
time dummies into the earnings equation.28 Our tests indicate that the time dummies in the
ex post earnings equations do not enter the schooling choice equation. Thus, we estimate
that macro uncertainty is not forecastable by agents at the time schooling choices are made.
Macro uncertainty decreased by 90% for later cohorts of high school educated workers (see
Table 4). Macro shocks have decreased slightly if at all for college educated workers. These
estimates are consistent with the evidence that US business cycle volatility has decreased in
recent years. At the same time, macro uncertainty is a tiny fraction of total uncertainty for
both cohorts(6.8% for 1966, 3.3% for 1979).


3.3.4      Inequality Accounting

In deriving the estimates presented in this paper, we have assumed risk neutrality and/or full
insurance against all shocks. It would be informative to estimate a more general model with
risk aversion by agents explicitly modeled. Introducing risk aversion and market structure
  28
     We face the standard problem of the lack of simultaneous identification of age, period and cohort effects
so we cannot identify cohort effects in the presence of age and time effects. Thus our estimates of uncertainty
of time effects can also be interpreted as estimates of uncertainty of cohort effects. See Heckman and Robb
(1985) for a discussion of this problem and a discussion of the interactions that can be identified.


                                                      18
raises a more general set of questions about the identification of the model discussed in
CHN.29 Navarro (2007) reports estimates of a related model with risk aversion.
       Instead of estimating a model with risk aversion, in this paper we draw on a large liter-
ature on inequality measurement that evaluates alternative distributions of earnings using
a variety of indices and social welfare functions.30 These criteria embody social preferences
toward inequality aversion. We contribute to this literature by distinguishing the contribu-
tions to inequality arising from uncertainty and the contributions arising from predictable
components, which we term heterogeneity. These are measured with respect to information
sets at the college going age.
       We simulate the distribution of the observed present value of truncated earnings for
which we compute the Gini coefficient, the Theil Entropy Index, and the Atkinson Index
under different scenarios. For each cohort k, we write earnings of individual i at the time t,
schooling level s as Yk,i,t . Let Sk,i = 1 if a person graduates college and Sk,i = 0 if a person
graduates high school. We may write


                                 Yk,i,t = Sk,i Yk,1,i,t + (1 − Sk,i )Yk,0,i,t
  29
     A basic question first posed by CHN (2005) is “What can be identified in more general environments?” In
the absence of perfect certainty or perfect risk sharing, preferences and market environments also determine
schooling choices. The separation theorem used in this paper that allows consumption and schooling decisions
to be analyzed in isolation of each other breaks down.
  If we postulate information arrival processes a priori, and assume that preferences are known up to
some unknown parameters as in Flavin (1981), Blundell and Preston (1998) and Blundell, Pistaferri, and
Preston (2004), we can identify departures from specified market structures. Flavin (1981), Blundell and
Preston (1998) and Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2002) specify explicit time series processes for the
unobservables (e.g., ARMA or fixed effect/AR-1 models) with unknown coefficients but prespecified serial
correlation structures and assume that the innovations in these processes are the uncertainty components
while the predictable components are heterogeneity. Hansen (1987) shows a fundamental nonidentification
result for the Flavin model estimated on aggregate data. Our use of micro panel data circumvents the
problem he raises. An open question, not yet fully resolved in the literature, is how far one can go in
nonparametrically jointly identifying preferences, market structures and agent information sets. One can
add consumption data to the schooling choice and earnings data to secure identification of risk preference
parameters (within a parametric family) and information sets, and to test among alternative models for
market environments. Navarro (2007) attempts to do this. Alternative assumptions about what analysts
know produce different interpretations of the same evidence. The lack of full insurance interpretation given
to the empirical analysis by Flavin (1981) and Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2004), may instead be a
consequence of their misspecification of the generating processes of agent information sets.
  30
     See Anand (1983), Foster and Sen (1997), Sen (2000), Atkinson and Bourguignon (2000) and Cowell
(2000) for surveys of this literature.


                                                     19
and
                                                  T∗
                                                  X        Yk,i,t
                                         Yk,i =                    .
                                                  t=1
                                                        (1 + ρ)t−1

       We show that the distribution of Yk,i for each cohort, displayed in the first row of Table 5A
(for the Gini index), Table 5B (for the Theil index) and Table 5C (for the Atkinson index),
the NLSY/1979 cohort is more unequal than the NLS/1966 cohort under any inequality
measurement we use. The Gini coefficient (Table 5A) grows by 16% from the earlier cohort
to the later cohort.31 Table 5B shows that the Theil Entropy Index T grew by 38% from the
NLS/1966 to the NLSY/1979. One of the advantages of the Theil Index is that it can be
used to decompose overall inequality within and between schooling groups. Within inequality
grew by 28% and between inequality grew by 450%.
       An explicit social welfare approach to measuring earnings inequality proceeds by con-
structing indexes based on social welfare functions defined over earnings distribution (see
Cowell, 2000; Foster and Sen, 1997).32 For each cohort k, let µk denote the average income
level computed over incomes of agents i in all schooling groups,

                                                    nk
                                                1 X
                                           µk =        Yk,i ,
                                                nk i=1

where nk is the number of persons in our samples of cohort k. Given a social welfare function
U (Yk,i ) , the Atkinson index (1970) is defined as the per-capita level of present value of income
Ȳk such that, if equally distributed, would generate the same level of social welfare as the
distribution of earnings in cohort k. That is, Ȳk satisfies:

                                        1−          nk   1−
                                    Ȳk      −1   1 X    Yk,i  −1
                                                =                 .
                                       1−        nk i=1 1 − 


The parameter  is a measure of inequality aversion ( = 0 corresponds to no inequality
  31
     The low level of the Gini coefficient arises from the averaging of incomes that arises in constructing
present values, because we study of white males only, and from the truncation of the present value term due
to data limitations.
  32
     Anand (1983) presents a useful summary of the indices used in this literature.


                                                       20
aversion;  → −∞ corresponds to Rawlsian inequality aversion). The Atkinson index A is
defined as:
                                                         
                                                    Ȳk
                                       A=1−                   .
                                                    µk

Table 5C computes the Atkinson Index for each cohort and its growth, for different values
of inequality aversion parameter . Regardless of the value of , inequality has increased by
between 40% to 60% according to the Atkinson Index.
   Our previous analysis established that some portion of the inequality in observed present
value of earnings is predictable at the age college decisions are made by the information in
I. We can compare the inequality that is produced by predictable factors (heterogeneity)
versus overall earnings inequality. This allows us to determine the contribution of uncertainty
to overall inequality using a variety of measures. We simulate counterfactual economies in
which uncertainty is eliminated. Eliminating uncertainty can be accomplished by simulating
an economy in which the unforecastable components are set at their means. We can keep
schooling choices fixed at their values in the factual economy or allow agents to re-optimize
and see how that affects inequality measurement. We do both, but differences arising from
re-optimized schooling choice are of second order. See the tables in Appendix V (Tables V-A,
V-B and V-C, respectively). In the text, we report results holding schooling fixed at their
value in the factual economy.
   The second row of Table 5A presents the Gini coefficient for the economy without un-
certainty in future earnings fixing schooling choices as in the factual economy. In this case,
the Gini coefficient for the NLS/1966 would be 0.16 and for the NLSY/1979 would be 0.18,
which represents a growth of less than 15% in inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient.
The analogous calculation for the Theil index reported in Table 5B shows that the Overall
Theil Index would have grown only by 34% if uncertainty were eliminated, while the Within
and Between Theil Indexes would have grown by 22% and 394%, respectively. The analogous
exercise for the Atkinson index predicts an increase between 35% and 42%. (See Table 5C .)
   These calculations show that rising inequality in the aggregate as measured by conven-

                                              21
tional inequality indices is largely driven by rising heterogeneity. However, as documented
in Table 3, there are sharp differences in the contribution of rising uncertainty to inequality
for different schooling groups. High school graduates’ earnings variability is due to a sub-
stantial rise in inequality due to uncertainty. Uncertainty in college graduate earnings has
not increased substantially, although predictable components have become more variable.



4     Summary and Conclusion

This paper investigates the sources of rising wage inequality in the US labor market for white
males. We find that increasing inequality arises both from increasing micro uncertainty and
increasing heterogeneity that is predictable by agents. The latter could arise from increased
specialization in labor markets, but we present no direct evidence on this question. Both
predictable and unpredictable components have increased since the late 1960s. The fraction
of the variability due to micro uncertainty has increased especially for less skilled workers.
Aggregate uncertainty has decreased especially for unskilled workers. The recent increase in
uncertainty has microeconomic origins. Our evidence of substantially increased uncertainty
at the micro level for recent cohorts of unskilled labor supports the increased turbulence
hypothesis of Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004). Conventional measures of aggregate inequality
do not reveal the substantial contribution of the rise in the uncertainty of the earnings of
less skilled workers to their observed rise in the inequality of their earnings.




                                               22
References

Abbring, J. H. and J. J. Heckman (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, part
  III: Distributional treatment effects, dynamic treatment effects, dynamic discrete choice,
  and general equilibrium policy evaluation. In J. Heckman and E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook
  of Econometrics, Volume 6B. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Forthcoming.

Anand, S. (1983). Inequality and Poverty in Malaysia: Measurement and Decomposition.
  New York: Published for the World Bank by Oxford University Press.

Atkinson, A. B. (1970, September). On the measurement of inequality. Journal of Economic
  Theory 2 (3), 244–266.

Atkinson, A. B. and F. Bourguignon (2000). Introduction: Income distribution and eco-
  nomics. In A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (Eds.), Handbook of Income Distribution,
  Volume 1, pp. 1–58. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
  Reference to Education. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, distributed
  by Columbia University Press.

Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2002). Partial insurance, information and con-
  sumption dynamics. Technical Report IFS Working Papers: W02/16, Institute for Fiscal
  Studies, London.

Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2004, October). Consumption inequality and
  partial insurance. Technical Report WP04/28, Institute for Fiscal Studies.

Blundell, R. and I. Preston (1998, May). Consumption inequality and income uncertainty.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (2), 603–640.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (2001, June). The dynamics of educational attainment
  for black, hispanic, and white males. Journal of Political Economy 109 (3), 455–99.

                                            23
Carneiro, P., K. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003, May). Estimating distributions of treat-
  ment effects with an application to the returns to schooling and measurement of the effects
  of uncertainty on college choice. International Economic Review 44 (2), 361–422.

Cowell, F. A. (2000). Measurement of inequality. In A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon
  (Eds.), Handbook of Income Distribution, Volume 1, pp. 87–166. Amsterdam: North-
  Holland.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005, April). Separating uncertainty from het-
  erogeneity in life cycle earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture. Oxford Economic Papers 57 (2),
  191–261.

Ferguson, T. S. (1983). Bayesian density estimation by mixtures of normal distributions. In
  H. Chernoff, M. Rizvi, J. Rustagi, and D. Siegmund (Eds.), Recent Advances in Statistics:
  Papers in Honor of Herman Chernoff on his Sixtieth Birthday, pp. 287–302. New York:
  Academic Press.

Flavin, M. A. (1981, October). The adjustment of consumption to changing expectations
  about future income. Journal of Political Economy 89 (5), 974–1009.

Foster, J. E. and A. K. Sen (1997). On Economic Inequality. New York: Oxford University
  Press.

Friedman, M. and S. S. Kuznets (1945). Income from Independent Professional Practice.
  New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gordon, R. J. (2005). What caused the decline in U. S. business cycle volatility? In C. Kent
  and D. Norman (Eds.), The Changing Nature of the Business Cycle, pp. 61–104. Sydney,
  Australia: Economics Group, Reserve Bank of Australia. Proceedings of a conference held
  at the H.C. Coombs Centre for Financial Studies, Kirribilli, Australia on 11-12 July 2005.




                                             24
Gottschalk, P. and R. Moffitt (1994). The growth of earnings instability in the U.S. labor
  market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 217–254.

Hansen, L. P. (1987). Calculating asset prices in three example economies. In T. F. Bewley
  (Ed.), Advances in Econometrics: Fifth World Congress, Volume 1, pp. 207–243. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.

Heckman, J. J. and P. A. LaFontaine (2007). The American high school graduation rate:
  Trends and levels. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Eco-
  nomics.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006). Earnings equations and rates of return:
  The Mincer equation and beyond. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of
  the Economics of Education, Chapter 7, pp. 307–458. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Polachek (1974, June).         Empirical evidence on the functional
  form of the earnings-schooling relationship. Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
  ciation 69 (346), 350–354.

Heckman, J. J. and R. Robb (1985). Using longitudinal data to estimate age, period and
  cohort effects in earnings equations. In W. M. Mason and S. E. Fienberg (Eds.), Cohort
  Analysis in Social Research: Beyond the Identification Problem. New York: Springer-
  Verlag.

Katz, L. F. and D. H. Autor (1999). Changes in the wage structure and earnings inequality. In
  O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Chapter 25,
  pp. 1463–1555. New York: North-Holland.

Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (2004, April-May). European unemployment and turbulence
  revisited in a matching model. Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (2-3),
  456–468.


                                             25
MaCurdy, T. E. (1982, January). The use of time series processes to model the error structure
  of earnings in a longitudinal data analysis. Journal of Econometrics 18 (1), 83–114.

MaCurdy, T. E. (2007). A practitioner’s approach to estimating intertemporal relationships
  using longitudinal data: Lessons from applications in wage dynamics. In J. J. Heckman
  and E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6A of Handbooks in Economics,
  Chapter 62. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Forthcoming.

Matzkin, R. L. (1992, March). Nonparametric and distribution-free estimation of the binary
  threshold crossing and the binary choice models. Econometrica 60 (2), 239–270.

Miller, S. (2004). The National Longitudinal Surveys NLSY79 User’s Guide 1979-2002.
  Washington, DC: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor.

Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York: Columbia University
  Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

Navarro, S. (2007). Reconsidering the importance of borrowing constraints, uncertainty and
  preferences for college attendance: Using observed choices to infer agent’s information.
  Unpublished manuscript, University of Wisconsin, Department of Economics.

Roy, A. (1951, June). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic
  Papers 3 (2), 135–146.

Schennach, S. M. (2004, January). Estimation of nonlinear models with measurement error.
  Econometrica 72 (1), 33–75.

Sen, A. K. (2000). Social justice and the distribution of income. In A. B. Atkinson and
  F. Bourguignon (Eds.), Handbook of Income Dynamics, Volume 1, pp. 59–85. Amsterdam:
  North-Holland.

Sims, C. A. (1972, September). Money, income, and causality. American Economic Re-
  view 62 (4), 540–552.

                                             26
                             Table 1:
Schooling Choice and Rates of Return per Year of College
                 Comparison Across Cohorts
                             NLS/66              NLSY/79
High School Graduates         58.17%               64.19%
College Graduates             41.83%               35.81%
Mincer Returns to College1 9.01%                   11.96%
Mincer Returns to College2 10.17%                  12.41%
                          3
Mincer Returns to College     8.17%                11.00%
1
  Pooled OLS Regression, controlling only for Mincer Experience and
Mincer Experience Squared
2
  Pooled OLS Regression, controlling for Mincer Experience, Mincer
Experience Squared, and Year Dummies
3
  Pooled OLS Regression, controlling for Mincer Experience, Mincer
Experience Squared, Cognitive Skills, Urban and South Residence
at Age 14, and Year Dummies (Dependent Variable: Log Earnings).




                                27
                                    Table 2:
           Mean Rates of Return per Year of College by Schooling Group
                                    NLS/66                      NLSY/79
Schooling Group           Mean Returns Standard Error Mean Returns Standard Error
High School Graduates        0.0592          0.0046      0.0955         0.0063
College Graduates            0.0877          0.0070      0.1355         0.0080
Individuals at the Margin    0.0750          0.0178      0.1184         0.0216




                                     28
                                                     Table 3:
                                             Evolution of Uncertainty
                                                     NLS/1966
                                                                                College High School      Returns
     Total Variance                                                             195.882   136.965        611.245
     Variance of Unforecastable Components                                      76.332    31.615         167.187
     Variance of Forecastable Components                                        119.550   105.350        444.058
                                                      NLS/1979
                                                                                College High School      Returns
     Total Variance                                                             292.368   165.350        823.200
     Variance of Unforecastable Components                                      84.464    48.137         221.976




29
     Variance of Forecastable Components                                        207.904   117.214        601.223
                                                       Evolution
                                                                                 College   High School   Returns
     Percentage Increase in   Total Variance                                     49.26%      20.72%      34.68%
     Percentage Increase in   Variance of Unforecastable Components              10.65%      52.26%      32.77%
     Percentage Increase in   Variance of Forecastable Components                73.90%      11.26%      35.39%
                                    Percentage Increase in Total Variance by Source
                                                                                 College   High School   Returns
     Percentage Increase in   Total Variance due to Unforecastable Components 8.43%          58.20%      25.85%
     Percentage Increase in   Total Variance due to Forecastable Components      91.57%      41.80%      74.15%
                                   Table 4:
                    Share of Variance of Business Cycle
              in Total Variance of Unforecastable Components

                          NLS/1966                       NLSY/1979
               Point Estimate Standard Error   Point Estimate Standard Error
High School        0.1111          0.0147          0.0156         0.0020
College            0.0452          0.0077          0.0392         0.0052
Overall            0.0679          0.0107          0.0328         0.0042




                                     30
                                                      Table 5:
                                                        A
                                                Gini Decomposition
                                                                                      NLS/66        NLSY/79      %Growth
 Factual Economy: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty1                                      0.1803         0.2088       15.85%
 Counterfactual: Fixing Schooling Choices as in Factual Economy
 Heterogeneity Only2                                                                   0.1591         0.1825     14.73%

                                                      B
                                          The Theil Entropy Index T
                                                    Overall
                                                                                      NLS/66        NLSY/79      %Growth
 Factual Economy: Heterogeneity and            Uncertainty1                           0.0502         0.0693       37.98%
 Counterfactual: Fixing Schooling Choices as in Factual Economy
 Heterogeneity Only2                                                                   0.0390         0.0522     33.76%
                                    Within Schooling Groups
                                                                                      NLS/66        NLSY/79      %Change
 Factual Economy: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty1                                      0.0491         0.0631       28.53%
 Counterfactual: Fixing Schooling Choices as in Factual Economy
 Heterogeneity Only2                                                                   0.0378         0.0465     22.85%
                                    Between Schooling Groups
                                                                                      NLS/66        NLSY/79      %Change
 Factual Economy: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty1                                      0.0011         0.0062      447.37%
 Counterfactual: Fixing Schooling Choices as in Factual Economy
 Heterogeneity Only2                                                                   0.0011         0.0057     394.22%
1 LetYk,s,t,i denote the earnings of an agent i, i = 1, ..., nk , at age t, t = 22, ..., 36, in schooling level s,
s = high school, college, and cohort k, k = N LS/1966, N LSY /1979. We model earnings Yk,s,t,i as:

                Yk,s,t,i = µs,k (Xk ) + θ1,k,i α1,k,s,t,i + θ2,k,i α2,k,s,t,i + θ3,k,i α3,k,s,t,i + εk,s,t,i .         (i)
                                                                           P ∗ Yk,s,t,i
The present value of earnings at schooling level s, Yk,s,i , is Yk,s,i = Tt=1 (1+ρ)    t−1 . The observed present

value of earnings satisfies Yk,i = Sk,i Yk,1,i +(1 − Sk,i ) Yk,0,i where Sk,i = 1 if agent i in cohort k graduates
college, and Sk,i = 0 if the person graduates high school. Let Ck,i denote the direct costs for individual
i in cohort k. The schooling choice is:

                                  Sk,i = 1 ⇔ E ( Yk,1,i − Yk,0,i − Ck,i | Ik ) ≥ 0.                                   (ii)

This is the factual economy. In this row, we show the inequality measure in the subtitle.
2 We simulate the economy by replacing (i) with:


                                 h
                               Yk,s,t,i = µs,k (Xk ) + θ1,k,i α1,k,s,t,i + θ2,k,i α2,k,s,t,i ,
          h
where Yk,s,t,i are the individual earnings when idiosyncratic uncertainty is completely shut down. The
present value of earnings when only heterogeneity is accounted for is constructed in a similar manner:
                   h
          PT ∗ Yk,s,t,i
  h
Yk,s,i =    t=1 (1+ρ)t−1 . The schooling choices are as determined in (ii). In this row, we show the
inequality measure for the concept given in the subtitle for the observed truncated present value of
            h
earnings Yk,s,i when we constrain schooling choices to be the same as in the economy that generates
the first row.

                                                          31
                                                                              Table 5C:
                                                                           Atkinson Index
                                                                                                      ε = 0.5                                      ε = 1.0
                                                                                        NLS/66       NLSY/79         %Change         NLS/66       NLSY/79    %Change
      Factual Economy: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty1                                   0.0276        0.0389          0.4111         0.0586        0.0847     0.4446
      Counterfactual: Fixing Schooling Choices as in Factual Economy
      Heterogeneity Only2                                                                0.0213         0.0286           0.3437          0.0447    0.0604     0.3503

                                                                                                      ε = 1.5                                      ε = 2.0
                                                                                        NLS/66       NLSY/79         %Change         NLS/66       NLSY/79    %Change
      Factual Economy: Heterogeneity and         Uncertainty1                           0.0968        0.1467          0.5147         0.1627        0.2627     0.6149
      Counterfactual: Fixing Schooling Choices as in Factual Economy
      Heterogeneity Only2                                                                0.0716         0.0980           0.3687          0.1060    0.1506     0.4205
     1 LetYk,s,t,i denote the earnings of an agent i, i = 1, ..., nk , at age t, t = 1, ..., T, in schooling level s, s = high school, college, and cohort
     k, k = N LS/1966, N LSY /1979. We model earnings Yk,s,t,i as:

                                        Yk,s,t,i = µs,k (Xk ) + θ1,k,i α1,k,s,t,i + θ2,k,i α2,k,s,t,i + θ3,k,i α3,k,s,t,i + εk,s,t,i .                             (i)
                                                                                   P ∗ Yk,s,t,i
     The present value of earnings in schooling level s, Yk,s,i , is Yk,s,i = Tt=1 (1+ρ)      t−1 . The observed truncated present value of earnings is

     Yk,i = Sk,i Yk,1,i + (1 − Sk,i ) Yk,0,i . Let Ck,i denote the direct costs for individual i in cohort k. The schooling choice is:
32




                                                          Sk,i = 1 ⇔ E ( Yk,1,i − Yk,0,i − Ck,i | Ik ) ≥ 0.                                                        (ii)

     This is the factual economy. We then compute the average present value of earnings across all individuals in cohort k, µk = n1 ni=1
                                                                                                                                   P k
                                                                                                                                         Yk,i .
     For a given inequality aversion parameter , we compute the level of permanent income Ȳk () that generates the same welfare as the
     social welfare of the actual distribution in cohort k:
                                                                1−         nk
                                                                                (Yk,i )1− − 1
                                                        
                                                         Ȳk ()     −1   1 X
                                                                        =
                                                              1−         nk        1−
                                                                                          i=1

                                                                      Ȳk ()
     For each value of , the Atkinson Index is A () = 1 −             µk .    In this row, we show the Atkinson Index for the observed present value of
     earnings Yk,i for different values of .
     2 We simulate the economy by replacing (i) with:


                                                         h
                                                       Yk,s,t,i = µs,k (Xk ) + θ1,k,i α1,k,s,t,i + θ2,k,i α2,k,s,t,i ,
             h
     where Yk,s,t,i are the individual earnings when idiosyncratic uncertainty is completely shut down. The present value of earnings when
                                                                                              h
                                                                                     P ∗ Yk,s,t,i
                                                                               h
     only heterogeneity is accounted for is constructed in a similar manner: Yk,s,i = Tt=1 (1+ρ) t−1 . The schooling choices are as determined in
                                                                                                h for different values of  when we constrain
     (ii). In this row, we show the Atkinson Index for the observed present value of earnings Yk,i
     schooling choices, Sk,i , to be observed in the factual economy.
                                                                            Figure 1
                                                                      Mean Earnings Profile
                                                                        NLS/66 Sample
                                                            Comparison Across Schooling Within Cohorts


                                  5.7

                                  5.2

                                  4.7
Earnings (Ten Thousand Dollars)




                                  4.2

                                  3.7

                                  3.2

                                  2.7

                                  2.2

                                  1.7

                                  1.2
                                        22   23   24   25   26      27      28      29      30      31     32   33   34   35   36
                                                                                   Age

                                                                  High School - NLS/66      College - NLS/66
                                                                            Figure 2
                                                                      Mean Earnings Profile
                                                                        NLSY/79 Sample
                                                            Comparison Across Schooling Within Cohorts



                                  5.7

                                  5.2
Earnings (Ten Thousand Dollars)




                                  4.7

                                  4.2

                                  3.7

                                  3.2

                                  2.7

                                  2.2

                                  1.7

                                  1.2
                                        22   23   24   25   26      27      28      29      30      31    32     33   34   35   36
                                                                                   Age

                                                                  High School - NLSY/79      College - NLSY/79
                                                                                Figure 3
                                                                     Standard Deviation of Earnings
                                                                           High School Sample
                                                            Comparison Within Schooling Groups Across Cohorts


                                  2.4

                                  2.2

                                   2
Earnings (Ten Thousand Dollars)




                                  1.8

                                  1.6

                                  1.4

                                  1.2

                                   1

                                  0.8

                                  0.6
                                        22   23   24   25       26       27      28         29     30     31      32     33   34   35   36
                                                                                        Age

                                                                     High School - NLS/66        High School - NLSY/79
                                                                       Figure 4
                                                            Standard Deviation of Earnings
                                                                    College Sample
                                                   Comparison Within Schooling Groups Across Cohorts


                         2.4

                         2.2

                          2
(Ten Thousand Dollars)




                         1.8

                         1.6

                         1.4

                         1.2

                          1

                         0.8

                         0.6
                               22   23   24   25       26     27      28         29     30      31        32   33   34   35   36
                                                                             Age

                                                              College - NLS/66        College - NLSY/79
                                      Figure 5
                          Densities of earnings at age 33
                            Overall Sample NLSY/79
0.35
                                                                                Fitted
                                                                                Actual
0.3


0.25


0.2


0.15


0.1


0.05


  0
   0               5                10            15                  20             25
                                    Ten Thousand Dollars

  Let Y denote earnings at age 33 in the overall sample. Here we plot the density
  functions f(y) generated from the data (the solid curve), against that predicted
  by the model (the dashed line).
                                      Figure 6A
                        Densities of present value of earnings
                          High School Sample NLSY/79

 0.04
                                                                         Factual
                                                                         Counterfactual
0.035


 0.03


0.025


 0.02


0.015


 0.01


0.005


   0
    0      10      20      30       40     50      60       70      80        90      100
                                    Ten Thousand Dollars

  Present value of earnings from age 22 to 36 for High School Graduates discounted
  using an interest rate of 5%. Here we plot the factual density function f(y0|S=0)
  (the solid curve), against the counterfactual density function f(y1|S=0) (the dashed. line).
  We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.
                                        Figure 6B
                         Densities of present value of earnings
                           High School Sample NLS/1966
 0.05
                                                                          Factual
0.045                                                                     Counterfactual


 0.04

0.035

 0.03

0.025

 0.02

0.015

 0.01

0.005

   0
        0   10      20       30      40     50      60      70       80        90      100
                                     Ten Thousand Dollars
   Present value of earnings from age 22 to 36 for High School Graduates discounted
   using an interest rate of 5%. Here we plot the factual density function f(y0|S=0)
   (the solid curve), against the counterfactual density function f(y1|S=0) (the dashed. line).
   We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.
                                    Figure 7A
                  Densities of present value of earnings to age 36
                             College Sample NLSY/79
 0.04
                                                                         Factual
                                                                         Counterfactual
0.035


 0.03


0.025


 0.02


0.015


 0.01


0.005


   0
        0   10      20      30      40      50       60     70      80        90          100
                                    Ten Thousand Dollars

  Present value of earnings from age 22 to 36 for College Graduates discounted
  using an interest rate of 5%. Here we plot the factual density function f(y1|S=1)
  (the solid curve), against the counterfactual density function f(y0|S=1) (the dashed .line).
  We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.
                                     Figure 7B
                   Densities of present value of earnings to age 36
                             College Sample NLS/1966
 0.05
                                                                         Factual
0.045                                                                    Counterfactual


 0.04

0.035

 0.03

0.025

 0.02

0.015

 0.01

0.005

   0
        0   10      20      30      40      50       60     70      80        90      100
                                    Ten Thousand Dollars


    Present value of earnings from age 22 to 36 for College Graduates discounted
    using an interest rate of 5%. Here we plot the factual density function f(y1|S=1)
    (the solid curve), against the counterfactual density function f(y0|S=1) (the dashed line).
    We use kernel density estimation to smooth these functions.
                                          Figure 8A
                            Densities of Gross Returns to College
                                      NLSY/79 Sample
 2
                                                                      High School Graduates
1.8                                                                   College Graduates


1.6

1.4

1.2

 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
 -100                 -50               0                 50               100                150
                                              Percent
      Let Y0,Y1 denote the present value of earnings from age 22 to age 36 in the high school
      and college sectors, respectively. Define ex post returns to college as the ratio R=(Y1-Y0)/Y0.
      Let f(r) denote the density function of the random variable R. The solid line is the density of
      ex post returns to colege for high school graduates, that is f(r|S=0). The dashed line is the density
      of ex post returns to college for college graduates, that is, f(r|S=1). This assumes that the agent
      chooses schooling without knowing q3 and the innovations es,t for s = high school, college
      and t = 22, ..., 36.
                                    Figure 8B
                       Densities of Gross Returns to College
                                 NLS/1966 Sample
2.5
                                                                   High School Graduates
                                                                   College Graduates


 2




1.5




 1




0.5




 0
 -100            -50                 0               50                100                 150
                                          Percent
  Let Y0,Y1 denote the present value of earnings from age 22 to age 36 in the high school
  and college sectors, respectively. Define ex post returns to college as the ratio R=(Y1-Y0)/Y0.
  Let f(r) denote the density function of the random variable R. The solid line is the density of
  ex post returns to colege for high school graduates, that is f(r|S=0). The dashed line is the density
  of ex post returns to college for college graduates, that is, f(r|S=1). This assumes that the agent
  chooses schooling without knowing q3 and the innovations es,t for s = high school, college
  and t = 22, ..., 36.
                                          Figure 9A
                   The densities of total and unforecastable components
             in present value of high school earnings for the NLSY/79 sample
 0.04
                                                                     Total
                                                                     Unforecastable Components
0.035



 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



    0
    -100      -80      -60      -40      -20      0        20       40       60       80         100
                                         Ten Thousand Dollars

        In this figure we plot the density of total (the solid curve) against the density of the
        unforecastable components (the dashed curve) for the present value of high-school earnings
        from ages 22 to 36 for the NLSY/79 sample of white males. The present value of earnings is
        calculated using a 5% interest rate.
                                              Figure 9B
                       The densities of total and unforecastable components
                  in present value of high school earnings for the NLS/66 sample
0.045
                                                                           Total
                                                                           Unforecastable Components
 0.04


0.035


 0.03


0.025


 0.02


0.015


 0.01


0.005


   0
    -100        -80      -60      -40      -20       0         20     40         60        80          100
                                            Ten Thousand Dollars

        In this figure we plot the density of total (the solid curve) against the density of the
        unforecastable components (the dashed curve) for the present value of high-school earnings
        from ages 22 to 36 for the NLS/66 sample of white males. The present value of earnings is
        calculated using a 5% interest rate.
                                                Figure 10A
                          The densities of total and unforecastable components
                      in present value of college earnings for the NLSY/79 sample
 0.04
                                                                       Total
                                                                       Unforecastable Components
0.035



 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



    0
    -100        -80        -60     -40     -20       0         20     40       60        80        100
                                           Ten Thousand Dollars

        In this figure we plot the density of total (the solid curve) against the density of the
        unforecastable components (the dashed curve) for the present value of college earnings
        from ages 22 to 36 for the NLSY/79 sample of white males. The present value of earnings is
        calculated using a 5% interest rate.
                                               Figure 10B
                         The densities of total and unforecastable components
                      in present value of college earnings for the NLS/66 sample
 0.04
                                                                           Total
                                                                           Unforecastable Components
0.035



 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



   0
    -100        -80        -60     -40      -20       0         20    40         60        80          100
                                             Ten Thousand Dollars

        In this figure we plot the density of total (the solid curve) against the density of the
        unforecastable components (the dashed curve) for the present value of college earnings
        from ages 22 to 36 for the NLS/66 sample of white males. The present value of earnings is
        calculated using a 5% interest rate.
                                           Figure 11A
               The densities of total and unforecastable components for the gross
                    returns college vs high school for the NLS/66 Sample
0.035
                                                                       Total
                                                                       Unforecastable Components

 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



    0
    -100       -80      -60      -40       -20       0         20     40       60        80        100
                                           Ten Thousand Dollars

        In this figure we plot the density of total (the solid curve) against the density of the
        unforecastable components (the dashed curve) for the present value of earnings differences
        (or returns to college) from ages 22 to 36 for the NLSY/79 sample of white males.
        The present value of earnings is calculated using a 5% interest rate.
                                               Figure 11B
                      The densities of total and unforecastable components for the
                      gross returns college vs high school for the NLS/66 Sample
 0.04
                                                                            Total
                                                                            Unforecastable Components
0.035



 0.03



0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



   0
    -100        -80        -60     -40      -20       0         20     40         60        80          100
                                             Ten Thousand Dollars

        In this figure we plot the density of total (the solid curve) against the density of the
        unforecastable components (the dashed curve) for the present value of earnings differences
        (or returns to college) from ages 22 to 36 for the NLS/66 sample of white males.
        The present value of earnings is calculated using a 5% interest rate.
                                                               Figure 12A
                                                   Profile of Variance of Uncertainty
                                                          High School Sample
                                                         NLS/66 vs NLSY/79

                         3.0


                         2.5
(Ten Thousand Dollars)
 Variance of Earnings




                         2.0


                         1.5


                         1.0


                         0.5


                         0.0
                               22   23   24   25    26    27     28       29    30      31   32   33    34   35   36
                                                                        Age

                                                   High School - NLS/66         High School - NLSY/79
                                                               Figure 12B
                                                   Profile of Variance of Uncertainty
                                                             College Sample
                                                         NLS/66 vs NLSY/79

                         6.0


                         5.0
(Ten Thousand Dollars)
 Variance of Earnings




                         4.0


                         3.0


                         2.0


                         1.0


                         0.0
                               22   23   24   25   26      27    28        29   30      31   32     33   34   35   36
                                                                        Age

                                                        College - NLS/66        College - NLSY/79
                                                                        Figure 13A
                                    Profile of Variance of Heterogeneity Forecastable Components of Variance by Age
                                                                   High School Sample
                                                                  NLS/66 vs NLSY/79

                         1.6

                         1.4

                         1.2
(Ten Thousand Dollars)
 Variance of Earnings




                         1.0

                         0.8

                         0.6

                         0.4

                         0.2

                         0.0
                               22     23     24     25     26     27     28      29    30     31     32    33     34   35   36
                                                                               Age

                                                          High School - NLS/66         High School - NLSY/79
                                                                        Figure 13B
                                    Profile of Variance of Heterogeneity Forecastable Components of Earnings by Age
                                                                     College Sample
                                                                  NLS/66 vs NLSY/79

                         3.5

                         3.0
(Ten Thousand Dollars)




                         2.5
 Variance of Earnings




                         2.0

                         1.5

                         1.0

                         0.5

                         0.0
                               22     23     24     25     26      27    28        29   30    31     32     33    34   35   36
                                                                               Age

                                                                College - NLS/66        College - NLSY/79
