                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PROSPECTIVE CHANGES IN TAX LAW AND
               THE VALUE OF DEPRECIABLE REAL ESTATE


                      Patrc H. Hendershott
                          David C. Ling


                      Working Paper No. 1352




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1984




The study was supported by the Center for Real Estate Education and
Research, The Ohio State University, from funds supplied by the
Ohio Real Estate Education and Research Fund. Participants in the
OSU Pablic Finance Workshop provided useful comments on an early
draft.  The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1352
                                               May 1984




                 Prospective Changes in Tax Law and the Value of
                             Depreciable Real Estate



                                   ABSTRACT

      The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 significantly reduced the taxation

of income—producing properties by accelerating tax depreciation on both new

and, especially, existing properties. A partial reversal of the 1981 legis-

lation appears likely. To provide some insight into the possible effects of a

decrease in tax depreciation of income—producing properties, two potential tax

changes are analyzed: an increase from 15 to 20 years in the tax service lives

of both new and existing properties and an increase for existing properties

only. Both residential and commercial/industrial properties are considered.




Patric H. Hendershott                           David C. Ling
321 Hagerty Hall                                Faculty of Finance
1775 College Road                               College of Business Admin.
Ohio State University                           University of Florida
Columbus, OH 43210                              Gainesville, Florida 32611
(614) 422—0552                                  (904) 392—1330
                                    Section 1

                                  INTRODUCTION


       The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA) significantly reduced the

 taxation of income—producing properties by shortening the cost recovery

 periods (tax lives) of both new and existing properties. Such an increase in

 tax depreciation would, ceteris paribus, raise property values and reduce the

 level of real rents. However, we likely will not experience the full increase

 in values and decline in rents because a partial reversal of the 1981 Act is

 already in process.

       In March 1984, the U.S. Senate Finance Committee approved a lengthening

of cost recovery periods for both residential and commercial properties from

15 to 20 years.1 This bill would also recapture, at the time of sale, all of

the excess depreciation even if an installment sale were utilized. In April

1984, the full Senate passed a bill increasing the tax service lives to 20

years in 1984, 19 years in 1985 and 18 years thereafter. What form final

legislation will take depends on the outcome of a Senate—House conference and

the concurrence of both full bodies of Congress and the President.

      In this paper, we calculate the impact that alternative tax changes

would have on the value of both residential and commercial/industrial
                                                                        proper-
ties. Two separate proposals are considered in detail. The first would

increase tax lives from 15 to 20 years on both new and existing conventional

residential and commercial properties. The second would increase tax lives of

existing properties only. The less—favorable treatment of existing properties

relative to new ones would be consistent with the pre—ERTA tax environment.




1Under the current proposal, the 15 year recovery period would remain
available to investors in qualified low income housing.
                                     —2—




      Our model, which extends analyses of earlier tax code changes in two

important respects, is presented in Section 2, and the results for the two tax

changes are reported in Sections 3 and 4. Section 5 contains an informal

analysis of the recapture provision and other minor possible variants of the

1984 legislation and provides a general equilibrium prospective. The paper is

summarized in Section 6.



                                  Section 2

                        THE MODEL AND PARAMETERIZATION

      The key element in the computation of investment value responses to tax

code alterations is a simulation model that translates the expected cash flows

associated with a property (net operating income, debt service payments,

depreciation and interest tax savings, and sales proceeds—net of selling costs

and tax liabilities) into a market price (value). The model developed by Ling

and Whinihan (1984) simultaneously determines the optimal expected year of

sale, the sales price in that year (and in all other years because they are

needed to specify the optimal year of sale), and the optimal depreciation

method. Of course, all expected future sales prices (and optimal holding

periods) depend upon all future cash flows, including tax savings and

liabilities

      The endogenous determination of future sales prices, rather than the

simplifying assumption that they will be the current price marked up for

general inflation less depreciation, is crucial to analysis of tax changes



    should be emphasized that the 'utils' of rental services provided by the
property over time are exogenous. That is, the "want satisfying" ability of
the property is not dependent upon tax law, interest rates, or any other
variables that are subject to change over time. A change in such variables
will affect the equilibrium level of rents, but it will not alter the relative
pattern of these rents over the property's economic life.
                                       —3—



 that affect new and existing properties differently, such as ERTA and the five

 year stretch out of tax depreciation on existing properties only analyzed in

 Section 43 As is shown there, prices of existing properties clearly have a

 life of their own, a life that affects prices of new properties and long—run

 equilibrium market rents unless trading was suboptimal prior to the tax change

 and is suboptimal after the change.

       The second novelty of the model is an explicit consideration of supply

 factors. This includes both allowing market rents to adjust to their long—run

 value with a lag and letting reproduction costs or the long—run supply price

 respond to changes in demand.



2.1 The Valuation Equation

      The basic valuation equation employed within the dynamic programming

algorithm is the traditional discounted cash flow equation that measures and

values cash flows to the equity position after all operating, financial, and

tax expenses have been paid. Assume that

      1. the fraction xl of the property's purchase price is financed at the

          mortgage or debt rate Pd,

      2. the costs associated with refinancing during the holding period are

          prohibitive,

      3. the property is expected to be sold after h years at which time a

          brokerage commission of 3 percent will be paid, and

      4. the cash flows are discounted at the nominal, after—tax, return on

          equity, Re.

The value of the property at the beginning of year j is:



3For analyses of ERTA that make the simplifying assumption, see Bruggeman,
Fisher and Stern (1982) and Hendershott and Shilling (1982).
                       •
                                                  —4—




            V(j,h) =
                                 (l-To)R(i)       +          T0DEPF(i)P(j)
                                                                                               (1)
                                  (l+Re)'                     (l+Re)
                           1=1                        1=1


                       +   P(j+h) (1—B)     —   Tg[P(j+h)(l—B) — P(j)ACDP(h)]
                            (l+Re)h                            (l+Re)h

                                                        h                    h
                                    L(h)                       PAY(±)              T0RdL(i—l)
                       +L(O)—                     —                      +
                                    (l+Re)"            1=1
                                                              (l+Re)         1=1
                                                                                     (1+Re)'




where V(j,h) =   the   investment value at the beginning of year j                     if   held h
                 years,

       R(i) =    net operating income or "rents" in year i of the holding
                 period,

          To =   marginal ordinary income tax rate,
    DEPF(i) = percentage of the initial tax basis that is written off in year
              i of the holding period,

        P(j) =   current     market demand price,

      P(j+h) =   competitive market demand price of the property at the end of
                 the holding period,

          Tg =   marginal capital gains tax rate,
    ACDP(h) = percentage of the initial tax basis not written off during the
              holding period,

      PAY(i) =   total     mortgage payment, and

       L(i) = balance of the loan at the end of year i of the holding period.

The first two sums are the discounted values, respectively, of the cash flows

from annual operations and the depreciation tax shield. The third and fourth

terms represent the before—tax cash flow from the sale of the property and the

resulting capital gain tax liability.4 The remaining four terms capture the

cash flow effects of debt financing. L(O) represents the initial value of the


4The calculation of the capital gain tax liability in equation (1) assumes
that straight—line depreciation is used. In analyses where accelerated
depreciation is assumed, the equation is adjusted to reflect the appropriate
recapture provisions.
 mortgage and L(h) the outstanding loan obligation at the end of the holding

 period. The two sums are the present values of the mortgage payments and of

 the tax savings from interest deductions, respectively.

       When a standard fixed—rate mortgage is used,




             PAY(i) = PAY =   RdxlP(j)    (l+Rd)m
                                                                          (2)
                                  (l+Rd)m — 1
 and

             L(i) = {(l+Rd)m        (l+Rd)hJxlP(j)
                             —
                                                                          (3)
                              (l÷Rd)m —   I

where m equals the original maturity of the mortgage. Because P(j) is an

 endogenous variable equal, for the marginal investor, to V(j,h)   ,   the reduced—
form market valuation equation is obtained by substituting V(j,h) for P(j) on

the right hand side of equation (1) and factoring. In reduced form, current

investment value is a function of exogenous parameters and the selling price

of the property at the end of the holding period (h years) which is endo-

genously determined in a prior iteration of the algorithm. The competitive

market demand price in year j, P(j), is




            P(j) =   MAX V(j,h)                                           (4)
                     hcH



where H equals the number of years of remaining economic life. The holding

period (h) that maximizes V(j,h) is the optimal holding period for a buyer in

year j. The maximum V(j,h) becomes the market price at the beginning of year

j. It is then used as an input to the investor's optimization problem in

years j—l, j—2, etc.
                                              —6—



 2.2 Addition of the Supply Side

        Equation (1) in conjunction with (4) determines the demand prices for

new and existing properties of every vintage. Full equilibrium requires that,

for new property, P(j) equals the "supply price" or reproduction cost of a new

property, i.e.,



                          P(j) = P       .                                   (5)
                                     5



The issue here is the specification of reproduction costs or
                                                                      P5.

           The simpliest assumption is that the supply price is independent of

the tax law change and thus that there is no long—run change in the value of

new properties. A richer model is obtained by positing demand and supply

equations for the stock of income—producing properties and solving for the

price that equates them. We assume that supply (Q)            is   elastic with respect

to price



                             =



and demand              is b elastic with respect to rents



                             =   aRb,



where    >   0,   b <   0.   Equating and solving for price



                             = ZR   ,                                        (6)
                                                 —7--




 where Z =       (a/a)   and y =   b/s.     Simultaneous solution of (1) and (6) ——   using
 (5) ——    then determines P and R.

       Exhibit 1 illustrates this solution and provides a graphical derivation

 of the P(R) relation. The negative Qd(R) relation is illustrated in the

                                   ——PUT EXHIBIT 1 NEAR HERE——

 lower left panel of the Exhibit, and the positive Q(P) relation is in the

upper right. These quantity relations should be interpreted as relative to

trend; both schedules will                shift outward over time. Equation (1), after

substituting P for V(j,h), gives the positively sloped demand schedule in the

upper left panel which is drawn for a specific tax depreciation schedule,

discount rate, etc. The market equilibrium price, rent, and quantity (P°, R°

and Q°) are those consistent with the three schedules. Alternative sets of P

and R that satisfy the             and      functions are obtained by starting with an R

value on the d schedule in the lower left panel and moving counter—clockwise

through the panels.

      An increase in tax service lives (decrease in the depreciation tax

shield) will shift the demand curve to the right, raising rents, lowering

price, and reducing the stock of income—producing properties. Note that if

builders were unresponsive to price ——            if the Q schedule were vertical (=O)
the supply schedule in the upper left panel would also be vertical and only

price would change. On the other hand, if builders were totally responsive to

price ——    if   the Q schedule were horizontal               the   supply schedule in the

upper left panel would also be horizonal, and only rents and the quantity

would change.
                              —8—



    Exhibit 1: Simul taneous Determination of Price and Rent




                        D
P



P




2




                                                               Q
                                          —9—



 2. 3 Parameterization

         A 70 year economic life is assumed for the improvements based on the

 findings of Hulten and Wycoff (1978) .    A reverse Sum—of—the—Years—Digit (SYD)

pattern of economic depreciation is assumed over the 70 year life based on

Ling and Whinihan (1984). That is, the utility provided by the improvements

and, therefore, gross rents decline at an increasing rate through time. We

also assume that operating expenses are proportional to gross rents.

         It is assumed that land accounts for 20 percent of the property's

initial price and that the value of the land remains constant in real terms.

In some year j, the value of the existing property to a new investor is less

than the market price of the land (residual land value) .    This   condition is

incorporated by modifying the dynamic programming procedure to require that

the market price in year j must equal or exceed the nominal residual land

value.

         We assume ERTA tax law in our base—case simulations which offers

identical tax depreciation options to investors in conventional residential

and commercial income properties——l75 percent declining balance or straight—

line with a 15 year cost recovery period. The marginal investor is assumed to

be in a marginal tax bracket (To) on regular income equal to 45 percent and

have a marginal tax rate on capital gain income (Tg) equal to 18 (0.4x45)

percent. We assume that the marginal investor is not affected by minimum tax

complications.

      For investors in low to medium tax brackets, a measure of their

opportunity cost of equity capital is the after—tax mortgage interest rate

(plus a risk premium) because fully taxable bonds and mortgages are reasonable

investment alternatives for such investors. For higher tax bracket indivi-

duals, however, tax—exempt securities provide a better after—tax rate of
                                             —1 0—




 return. Because the long—term municipal bond rate has generally been 70

percent of the fully taxable rate, the after—tax rate of return on equity is

 assumed to be equal to 70 percent of the nominal mortgage interest rate

adjusted by a risk premium (PREM)



             Re = 0.7Rd + PREM.                                              (5)




PREM is set equal to 8 percent.

       Two assumptions with respect to the determination of nominal mortgage

interest rates are employed. Case one assumes Fisher interest rates. Rd is

equal to the product of the assumed constant, real, before—tax rate of return

on debt (RRd) and the expected inflation rate ()         or


             Rd = (l+RRd) (l+ir) —   1.                                      (6)




RRd is set equal to 4 percent which implies that d(Rd)/d() =         1.04.   Because

Re = 0.7Rd+pREM, the real after—tax discount rate declines with increases in

anticipated inflation. Consequently, this specification is labeled the low

discount rate case. Case two assumes that nominal mortgage rates respond to

changes in inflation in such a way as to keep the real after—tax mortgage rate

constant for an investor in the 30 percent marginal tax bracket or



            Rd = RRd + Tr/0.7,                                               (7)




which implies that d(Rd)/d('ri) =    1.43.    This specification is labeled the high

discount rate case.
                                      —11--




       Initial loan—to—value ratios, determined either by optimizing behavior

  (the marginal costs of debt and equity are equal) or leverage constraints

 imposed by lenders, are assumed to be 80 percent for residential properties

 and 75 percent for commercial properties. In both cases, the loan must be

 amortized over 25 years, or by year 70, whichever is less. Nominal operating

 income (rents) and the nominal residual land value for each year are computed

 by compounding real values at the expected inflation rate.

       Studies of residential housing have provided estimates of the relative

 price and rent elasticities. There is general agreement that the rent

 elasticity, b, is about —0.4 [Hanushek and Quigley (1980)].    Supply—price

 elasticity estimates vary widely. The lowest estimate of      is Poterba's

 (1980) 2; Smith (1976) provides an estimate of 9. To obtain the greatest

plausible slope (in absolute value) for the price—rent relation, we select      =

2, in which case y = —0.2.   This will provide a high estimate of the decline

in price caused by the tax law change. The supply—price elasticities of

commercial and residential properties should be similar. There is less reason

for this to be true of the 'rent" elasticities, but in the absence of

alternative estimates we take b to be —0.4 for commercial properties also.



                                   Section 3

            INCREASED TAXATION OF BOTH EXISTING AND NEW PROPERTIES

      An increase of the tax service life of all properties from 15 to 20

years will lower property values and raise real rents. Estimates of these

impacts for new and existing residential and commercial properties are

reported below.
                                          —12—



 New Residential Properties

      Exhibit 2 contains estimates of the impact of the tax law change on new

 residential properties under two expected inflation senarios (4 and 8

                            ——PLACE EXHIBIT 2 NEAR HERE---

percent), two different discount rates (low and high), and three supply

elasticities (zero, infinity, and 2) .      The exhibit reports the immediate

percentage change in real price or value, the long—run (beyond four years)

percentage change in real price, and the long—run percentage change in real

rents. The specific method of calculating price and rent changes for

different supply—price elasticities and a general interpretation of the

changes are as follows. For a zero supply elasticity, equation (1) is solved

for value assuming constant real rents (R) .      Thus the percentage change in

rents is zero and the immediate and long—run changes in price are equal. For

the infinite—elasticity results, real rents are assumed to be constant for

four years and then jump to a level consistent with an unchanged real value of

new properties at that time. Thus the long—run change in real price is zero;

the immediate decline in price reflects the failure of real rents to jump

immediately to their new equilibrium level and the constraint that the

property earns the market rate of return. In the case of a finite elasticity

(2 in our calculations) ,   real   rents are constant for four years and then jump

to a level consistent with the simultaneous solution of equations (1) and

(6). The four—year real rent adjustment is, in our view, conservative in that

the resultant decline in value is likely to be on the high side. In fact,

real rents will begin to rise shortly after the tax change (or even prior to

the actual change if the change is effective retroactively)
                                          —13—




                                       EXHIBIT 2

       INCREASE IN TAX LIFE OF EXISTING AND NEW PROPERTIES: NEW RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY


                       Supply        Immediate %L\    Long-Run %A   Long—Run %A
                       Elasticity(s) in Price         in Real Price in Real Rents

Inflation Rate of 4%

           Low            0              —12.3           —12.3             ——

           Discount                       —2.5             ——             14.0
           Rate           2               —4.2            —2.2            12.2


           High           0              —10.7           —10.7             ——

           Discount                       —2.5             ——              12.0
           Rate           2               —4.0            —1.8              9.8


Inflation Rate of 8%

           Low            0              —12.5           —12.5              ——

          Discount                        —2.1             ——              14.4
          Rate            2               —4.2            —2.5             11.5


          High            0               —9.4            —9.4

          Discount                        —2.1             ——              10.3
          Rate            2               —3.1            —1.2              9.0
                                         —14—



       Exhibit 3 illustrates the alternative assumptions and responses. As

                         ——PLACE EXHIBIT 3 NEAR HERE ——

 noted in the discussion of Exhibit 1, the lengthening of tax life from 15 to

 20 years shifts the demand schedule out to the right. Assuming low inflation

 and discount rates (see the top panel of Exhibit 2) and a zero supply—price

 elasticity (constant real rents) ,   price   (value) would decline by 12.3 percent

from point A to B. Because the zero—response case implies that builders would

continue to supply new structures at the same rate as prior to the tax law

change even though the price at which the structures can be sold to investors

has declined by 12.3 percent, this result is totally unrealistic. In

contrast, with an infinite supply elasticity, the price of new structures

declines by only 2.5 percent from point A to point C. As time passes —— as

the years in which new properties will earn below long—run equilibrium rents

declines and the demand for the services from income—producing properties

grows, real rents and value rise together along the vector CD. Under our

assumptions, point D is reached after 4 years. New properties will then

command the same real price as they did before the tax law change, and real

rents are 14 percent higher. With a finite—supply elasticity, the long—run

real price declines by 2.2 percent (point F), and the initial decline in

price, reflecting both four years of below long—run real rents and the lower

long—run real price, is 4.2 percent (point E). Real rents rise by 12.2

percent in the long run. A "realistic estimate" of the immediate decline in

value is 2.5 to 4.2 percent.

      Inspection of the remainder of Exhibit 2 reveals little sensitivity of

the realistic estimate to alternative assumptions regarding the inflation and

discount rates. Increases in these rates do lower the estimated price

decline, but only to the 2.1 to 3.1 percent range.
                           —15--




Exhibit 3: An Illustration of Real Price and Rent Responses
           to a Reduction in Tax Service Lives



     PRICE
                                                    Demand
                                                     Price (ERTA)


                                                   Demand
                                                    Price (New Law)



p0
                            A
                                           7
                                       F



                            B




                                                              RENTS
                                     —16—



Used Residential Properties

      Exhibit 4 contains the price changes for existing residential proper-

ties. The calculations presume that prior to the tax change the marginal

                         ——PLACE EXHIBIT 4 NEAR HERE—-

investor assumed that the real estate provisions of ERTA would be in effect

for the remaining life of the property and after the change that the new law

will be in effect for the remaining life. The first column lists the

remaining years of economic life (70 years is a new property) ,   the second the
supply—price elasticity, and the third the percentage change in price. The

calculations are performed for the low and high inflation rate and high—

discount rate cases. The percentage changes in rents are not reported because

they are determined by (and are equal to) those for new properties. The

realistic ranges of percentage declines in price are contrasted with that for

new properties, 2½ to 4 percent.

      Two offsetting factors are at work in these calculations. On the one

hand, the four years of below long—run level market rents increases in

relative importance as the total number of years that long—run market rents

would be earned declines. Thus, the decline in value would be expected to be

greater the shorter the remaining life of the property. On the other hand,

the ratio of the value of the structure to the total value of the property

declines as the property ages. Thus the negative impact of the reduced tax

depreciation on the price, ignoring rent changes, is less the shorter is the

remaining life of the property. (This is indicated by declining price impacts

in the zero elasticity case.) From Exhibit 4, we see that the structure/value

effect outweighs the rent effect throughout the first 30 years of life and

then again in the last 20 years, but the rent effect dominates in the middle

years. In the low inflation rate case, the realistic range of price decline
                                     —17--




                                   EXHIBIT 4

INCREASE IN TAX LIFE OF EXISTING AND NEW PROPERTIES: USED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY



Remaining Yrs.   Long—Run Supply     % Change in Price    % Change in Price
of Econ. Life    Elasticity ()       (low    inflation)   (high inflation)


    70                0                       —10.7             —9.4

    70                                         —2.5             —2.1

    70                2                        —4.0             —3.1


   60                 0                      —10.2

   60                                          —2.1

   60                 2                       —3.6


   50                 0                       —9.6

   50                                         —1.9

   50                 2                       —3.3


   40                 0                       —9.1              —7.5

   40                                         —1.8              —1.0

   40                 2                       —3.1              —1.8


   30                 0                       —8.6

   30                                         —1.9

   30                 2                       —3.2


   20                 0                       —7.0              —6.0

   20                                         —1.6              —1.0

   20                 2                       —2.6              —1.6
                                     —18—



falls from 2.5 to 4.0 percent on new properties to 1.8 to 3.1 percent for 30

year old properties (40 years remaining life) ,   is   roughly constant for a

decade, and then declines further after 40 years. With an 8 percent expected

inflation rate, the range declines from 2.1 to 3.1 percent on new properties

to 1.0 to 1.8 percent for 30 year properties and is then roughly constant for

the next two decades.



Commercial Properties

      Exhibit 5 reports the same estimates as Exhibit 2, except for new

commercial properties rather than residential properties. Assuming low

inflation and discount rates (top panel of Exhibit 5) and a zero supply—price

                        ——PLACE EXHIBIT 5 NEAR HERE——

elasticity, price would decline by 24.6 percent. With an infinite supply

elasticity, the immediate percentage price decrease would be 5.3 percent. The

corresponding long—run increase in real rents is 32.6 percent. With a

finite—supply elasticity of 2, the immediate price decline is 8.9 percent, and

the long—run increase in real rents is 26.5 percent.

      These commercial price responses are roughly twice as large as the

corresponding residential results. This is because straight—line, rather than

accelerated, depreciation is optimal for commercial property and the time

profile of straight—line deductions is more adversely affected than that of

accelerated depreciation, by the five—year lengthening of cost recovery
                                          —19—



                                        EXHIBIT 5

        INCREASE IN TAX LIFE OF EXISTING AND NEW PROPERTIES: NEW COMMERCIAL PROPERTY


                       Supply         Immediate %L     Long—Run %t    Long-Run %1\
                       Elast±city()   in Price         in Real Price in Real Rents
Inflation Rate of 4%

           Low                0           —24.6           —24.6             ——

           Discount                        —5.3             ——             32.6
           Rate            2               —8.9            —4.6            26.5


           High            0             —19.7           —19.7              ——

           Discount                       —5.0             ——              24.6
           Rate           2               —7.7            —3.7             20.0


Inflation Rate of 8%

          Low             0              —16.4           —16.4             ——
          Discount                        —3.1             ——             19.6
          Rate            2               —5.7            —3.0            16.0


          High            0              —11.0           —11.0             ——
          Discount                        —2.7              ——            12.4
          Rate            2               —4.3            —2.1            10.0
                                         —20—



periods .

      Percentage decreases for commercial property are more sensitive to
alternative assumptions regarding inflation and discount rates than were those

for residential properties. With 8 percent inflation, a relatively low

discount rate, and zero supply—price elasticity, price will decline by only

16.4 percent (versus 24.6% at 4% inflation) .    A realistic estimate of the

immediate price decline would decrease to the 3.1 to 5.7 range (from the 5.3

to 8.9 range at 4 percent inflation) .    The reduced commercial price declines

at higher levels of inflation reflect the use of historical cost accounting.

Taking away a fixed percentage of tax depreciation will have less of an impact

on price because all depreciation is relatively less valuable at higher levels

of inflation.




                                     Section 4

                INCREASED TAXATION OF EXISTING PROPERTIES ONLY

      Prior to ERTA, existing properties were treated less favorably than new

properties. Analysis of an increase from 15 to 20 years in the tax service

life of existing properties only should provide an understanding of the

significance of this differential treatment.


5For example, with accelerated depreciation the five year stretchout reduces
the present value of the first 8 years of depreciation deductions by 20%
 (assuming 71 = 4% and a relatively high discount rate) . The corresponding
straight—line reduction is 37%. The impact on market prices of this
relatively larger decrease in the value of the depreciation tax shield is then
amplified by the resultant decline in the value of the interest tax shield.
To demonstrate the interaction of tax depreciation and debt financing on
market prices, we ran select simulations assuming pure equity fianancing.
With 4% inflation, relatively high discount rate, zero supply price
elasticity, and an equity risk premium of 4%, the 5 year stretchout reduces
residential prices by 4.6% (versus 10.7% with debt financing) . The
corresponding price decrease for commercial property is a slightly larger 5.5%
(versus 19.7% with debt financing) . These results suggest that greater use of
equity financing reduces the magnitude of price responses and decreases the
disparity between commercial and residential price declines.
                                      —21—



       At first glance one might suppose that the increase in tax service life

 for existing property only would lower the value of existing properties by the

 amount deduced in our earlier experiment and leave the value of new properties

unchanged. Neither of these suppositions is generally correct. The value of

new properties would be unchanged only if any trade of the property were

suboptimal before the tax change. Only in this event is the value of new

properties independent of the tax treatment of existing properties. If some

trading were optimal, then new properties will decline in value in response to

the less favorable treatment of existing properties. Obviously the decline

will be less than if new properties, too, were taxed less favorably.     (In

terms of Exhibit 3, the rightward shift in the demand schedule is less.)

Thus, a smaller increase in real rents is needed for new properties to

continue earning the market rate of return. Given the smaller rent increase,

the decline in the value of existing properties will be greater than if both

new and existing properties were taxed less favorably.

      Results for residential property are reported in Exhibit 7 for both the

low (4 percent) and high (8 percent) expected inflation and discount rate

                         ——PLACE EXHIBIT 7 NEAR HERE-—

senarios (the third set of results is described below) .   The calculations

confirm the above analysis. The long—run percentage increase in real rents is

less than half that computed when both new and existing properties were taxed

less favorably, and the reasonable range of estimated price decline in new

properties is 40 percent less, 1.5 to 2.2 percent versus the earlier 2.5 to

4.0 percent. In contrast, the decline in the value of existing (one—year old)

properties is a far sharper 6.6 to 7.4 percent. With higher expected

inflation, all changes are slightly less. This again reflects the negative
                                                         EXHIBIT   7
                      INCREASE IN THE TAX LIFE OF EXISTING PROPERTIES ONLY, RESIDENTIAL RESULTS
                                                           New Properties             Existing Properties
                      Supply         Long—Run %      Immediate     Long—Run %A     Immediate     Long—Run   %
                      Elast.   (B)   in Real Rents   %A in Price   in Real Price   %A in Price   in Real Price
Low Inflation Rate
                        0                               —5.6           —5.6          —10.6          —10.6
                                        5.9             —1.5                          —6.6           —5.4
                        2               4.8            —2.2            —1.0           —7.4           —6.3
High Inflation Rate
                        0                              —5.6            —5.6           —9.4           —9.4
                                       6.0             —1.4                           —5.1           —3.9
                        2              4.9             —2.1            —1.0           —5.9           —4.9
                                        —23—




 relationship between inflation and the value of depreciation deductions based

 on historical costs.

          As noted, the impact of the increased taxation of existing properties on

 the value of new properties and thus the equilibrium level of rents depends on

 how soon new properties are likely to be traded and become existing properties

 under the tax code. For example, if refinancing were costless and the

 expected inflation rate exceeded 6 percent, then new properties are never

 expected to be traded under ERTA provisions (Hendershott and Ling, 1984) and

 taxing existing properties less favorably would have no impact on either the

 value of new properties or the level of rents.

         It is noteworthy that the same, sharp decline in the value of existing

properties can occur in response to a tax change even if the taxation of

existing properties is not altered. More specifically, more favorable

taxation of new properties has the same impact as does less favorable taxation

of existing properties. In the former case, a decline in the level of future

rents, which are determined from the conditions that investors in new

properties will earn the market rate of return and the value of new properties

is ultimately determined by the supply price, is the source of the decline in
      6
value.

         Exhibit 8 contains the same estimates as Exhibit 7, except for new and

existing commercial properties rather than residential properties. The long—

run increase in real rents, assuming 4 percent inflation and infinite supply—

                           ——PLACE EXHIBIT 8 NEAR HERE——




6Auerbach (1983, pp. 491—96) estimated that the more favorable treatment of
new business investment in 1981 reduced the value of the existing capital
stock by $131 billion, and Hendershott (1982, pp. 71—72) contended that
providing subsidies for new housing units (as in the 'Lugar bill' passed by
the Senate in 1982) would lower the value of the unsubsidized housing stock.
                                           EXHIBIT   8
            INCREASE IN THE TAX LIFE OF EXISTING PROPERTIES ONLY, COMMERCIAL RESULTS
                                      New Properties                   Existing Properties
Supply     Long—Run %          Immediate          Long—Run %A       Immediate     Long—Run     %
Elastic.   in Real Rents       %  in Price        in Real Price     % in  Price   in Real Price
  o                                —15.6                 —15.6       —19.7             —19.7
              18.5                  —4.4                              —8.6              —4.9
  2           15.2                  —6.4                  —2.8       —10.6              —7.5
  0                                 —8.1                 —   8.1      —11.0            —11.0
               8.8                  —2.1                               —5.1             —3.2
  2            7.2                  —3.2                  —1.4         —6.2             —4.6
                                      —25—



 elasticity, is 18.5 percent (versus 24.6 percent when the tax lives of both

 new and used properties are increased to 20 years)   .   Estimates of immediate
 price declines for new properties decrease to the 4.4 to 6.4 range from the

 5.0 to 7.7 range. The decline in the price of existing property is increased

 to the 8.6 to 10.6 range.

       With 8 percent inflation, responses are again dampened by historical

 cost accounting. With an infinite supply elasticity, the long—run increase in

 real rents is reduced to 8.8 percent and the estimated range of immediate

 price declines for new properties falls to 2.1 to 3.2 percent from the 2.7 to

 4.3 range. Immediate price declines for existing properties increase to the

 5.1 to 6.2 range.

                                      Section 5

                             OTHER TAX LAW CHANGES

      The U.S. Senate Finance Committee considered recapturing at the point of

sale all or some of the straight—line depreciation taken on a property if it

sold in less than 10 years and approved legislation that would recapture all

of the excess depreciation even if an installment sale were utilized. The

bill passed by the full U.S. Senate would increase tax service lives to 20

years in 1985, but shift back to 19 years in 1986 and 18 years in 1987 and

thereafter. The motivations for and possible impacts of these provisions are

discussed in turn.

      The increased taxation of properties traded in less than 10 years is

obviously aimed at reducing the uchurninglt of properties or at least letting

the Treasury (taxpayers generally) benefit from the churning (or suffer

smaller loses if the churning is motivated by tax considerations). Churning

of income—properties has undoubtedly been substantial in recent years in

response to the passage of ERTA which has allowed investors to
                                                                  substantially
                                        —26—



 accelerate their tax depreciation schedules (move to a 15 year life) simply by

 engaging in outright sales and repurchases. However, the concern with

 churning at this point seems misplaced. For one thing, investors desiring to

get onto ERTA's more favorable depreciation schedule are probably already

there. The horse is out; it's too late to close the barn door. For another,

the current lengthening of tax lives will itself strongly discourage churning.

In our estimation, this particular provision is unlikely to have a significant

impact on real estate values or rents.7

      The recapture of excess depreciation even in the presence of an

installment sale, too, is unlikely to have a significant impact on real rents

and prices. The Treasury acknowledges that installment sales are not widely

used and thus that a stricter taxation of them will not have a major impact.

The Treasury apparently fears a rapid expansion of installment sales and

wishes to nip the growth in the bud.8

      The rationale for the temporary increase in tax service lives to 20

years in 1984 and then reversal to 18 years by 1986 is unclear. The tem-

porally severe tax treatment should substantially reduce building and develop-

ment, as well as trading, in 1984 and 1985. Possibly Congress wishes to

reduce inflationary pressures near term (1984 and 1985) and to raise tax

revenues longer term (1986 when the trades postponed from 1984 and 1985

occur). And then, maybe there really is a tooth fairy.




7Users of properties who think there is a significant probability of their
needing the property for less than 10 years and thus being taxed especially
heavily upon sale would have an incentive to lease properties.

8The use of installment sales is analogous to the use of builder bonds in that
both can substantially defer tax payments. Builder bonds have been widely
used, much to the Treasury's dismay.
                                       —27—



        The partial equilibrium nature of our results needs to be emphasized

  before we conclude the analysis. If the changed tax law generates additional

  Treasury revenue and discourages development of new properties, interest rates

 are likely to be lower.9 This would, of course, act to dampen the decline in

 values and the increase in long—run rents. That is, a decline in interest

 rate would shift the demand curve in Exhibit 3 to the left, tending to offset

 the tax—depreciation shift to the right. Thus far we have made the plausible

 assumption that the decline in interest rates would be
                                                          negligible. However,
 if the increased taxation of real estate is just a small part of a broad

 deficit reduction package, then a significant reduction in interest rates

 could occur. Such a reduction is, in fact, the professed intent of the

 legislation.

       To illustrate the potential positive value of a deficit reduction

 package, even one including more severe taxation of real estate, on property

 values, we have run simulations in which the tax life on new and existing

properties is increased from 15 to 20 years and the basic debt rate is lowered

by one or two percentage points. The results suggest that about a one and a

quarter percentage point decline in the debt rate would approximately offset

the impact of the increase in tax service life on residential properties.

Larger declines are necessary to offset the impact on commercial properties.




9For a general equilibrium analysis of the passage of ERTA, which
                                                                  concluded
that real interest rates could rise by as much as two percentage points and
fully offset the more favorable tax treatment of rental housing, see
Hendershott and Shilling (1982).
                                       —28—



                                   Section 6

                            SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      In this paper, we calculate the impact that alternative tax code changes

would have on the value of both residential and commercial properties. This

research was stimulated by the lengthy deliberations of the Finance Committee

of the U.S. Senate in the Winter of 1984, deliberations that resulted in

passage by the full Senate in April 1984 of legislation partially reversing

the substantial benefits conferred upon real property by the Economic Recovery

Tax Act of 1981.   (What form final legislation will take depends on the

outcome of a Senate—House Conference and future concurrence by the full

Congress and the President.) Two separate proposals are considered in detail

in this paper. The first would increase cost recovery periods (tax lives)

from 15 to 20 years on both new and existing conventional residential and

commercial properties. The second would increase to 20 years the recovery

periods of existing properties only.

      An increase in cost recovery periods will, ceteris paribus, lower

property values and raise real rents. Full equilibrium requires that

investment value of new properties to the marginal investor equals the

reproduction costs (supply price) of new properties. With an infinite supply

elasticity, the long—run change in real price and value is zero; the immediate

decline in price reflects the failure of real rents instantaneously to attain

their new long—run equilibrium. With a finite supply elasticity, the

immediate decline in price reflects both rent adjustment lags and decreased

production costs in response to a lowered demand. We assume a four year real

rent adjustment lag which is, in our opinion, conservatLve in that estimated
                                        —29—




 price declines are likely to be on the high side. In keeping with this

 conservative posture, we assume an elasticity of 2 in our finite supply

 elasticity simulations, the lowest figure with any empirical support.

        With low (4 percent) inflation, a five year stretchout in tax lives will

 cause an immediate decline in the price of new residential properties of up to

 4 percent. The long—run increase in real rents associated with this price

decline is 10 to 12 percent, and the long—run price and quantity declines are

2 and 4 percent, respectively. Assuming that the four percent quantity

decline occurs over a four—year period, and that normal real gross investment

is 5 percent of the stock, investment in rental properties would be cut by 20

percent during this span. With high (8 percent) inflation and a relatively

high discount rate, all the estimated changes are about a percentage point

less.

        Estimated price declines for new commercial properties are significantly

greater than those for residential properties. With low inflation, price

could decline 9 percent and rents rise by 25 percent. These larger commercial

price and rent responses reflect the optimal use of straight—line

depreciation, the time profile of which is more adversely affected by the

five—year stretchout of the cost recovery period. With high inflation the

commercial price declines fall to the 4 to 6 percent range and rent increases

to the 10 to 15 percent range. This decrease reflects the use of historical

cost accounting.

        Similar analysis was performed on existing (up to 50 year old)

properties. In general, the range of price reductions decreases ever so

slightly with the age of the property. While the impact of four years of

below long—run market rents looms larger as the number of years in which rent

will be earned decreases and thus tends to exaggerate the price declines
                                      —30—



relative to new properties, the ratio of depreciable structure to the total

value of the property declines as the property ages, mitigating the price

decline.

      A five year increase in the tax lives of existing properties only would

reduce the range of price declines for new residential properties by roughly

40 percent relative to what would occur if both new and existing properties

were taxed less favorably. The decline in the value of existing (one—year

old) properties, however, increases to the 6½ to 7½ percent range. The price

declines on new properties reflect the increased taxation, and the resultant

decline in value, of existing properties. Because new properties would fall

less in value if the five year stretchout only applied to existing properties,

a smaller long—run increase in real rents is required to enable new property

investors to earn the market rate of return. This would amplify the impact on

existing properties because market rents would be determined by the impact of

the legislation on new properties.

      The partial equilibrium nature of our results needs to be emphasized.

If the increased taxation of depreciable real estate is just a small part of a

broad deficit reduction package, then a significant reduction in real interest

rates would likely occur. We estimate that, for residential property, a one

and a quarter percentage point decline in nominal debt rates would approxi-

mately offset the negative impact of the five year stretchout in tax lives on

new and existing properties.   (In the absence of such a decline, both rents

and the homeownership rate will tend to rise, the opposite of the response to

ERTA.) For commercial properties, possibly twice as large a decline in

interest rates would be necessary to offset the more adverse depreciation.
                                                  —31—



                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY



 Auerbach, Alan J., "Corporate Taxation in the United States, Brookings Papers

        on Economic Activity (2, 1983) : 451—505.

 Brueggeman, William B., Jeffrey D. Fisher and Jerold J.            Stern, "Rental Housing

        and the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public          Finance Quarterly 10
        (April 1982) : 222—241.

 Hanushek, Eric A. and John M. Quigley, "What is the Price Elasticity of

       Housing Demand?" Review of Economics and Statistics 62 (August 1980)

       449—54.

 Hendershott, Patric H., "An Analysis of Five Proposals to Stimulate Single—

       Family Housing," in Contracyclical Stimulus Proposals for            Single—Family
       Housing, U.S. Government Accounting Office (August 1982): 69—82.

Hendershott Patric H. and David C. Ling, "Trading and the Tax Shelter Value of

       Depreciable Real Estate," National Tax Journal 37 (June 1984).

Flendershott, Patric H. and James D. Shilling, "The Impacts on Capital

      Allocation of Some Aspects of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981,"

      Public Finance Quarterly (April 1982) : 242—273.

Hulten, C. R. and F. C. Wycoff, "Empirical Evidence           on Economic Depreciation

      of Structures," In The 1978 Compendium of Tax          Research, Washington, D.C.:
      Treasury Department.

Ling, David C. and Michael J. Whinihan, "Valuing Depreciable Real Estate: A

      New Methodology," (mimeo, March 1984).

Poterba, James, "Inflation, Income Taxes and Owner—Occupied Housing," NBER

      Working Paper No. 553 (September 1980).

Smith, Barton A., "The Supply of Urban Housing," Quarterly Journal of

     Economics 90 (August 1976) : 389—405.
