                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SHOCKS, STRUCTURES OR MONETARY POLICIES? THE EURO AREA AND
                             US AFTER 2001

                                         Lawrence Christiano
                                           Roberto Motto
                                          Massimo Rostagno

                                         Working Paper 13521
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13521


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




This paper expresses the views of the authors and not necessarily those of the European Central Bank.
We are grateful for the comments of Matthew Canzonieri, Mark Gertler, Dale Henderson, Klaus Masuch,
Philippe Moutot, Frank Smets and an anonymous referee, and for reactions of participants at the conference
organized by the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
December 1-2, 2005. We also thank Helen James for editorial assistance. The first author is grateful
to the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shocks, Structures or Monetary Policies? The Euro Area and US After 2001
Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno
NBER Working Paper No. 13521
October 2007
JEL No. C51,E47,E52,E58,F0,F00

                                               ABSTRACT

The US Federal Reserve cut interest rates more vigorously in the recent recession than the European
Central Bank did. By comparison with the Fed, the ECB followed a more measured course of action.
We use an estimated dynamic general equilibrium model with financial frictions to show that comparisons
based on such simple metrics as the variance of policy rates are misleading. We find that - because
there is greater inertia in the ECB's policy rule - the ECB's policy actions actually had a greater stabilizing
effect than did those of the Fed. As a consequence, a potentially severe recession turned out to be only
a slowdown, and inflation never departed from levels consistent with the ECB's quantitative definition
of price stability. Other factors that account for the different economic outcomes in the Euro Area
and US include differences in shocks and differences in the degree of wage and price flexibility.


Lawrence Christiano                                    Massimo Rostagno
Department of Economics                                European Central Bank
Northwestern University                                Postfach 16-03-19
2003 Sheridan Road                                     D-60066 Frankfurt am Main
Evanston, IL 60208                                     GERMANY
and NBER                                               Massimo.Rostagno@ecb.int
l-christiano@northwestern.edu

Roberto Motto
European Central Bank
Postfach 16 03 19
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
roberto.motto@ecb.int
1       Introduction
It is sometimes tempting to establish comparisons across central banks’ policies over the cy-
cle on the basis of the extent to which they move their instruments in a fraction of time. A
central bank that moves its policy rate around abruptly would under this measure be viewed
as very responsive to the state of the economy. Instead, a central bank which follows an ob-
servationally more moderate path would qualify as "passive" and unresponsive. In this paper
we use a medium-scale dynamic general equilibrium model with financial frictions to show
that comparisons based on such simple metrics are misleading. Comparative assessments of
monetary policies cannot abstract from a careful analysis of the shocks and the underlying
economic structures that shape the macroeconomic landscape which central banks face.
    We concentrate on the most recent international downturn, after 2001, in the US and the
Euro Area (EA, henceforth). We use estimated versions of our model on US and, respectively,
EA data and we reach three conclusions. First, a central bank that moves its policy rate
sharply in response to each twist and turn in the data would have only a limited impact
on economic activity. This is because policy shifts that lack persistence have little impact
on longer-term interest rates.1 According to our estimates ECB policy is characterized by
greater persistence than Fed policy is. As a result, to achieve a given economic eﬀect the ECB
must move its policy rate by much less than the Fed must. This is why we find that interest
rate actions by the ECB had a greater stabilizing eﬀect on output than the Fed interest
rate actions did, even though the latter were bigger. The slowdown in economic activity
after 2000 in the EA was so mild that it technically does not even meet the definition of a
recession (see log, per capita real GDP in the EA and the US in Figure 1).2 We estimate
that, had it not been for the supportive monetary policy shocks implemented by the ECB,
the EA growth slowdown after 2000 would instead have been a substantial recession.
    A second finding is that the US and EA were hit by diﬀerent shocks. For example,
it is true that the Fed’s response to the 2001 recession was very aggressive. Indeed, we
find that the Fed’s reaction was greater than what one would have predicted on the basis
of its past behavior in recessions. It is true that the ECB did not spring into action at
the same time and with the same abruptness as the Fed. But, that is because the shocks
that produced the EA recession did not occur until later (see Figure 1b). When the bad
shocks that produced the EA slowdown finally did strike one year later, the ECB reacted
by deviating from past patterns. The ECB continued to keep rates low longer than the Fed
did, because unfavourable shocks lingered longer in the EA than in the US (see Figure 1).
The ECB was able to provide support to economic activity, without violating its definition
of price stability (see Figure 1).
    1
    This principle has been analyzed extensively by Rotemberg and Woodford (1999), and
Woodford (1999,2003).
  2
    We never see two consecutive quarters of negative growth.


                                          2
     A third factor also helps to account for the diﬀerences between the US and the EA. Our
estimates indicate that wages and prices are more flexible in the US than in the EA. If the EA
were instead characterized by the same price flexibility as the US, inflation in the EA would
have exhibited more of the volatility evident in the US data (see Figure 1). This volatility
would have increased the volatility in the ECB’s policy rate, causing the movements in the
EA interest rate to more closely resemble those in the US. At the same time, we find that
diﬀerences in wage and price flexibility do relatively little to explain the diﬀerences in real
output between the EA and the US, according to our estimates.
     In order to quantify the macroeconomic outcome of a diﬀerent and more activist policy
in the EA, we conduct a simple test. We simulated the post 2000 period in the EA, replacing
the ECB monetary policy rule by the Fed’s policy rule. To our initial surprise, we found
that inflation would have been substantially higher and output would have been lower in the
EA, if the ECB had adopted the Fed’s monetary policy.3
     Our analysis requires disentangling the components of the data due to shocks, structure
and monetary policy.4 The formal tools we use are designed to do this. We use models
that have been estimated using EA and US data in Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2007).
The estimation exercise provides us with estimates of the shocks driving the two economies,
as well as parameter values for their economic structures and monetary policy rules. Our
analysis is based on simulations of our EA model under various counterfactual scenarios.
These simulations allow us to investigate how the EA economy would have evolved if it had
been struck by the US shocks, or if it were characterized by the US wage/price flexibility, or
if it had adopted US monetary policy.
     The models we use must be fairly elaborate if the results of our simulations are to be
credible. For example, we want to include standard shocks such as disturbances to technol-
   3
     It is useful to diﬀerentiate the question we study from an alternative question: “what
would have happened if the Fed had been in charge of the ECB?” Because the US and
EA economies have somewhat diﬀerent structures and shocks, it is possible that if the
Fed were literally in charge of the ECB, it might not have applied the same monetary
policy strategy that it uses in the US. To answer the alternative question would require
identifying the Fed’s objective function and then computing the monetary policy rule that
optimizes it, conditional on the economy corresponding to the estimated EA economy.
The question of what the Fed would have done, had it been in charge of the ECB, would
be answered by simulating our EA model economy with the optimized policy rule. We did
not do this. When we investigate what the Fed would have done, had it been in charge of
the ECB, we simulate the monetary policy rule that we estimated the Fed to have used in
the US.
   4
     A similar exercise is conducted in Sahuc and Smets (2007). They also find that
diﬀerences in shocks were important in determining the diﬀerent economic outcomes in
the two areas, while they find that diﬀerences in the nature of monetary policy and in the
degree of nominal rigidities in the two areas did not matter.



                                            3
ogy, government consumption, household preferences and monetary policy. In addition, the
substantial volatility observed in financial markets in recent times suggests that it is impor-
tant to allow for the possibility that financial factors play an important role in dynamics.
Thus, we allow for the possibility that financial markets are a source of shocks, and for the
possibility that financial markets play an important role in the propagation of non-financial
market shocks. Our estimated models are a variant of one we used to understand another
period when financial market volatility played an important role, the US Great Depression
(see, Christiano, Motto and Rostagno, 2003). This model builds on the basic structure of
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) by incorporating sticky wages and prices, adjust-
ment costs in investment, habit persistence in preferences and variable capital utilization.
Regarding financial markets, the model integrates the neoclassical banking model of Chari,
Christiano and Eichenbaum (1995). In addition, the model integrates the model of financing
frictions built by Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999). Finally, our analysis proceeds in
the spirit of Smets and Wouters (2003) and others by using Bayesian methods for model
estimation and for evaluation of model fit.
    In this paper we provide an overview of the model, followed by our analysis.5


2       The Model
We describe the model structure in this section, as well as the shocks. The model is composed
of households, firms, capital producers, entrepreneurs, banks and a monetary authority. At
the beginning of the period, households supply labor and entrepreneurs supply capital to
homogeneous factor markets. In addition, households divide their high-powered money into
currency and bank deposits. Currency pays no interest, and is held for the transactions
services it generates. All transactions services are modeled by placing the associated mone-
tary asset in the utility function. Bank deposits pay interest and also generate transactions
services. Banks use household deposits to fund working capital loans to firms. Firms use
working capital to pay the wage bill and rent on capital. Firms and banks use labor and
capital to produce output and transactions services, respectively.
    The output produced by firms is converted into consumption goods, investment goods
and goods used up in capital utilization. Capital producers combine investment goods with
used capital purchased from entrepreneurs to produce new capital. This new capital is then
purchased by entrepreneurs, using a combination of their own net worth and loans from
banks. Agency costs introduce financial frictions into the entrepreneur-bank relationship.
Banks obtain the funds to lend to entrepreneurs by issuing two types of liabilities to house-
holds.
    5
   The details of the estimation results for our model are reported in a separate paper
(Christiano, Motto and Rostagno, 2007).


                                          4
    The monetary authority conducts monetary policy according to a standard Taylor rule.
It is able to do this, because it controls the quantity of high-powered money.

2.1    Goods Production
We adopt the standard Dixit-Stiglitz framework for final goods production. Final output,
Yt , is produced by a perfectly competitive, representative firm. It does so by combining a
continuum of intermediate goods, indexed by j ∈ [0, 1], using the technology
                                   ∙Z   1          1
                                                              ¸λf,t
                                                  λf,t
                            Yt =            Yjt          dj           , 1 ≤ λf,t < ∞,        (1)
                                    0

where Yjt denotes the time-t input of intermediate good j and λf,t is a shock. The time
series representations of this and all other stochastic processes in the model will be discussed
below. Let Pt and Pjt denote the time-t price of the consumption good and intermediate
good j, respectively. The firm chooses Yjt and Yt to maximize profits, taking prices as given.
    We assume that final output can be converted into consumption goods one-for-one. One
unit of final output can be converted into μΥ,t Υt investment goods, where Υ > 1 is the trend
rate of investment-specific technical change, and μΥ,t is a stationary stochastic process. Be-
cause firms that produce consumption and investment goods using final output are assumed
to be perfectly competitive,
                       ¡         ¢the date t equilibrium price of consumption and investment
goods are Pt and Pt / μΥ,t Υt , respectively.
    The j th intermediate good used in (1) is produced by a monopolist using the following
production function:
                   ½                 1−α
                         α
                      t Kjt (zt ljt )
                                                      α
                                         − Φzt∗ if t Kjt (zt ljt )1−α > Φzt∗
             Yjt =                                                           , 0 < α < 1,    (2)
                     0,                         otherwise

where Φzt∗ is a fixed cost and Kjt and ljt denote the services of capital and homogeneous
labor. Fixed costs are modeled as growing with the exogenous variable, zt∗ :

                                    zt∗ = zt Υ( 1−α t) , Υ > 1,
                                                 α
                                                                                             (3)

where the growth rate of zt∗ corresponds to the growth rate of output in steady state. We
suppose that fixed costs grow at this rate to ensure that they remain relevant along the
equilibrium growth path, and to be consistent with balanced growth.
   In (2), the persistent shock to technology, zt , has the following time series representation:

                                                  zt = μz,t zt−1 ,


                                            5
where μz,t is a stochastic process. The variable, t , is a stationary shock to technology.
   The homogeneous labor employed by firms in (2) and the diﬀerentiated labor supplied
by individual households are related as follows:
                                      ∙Z   1                    ¸λw
                                                          1
                               lt =            (ht,i )   λw   di    , 1 ≤ λw .                 (4)
                                       0

Below, we discuss how ht,i is determined.
   Intermediate-goods firms are competitive in factor markets, where they confront a rental
rate, Pt r̃tk , on capital services and a wage rate, Wt , on labor services. Each of these is
expressed in units of money. Also, each firm must finance a fraction, ψk , of its capital
services expenses in advance. Similarly, it must finance a fraction, ψl , of its labor services in
advance. The gross rate of interest it faces for this type of working-capital loan is Rt .
   We adopt a variant of Calvo sticky prices. In each period, t, a fraction of intermediate-
goods firms, 1 − ξ p , can reoptimize their price. If the ith firm in period t cannot reoptimize,
then it sets price according to:
                                          Pit = π̃ t Pi,t−1 ,
where                                    ¡         ¢ι1
                                   π̃ t = π target
                                            t          (π t−1 )1−ι1 ,                          (5)
where ι1 controls the degree of indexation to the monetary authority’s inflation target, π target
                                                                                           t      ,
which we discuss below. Initially, we also included steady state inflation in (5), in a way
that preserved linear homogeneity. However, the value of the power on steady state inflation
went to a corner of zero during estimation on both the EA and US data, and so we simply
impose this estimation result here in the description of the model. The ith firm that can
optimize its price at time t chooses Pi,t = P̃t to optimize discounted profits:

                     X
                     ∞
                       ¡ ¢j      £                         ¡               ¢¤
                                                                       ∗
                  Et    βξ p λt+j Pi,t+j Yi,t+j − Pt+j st+j Yi,t+j + Φzt+j    .                (6)
                     j=0

Here, λt+j is the multiplier on firm profits in the household’s budget constraint. Also, Pi,t+j ,
j > 0 denotes the price of a firm that sets Pi,t = P̃t and does not reoptimize between
t + 1, ..., t + j.

2.2     Capital Producers
At the end of period t, capital producers purchase investment goods, It , and installed physical
capital, x, that has been used in period t. Capital producers use these inputs to produce new
installed capital, x0 , that can be used starting period t+1. In producing capital goods, capital

                                           6
producers face adjustment costs. In our baseline specification, these costs are expressed in
terms of It /It−1 :                   ¡                     ¢
                             x0 = x + 1 − S(ζ i,t It /It−1 ) It .
Here, S is a function with the property that in steady state, S = S 0 = 0, and S 00 > 0.
Also, ζ i,t is a shock to the marginal eﬃciency of investment. Since the marginal rate of
transformation from previously installed capital (after it has depreciated by 1 − δ) to new
capital is unity, the price of new and used capital is the same, and we denote this by QK̄ 0 ,t .
The firm’s time-t profits are:
                              £   ¡                      ¢ ¤                   Pt
                Πkt = QK̄ 0 ,t x + 1 − S(ζ i,t It /It−1 ) It − QK̄ 0 ,t x −    t
                                                                                     It .
                                                                              Υ μΥ,t

The capital producer’s problem is dynamic because of the adjustment costs. It solves:
                                        (∞                 )
                                          X
                               max Et        β j λt+j Πkt+j ,
                                {It+j ,xt+j }
                                                 j=0

where Et is the expectation conditional on the time-t information set, which includes all
time-t shocks.
    Let K̄t+j denote the beginning-of-time t + j physical stock of capital in the economy, and
let δ denote the depreciation parameter. From the capital producer’s problem it is evident
that any value of xt+j whatsoever is profit maximizing. Thus, setting xt+j = (1 − δ)K̄t+j is
consistent with profit maximization and market clearing. The aggregate stock of physical
capital evolves as follows
                                              ¡                      ¢
                          K̄t+1 = (1 − δ)K̄t + 1 − S(ζ i,t It /It−1 ) It .

2.3    Entrepreneurs
The situation of the entrepreneur is depicted in Figure 2. At the end of period t, the en-
trepreneur uses his net worth, Nt+1 , plus a loan from a bank to purchase the new, installed
physical capital, K̄t+1 , from capital producers. The entrepreneur then experiences an idio-
syncratic productivity shock: the purchased capital, K̄t+1 , becomes K̄t+1 ω, where ω is a unit
mean, lognormally distributed random variable across all entrepreneurs. The object, log ω
has a variance of σ 2t , where the t subscript indicates that σ t is itself the realization of a
random variable. The random variable, ω, is drawn independently across entrepreneurs and
over time from a cumulative distribution function which we denote by F . In period t + 1,
after observing the period t + 1 shocks, the entrepreneur determines the utilization rate of
                                                                                         k
capital, and then rents it out in competitive markets at nominal rental rate, Pt+1 r̃t+1    . In

                                          7
choosing the capital utilization rate, the entrepreneur takes into account the utilization cost
function:
                                Pt+1 Υ−(t+1) τ oil
                                               t+1 a(ut+1 )ω K̄t+1 ,

where a is an increasing and convex function, and τ oil          t+1 is a shock which we identify with
the real price of oil. After determining the utilization rate of capital and earning rent (net
of utilization costs) on it, the entrepreneur sells the undepreciated part of its capital to the
capital producers. At this point, the entrepreneur’s after tax rate of return on capital is
defined as:
                           £                                      ¤
          k      (1 − τ k ) ut+1 r̃t+1
                                   k
                                       − Υ−(t+1) τ oil                                      k
                                                   t+1 a(ut+1 ) Pt+1 + (1 − δ)QK̄ 0 ,t+1 + τ δQK̄ 0 ,t
    1 + Rt+1 =                                                                                         ,
                                                         QK̄ 0 ,t

where τ k is the tax rate on capital income. After this, entrepreneurs settle their bank
loans. Entrepreneurs with a large enough ω (bigger than a variable we denote by ω̄t ) pay
interest, Zt+1 , on their bank loan. Entrepreneurs who declare that ω < ω̄ t cannot fully
repay their bank loan are monitored, and they must turn over everything they have to
the bank. The monitoring cost to the bank is a proportion, μ, of the entrepreneur’s total
gross revenues. The interest rate, Zt+1 , and loan amount to entrepreneurs are determined
as in a standard debt contract. In particular, the loan amount and interest rate maximize
the entrepreneur’s expected state at the end of the loan contract, subject to a zero profit
condition on the bank. The bank’s zero profit condition reflects the assumption that there
is perfect competition in banking.6 The zero profit condition leads to a straightforward
definition of the external finance premium faced by entrepreneurs. Zero profits means that
banks’ revenues from entrepreneurs exactly equals bank expenses. Banks incur two expenses
in intermediating between households and entrepreneurs: the interest on banks’ cost of
funds from households, plus banks’ expenses on monitoring costs. We define the latter as
the external finance premium.
    After the entrepreneur has settled his debt with the bank in period t + 1, and his capital
has been sold to capital producers, the entrepreneur’s period t + 1 net worth is determined.
At this point, the entrepreneur exits the economy with probability 1 − γ t+1 , and survives to
continue another period with probability γ t+1 . The probability, γ t+1 , is the realization of a
stochastic process.
    Each period, new entrepreneurs are born in suﬃcient numbers so that the population of
entrepreneurs remains constant. New entrepreneurs born in period t + 1 receive a transfer of
              e               e
net worth, Wt+1  . Because Wt+1 is relatively small, this birth and death process helps to ensure
that entrepreneurs do not accumulate so much net worth, that they become independent of
banks. Entrepreneurs selected to exit consume a fraction, Θ, of their net worth, Vt , in the
   6
    In addition the zero profit condition also reflects the assumption that banks do not
have access to complete, state-contingent markets.

                                           8
period that they are selected to exit the economy. The complementary fraction of Vt is
transferred in the form of a lump-sum payment to households.7
    We interpret the random variable, γ t , as a reduced form way to capture an ‘asset price
bubble’ or ‘irrational exuberance’. In informal discussions these phrases are often used to
refer to changes in stock market wealth that are not clearly linked to shifts in preferences or
technology. This is literally the case in our model when γ t jumps. The random variable, σ t ,
is a way to capture the notion that the riskiness of entrepreneurs’ activities varies over time.
    The details of our model of entrepreneurs follows the specification in Christiano, Motto
and Rostagno (2003). With one exception, that model is taken from Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist (1999). The exception has to do with restriction that the return received by
households is nominally non-state contingent. This nominal restriction allows the model to
articulate Fisher’s (1933) “debt deflation” hypothesis. According to this, when there is an
unexpected drop in the price level, the total real resources transferred from entrepreneurs to
households is increased. Another diﬀerence with Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) is
that we specify idiosyncratic uncertainty, σ t , and the entrepreneur’s wealth shock, γ t , to be
random variables.

2.4     Banking
There is a representative, competitive bank. The bank intermediates loans between house-
holds and firms, and it produces transaction services using capital, labor and reserves.
   In period t, banks make working capital loans, Stw , to intermediate goods producers and
other banks. Working capital loans are for the purpose of financing wage payments and
capital rental costs:
                                 Stw = ψl Wt lt + ψk Pt r̃tk Kt .
Here, ψl and ψk are the fraction of the wage and capital rental bills, respectively, that must
be financed in advance. Note that these apply to all homogeneous labor, lt , and capital
services, Kt , reflecting our assumption that both intermediate goods producing firms and
banks must finance their period t variable input costs at the beginning of period t. The funds
for working capital loans are obtained by issuing demand deposit liabilities to households.
    In period t, banks make loans to entrepreneurs, Bt+1 , to purchase capital. Banks obtain
funds for these types of loans by issuing two types of liabilities to households - savings
            m
deposits, Dt+1  , and time deposits, Tt - subject to:
                                              m
                                             Dt+1 + Tt ≥ Bt+1 .                                  (7)
   7
     There are two objects we call ‘net worth’ in this section, Nt+1 and Vt . The former
is the average net worth of entrepreneurs in period t after a fraction of entrepreneurs is
selected to leave and after all transfers have been received. The object, Vt , is the period t
average net worth of all entrepreneurs who were present in period t − 1.

                                              9
                                             m
Household savings deposits pay interest, Rt+1   , in period t + 1 and also generate some trans-
                                                         T
actions services. Time deposits generate interest, Rt+1    , in period t + 1 but they provide no
transactions services.
    Our model has implications for various monetary aggregates: currency, M1 (currency plus
demand deposits), M3 (M1 plus savings deposits), high powered money (currency plus bank
reserves) and bank reserves. The reason we assume banks finance loans to entrepreneurs by
issuing two types of liabilities rather than one, is that this allows us to match the observed
velocity of M3 .8 If banks only issued one type of liability, and this liability were included in
M3 , then the velocity of M3 would be counterfactually low. This is because, as in the data,
the quantity of debt to entrepreneurs is high in our model.
                                                e
    In period t + 1 the bank earns a return, Rt+1   , on Bt+1 . It passes this on to households in
                        T                           m         m
the form of interest, Rt+1 , on Tt and interest, Rt+1  , on Dt+1   (see Figure 3). For the reasons
                                                                e
indicated in the previous subsection, we suppose that Rt+1 is a function of information
                                                                                    T          m
available at and before period t only. We suppose the same is true of Rt+1              and Rt+1 .
Following Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), we suppose that banks in period t do not
have access to period t + 1-contingent markets. As a result, they face the following ‘no
blood from stone’ constraint, which states that payments made to households cannot exceed
payments received from entrepreneurs:
                      ¡      e
                                ¢         ¡       T
                                                     ¢      ¡       m
                                                                       ¢ m
                       1 + Rt+1   Bt+1 ≥ 1 + Rt+1      Tt + 1 + Rt+1     Dt+1 .                (8)

    The maturity period of loans to entrepreneurs coincides with the maturity period of
household savings and time deposits. The loans are issued at the time new, installed capital
is sold after the goods market closes and they are repaid at the same time next period. The
timing of entrepreneurial lending activity and the associated liabilities is illustrated in Figure
4.
    To finance working capital loans, Stw , the bank issues demand deposit liabilities, Dth , to
households. These liabilities are issued in exchange for receiving At units of high-powered
money from the households, so that
                                           Dth = At .                                          (9)
Working capital loans are made in the form of demand deposits, Dtf , to firms, so that

                                               Dtf = Stw .                                   (10)

Total demand deposits, Dt , are:
                                           Dt = Dth + Dtf .                                  (11)
   8
     In Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2003), banks finance entrepreneurial loans with
only one type of liability.



                                          10
Demand deposits pay interest, Rta . We suppose that the interest on demand deposits that
are created when firms and banks receive working capital loans are paid to the recipient
of the loans. Firms and banks hold these demand deposits until the wage bill is paid in a
settlement period that occurs after the goods market.
     Interest paid by firms on working capital loans is Rt + Rta . Since firms receive interest
payments on deposits, net interest on working capital loans is Rt . The maturity period of
time t working capital loans to firms and banks and the maturity period of demand deposits
coincide. A period t working capital loan is extended just prior to production in period t,
and then paid oﬀ after production. The household deposits funds into the bank just prior
to production in period t and then liquidates the deposit after production (see Figure 4).
     Demand and savings deposits are associated with transactions services. The bank has a
technology for converting homogeneous labor, ltb , capital services, Ktb , and excess reserves,
Etr , into transactions services:

                  Dt + ςDtm           ³¡ ¢α ¡ ¢1−α ´ξ µ E r ¶1−ξ
                                                          t
                              = a xt Ktb
                                  b b
                                             zt ltb               , 0 < ξ < 1.             (12)
                      Pt                                 Pt
Here ab and ς are positive scalars, and 0 < α < 1. Also, xbt is a unit-mean technology
shock that is specific to the banking sector. We include excess reserves as an input to the
production of demand deposit services as a reduced form way to capture the precautionary
motive of a bank concerned about the possibility of unexpected withdrawals. Excess reserves
are defined as follows:
                                    Etr = At + Ft − τ Dt ,                             (13)
where τ denotes required reserves. Here, Ft represents reserves borrowed from other banks
on an interbank loan market. In the market, a bank can¡ augment    ¢ its reserves by borrowing
Ft and then at the end of the period it must pay back 1 + Rtb Ft . Since all the banks are
identical, we will have Ft = 0 in equilibrium. Our purpose in introducing this market is to
be in a position to define the rate of interest on interbank loans.
    At the end of the goods market, the bank settles claims for transactions that occurred in
the goods market and that arose from its activities in the previous period’s entrepreneurial
loan and time deposit market. The bank’s sources of funds at this time are: interest and
principal on working capital loans, (1 + Rt + Rta )Stw , plus interest and principal on entre-
preneurial loans extended in the previous period, (1 + Rte )Bt , plus the reserves it received
from households at the start of the period, At , plus newly created time and savings deposits,
        m
Tt + Dt+1  , plus loans on the interbank loan market, Ft . Its uses of funds include new loans,
Bt+1 , extended to entrepreneurs, plus principal and interest payments on demand deposits,
(1 + Rta )Dt , plus interest and
                              ¡ principal
                                     ¢    on saving deposits, (1 + Rtm )Dtm , plus principal and
interest on time deposits, 1 + RtT Tt−1 , plus gross expenses on labor and capital services,


                                      11
                            ¡         ¢
plus principal and interest, 1 + Rtb Ft , on interbank loans. Thus, the bank’s net source of
funds at the end of the period, Πbt , is:


Πbt = (1 + Rt + Rta )Stw + (1 + Rte ) Bt + At + Tt + Dt+1
                                                      m
                                                          + Ft − Bt+1 − (1 + Rta )Dt
                       ¡       ¢         £                   ¤ £                   ¤ ¡       ¢
    − (1 + Rtm )Dtm − 1 + RtT Tt−1 − (1 + ψk Rt ) Pt r̃tk Ktb − (1 + ψl Rt ) Wt ltb − 1 + Rtb Ft .

Taking into account (9), (10) and (11), and rearranging, this reduces to:

                 £                               ¡       ¢    ¤ £                 ¤
   Πbt = Rt Stw + (1 + Rte ) Bt − (1 + Rtm )Dtm − 1 + RtT Tt−1 − Bt+1 − Tt − Dt+1
                                                                              m
                                                                                                    (14)
       −   Rta At   − (1 +   ψk Rt ) Pt r̃tk Ktb   − (1 +   ψl Rt ) Wt ltb   −   Rtb Ft .

In solving its problem, the bank takes rates of return and factor prices as given. In addition,
Bt+1 is determined by the considerations spelled out in the previous subsection, and so here
{Bt+1 } is also taken as given as well. At date t, the bank takes Dtm , Tt−1 as given, and
chooses Stw , Dt+1
                m
                   , Tt , At , Ktb , ltb , Ft , Etr . The constraints are (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12)
and (13).

2.5     Households
There is a continuum of households, indexed by j ∈ (0, 1). Households consume, save and
supply a diﬀerentiated labor input. They set their wages using the variant of the Calvo
(1983) frictions described in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000). We first describe the
household utility function and budget constraint. We then discuss the household’s wage
setting problem.
    The sequence of decisions by the j th household during a period are as follows. First,
the current period aggregate shocks are realized. Second, the household purchases state-
contingent securities whose payoﬀ is contingent upon whether it can reoptimize its wage
decision. Third, it sets its wage rate after finding out whether it can reoptimize or not.
Fourth, the household supplies the labor that is demanded at its posted wage rate. In
addition, the household makes its consumption and portfolio decisions. In the analysis below,
we do not index the consumption and portfolio decisions by j, because the state contingent
securities guarantee that, in equilibrium these decisions are the same for all households (see,
Erceg, Henderson and Levin, 2000).




                                                    12
   The preferences of the j th household are given by:
           X
           ∞
     Etj         β l−t ζ c,t+l {u(Ct+l − bCt+l−1 ) − z(hj,t+l )                                                            (15)
           l=0
            ∙³                       ´(1−χt+l )θ ³                  ´ 1−χt+l )(1−θ) ³                   ´χt+l ¸1−σq
                 (1+τ c )Pt+l Ct+l                 (1+τ c )Pt+l Ct+l (                (1+τ c )Pt+l Ct+l
                      Mt+l                                 h                                 m
                                                                                            Dt+l
                                                          Dt+l
     −υ                                                                                                               },
                                                                 1 − σq

where Etj is the expectation operator, conditional on aggregate and household j idiosyncratic
information up to, and including, time t; Ct denotes time t consumption; and hjt denotes time
t hours worked; τ c is a tax on consumption; ζ c,t is an exogenous shock to time t preferences;
and χt is a money demand shock. In order to help assure that our model has a balanced
growth path, we specify that u is the natural logarithm. When b > 0, (15) allows for habit
formation in consumption preferences. The term in square brackets captures the notion
that currency, Mt , savings deposits, Dtm , and household demand deposits, Dth , contribute
to utility by providing transactions services. The value of those services are an increasing
function of the level of consumption expenditures (inclusive of consumption tax, τ c ). Finally,
we employ the following functional form for z(ht ) :

                                                   h1+σ
                                                    t
                                                        L

                                                     z(ht ) = ψL
                                                  1 + σL
    We now discuss the household’s period t uses and sources of funds. The household begins
the period holding the monetary base, Mtb . It divides this between currency, Mt , and deposits
at the bank, At subject to:
                                   Mtb − (Mt + At ) ≥ 0.                                  (16)
In exchange for At , the household receives a demand deposit, Dth , from the bank. Thus,
Dth = At . Demand deposits pay Rta and also oﬀer transactions services.
     The period t money injection is Xt . This is transferred to the household, so that by the
end of the period the household is in possession of Mt +Xt units of currency. We assume that
the household’s period t currency transactions services are a function of Mt only, and not
Xt , because Xt arrives ‘too late’ to be useful in current period transactions. In this way, this
timing assumption resembles the ‘cash in advance’ assumption emphasized by Carlstrom and
Fuerst (1997). We make a similar assumption about demand deposits. At some point later in
the period, the household is in possession of not just Dth , but also the deposits that it receives
from wage payments. We assume that the household only enjoys transactions services on
Dth , and that the other deposits come in ‘too late’ to generate transactions services for the
household.


                                                     13
                                                                       m
     The household also can acquire savings and time deposits, Dt+1        and Tt , respectively.
These can be acquired at the end of the period t goods market and pay rates of return,
       m             T
1 + Rt+1   and 1 + Rt+1   at the end of the period t + 1 goods market. The household can use
its funds to pay for consumption goods, (1 + τ c ) Pt Ct and to acquire high powered money,
   b
Mt+1  , for use in the following period.                    ¡      ¢
     Sources of funds include after-tax wage payments, 1 − τ l Wj,t hj,t , where Wj,t is the
household’s wage rate; profits, Π, from producers of capital, banks and intermediate good
firms; and Aj,t . The latter is the net payoﬀ on the state contingent securities that the house-
hold purchases to insulate itself from uncertainty associated with being able to reoptimize
its wage rate. In addition, households receive lump-sum transfers, 1 − Θ, corresponding to
the net worth of the 1 − γ t entrepreneurs who exit the economy the current period. Also,
the household pays a lump-sum tax, Wte , to finance the transfer payments made to the γ t
entrepreneurs that survive and to the 1 − γ t newly born entrepreneurs. Finally, the house-
hold pays other lump-sum taxes, Lumpt . These observations are summarized in the following
asset accumulation equation:
                                               ¡        ¢
                                     (1 + Rta ) Mtb − Mt + Xt − Tt − Dt+1m
                                                                                            (17)
                     − (1 + τ c ) Pt Ct + (1 − Θ) (1 − γ t ) Vt − Wte + Lumpt
                                              ¡       ¢
                                            + 1 + RtT Tt−1 + (1 + Rtm ) Dtm
                           ¡         ¢
                         + 1 − τ l Wj,t hj,t + Mt + Πt + Aj,t − Mt+1   b
                                                                          ≥ 0.

   The j th household faces the following demand for its labor:
                                          µ          ¶ 1−λ
                                                        λw
                                              Wj,t       w
                                 hj,t =                      lt , 1 ≤ λw ,                  (18)
                                              Wt

where lt is the quantity of homogeneous labor employed by goods-producing intermediate
good firms and banks, Wt is the wage rate of homogeneous labor, and Wj,t is the j th house-
hold’s wage. Homogeneous labor is thought of as being provided by competitive labor con-
tractors who use the production function, (4). The j th household is the monopoly supplier
of diﬀerentiated labor of type hj,t . In a given period the j th household can optimize its wage
rate, Wj,t , with probability, 1 − ξ w . With probability ξ w it cannot reoptimize, in which case
it sets its wage rate as follows:
                                                    ¡      ¢ϑ
                              Wj,t = π̃w,t (μz∗ )1−ϑ μz∗ ,t Wj,t−1 ,

where 0 ≤ ϑ ≤ 1 and                ¡         ¢ιw,1
                           π̃ w,t ≡ π target
                                      t            (π t−1 )ιw,2 π̄ 1−ιw,1 −ιw,2 .           (19)


                                          14
Here, πtarget
       t      is the target inflation rate of the monetary authority and π̄ is a constant which
is sometimes set to the steady state inflation rate. The parameters in this equation satisfy

                                  0 ≤ ιw,1 , ιw,2 , 1 − ιw,1 − ιw,2 ≤ 1.

   The household’s problem is to maximize (15) subject to the various non-negativity, the
demand for labor, the Calvo wage-setting frictions, and (17). The equilibrium conditions
associated with the household problem are derived in the appendix.

2.6     Monetary Policy
The monetary policy rule is:

            Rte = ρi Rt−1
                      e
                          + (1 − ρi ) {π ∗t + απ [Et (π t+1 ) − π ∗t ] + αy ŷt + αM g3t } + εt ,   (20)

where the constant term has been deleted. The monetary authority’s target inflation rate,
π∗t , is defined as follows:
                                   π ∗t = π target
                                            t+1    − π.
We model the inflation target as a stochastic process with high persistence. The notion
that the inflation target is a slowly-moving variable is consistent with the findings of several
recent empirical analyses of monetary policy.9
    In (20), ŷt denotes the log deviation from steady state of aggregate GDP, yt , defined in
the usual way as the sum of consumption, investment and government spending. Also, g3t is
the growth rate of ‘broad money’, defined as the sum of M1t and savings deposits, Dtm . We
define M1t as currency, Mt , plus demand deposits, Dt . Finally, εt in (20) denotes a monetary
policy shock, which we assume is uncorrelated over time.

2.7     Resource Constraint
We now develop the aggregate resource constraint for our model economy. Clearing in the
market for final goods implies:
  Z ω̄t                                                                          µ         ¶
               ¡       ¢
                     k QK̄ 0 ,t−1 K̄t   τ oil
                                          t a(ut )       Θ(1 − γ t )Vt                1
μ       ωdF (ω) 1 + Rt                +            K̄t +               +Gt +Ct +             It ≤ Yt .
   0                         Pt              Υt              Pt                    Υt μΥ,t
                                                                                                 (21)
  9
    See, Gerlach and Svensson (2001), Adolfson, Laseen, Linde, and Villani (2004) and
Schorfheide (2005).




                                           15
The first object in (21) represents the quantity of final output used up by banks in moni-
toring entrepreneurs. The second term captures capital utilization costs.10 The third term
corresponds to the consumption of the 1 − γ t entrepreneurs who exit the economy in period
t. We model government consumption, Gt , as in Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992):

                                                 Gt = zt∗ gt ,

where gt is a stationary stochastic process. By expressing Gt as a stationary fraction of zt∗ ,
we help to ensure that the model has a balanced growth path. The last term on the left of
the equality in the goods clearing condition is the amount of final goods used up in producing
It investment goods.

2.8       Fundamental Shocks
We place the 15 shocks in our model in the vector St :
          ¡                                                                                        ¢0
   St = π ∗t xbt μΥ,t χt gt μz∗ ,t γ t t εt σ t ζ c,t ζ i,t                     τ oil
                                                                                  t   λf,t σ ℵ,t        .   (22)
       15×1


Again, π ∗t is the central bank’s inflation objective, xbt is a technology shock in the bank pro-
duction function; μΥ,t is an investment-specific technology shock; gt is a shock to government
consumption; μz∗ ,t is the permanent, neutral technology shock; γ t is the entrepreneurial sur-
vival probability shock; εt is a monetary policy shock; t is the stationary, neutral shock to
technology; σ t is the shock to the risk of entrepreneurs’ activities; ζ c,t is a discount rate shock
in households’ utility function; ζ i,t is a shock to the production function for new capital;
and τ oil
      t is the price of oil (which shocks the cost of capital utilization); λf,t is a shock to the
elasticity of demand for intermediate goods (i.e., a price-markup shock). Finally, σ ℵ,t is a
shock in the term structure equation. Here,
                                                              α
                                           μz∗ ,t = μz,t +       .
                                                             1−α
We constructed a 15 × 1 vector st from St as follows. With one exception, if Sit is the
ith element of St , and Si is its mean value, then sit = (Sit − Si )/Si , for i = 1, ..., 15. The
exceptional case is s9,t and S9t (i.e., this corresponds to εt , the monetary policy shock). In
this case, s9,t = S9,t . We assume that st is a first order vector autoregression:

                                      st = P st−1 + ut , Eut u0t = D,                                       (23)
  10
    Here, we use the fact that an entrepreneur’s rate of utilization, ut , is independent of
the draw of ω. In addition, we use the fact that the integral of ω across entrepreneurs is
unity.

                                            16
where P and D are diagonal matrices.
    We are able to work with a large range of shocks because we use a large number of
variables in our analysis (see section 2.10 below). Because it is important to our analysis
that we get the shocks right, we place as few constraints as possible on the set of shocks the
data can choose from. One shock that often appears in economic analyses, but which is not
included here, is a disturbance to the disutility of labor. Originally we included this shock
in our model, but we dropped it when we found that it contributes essentially nothing to
model fit. For a complete analysis of the estimation results for our model, see Christiano,
Motto and Rostagno (2007).

2.9     Adjustment Cost Functions
The adjustment costs in investment are modeled as follows:
                           ∙ µ           ¶¸      ∙      µ      ¶¸
                                      I                     I
              S (x) = exp AS x −            + exp −AS x −         − 2,
                                     I−1                   I−1

where                                          µ          ¶2
                                                   1 00
                                        AS =         S         ,
                                                   2
and I/I−1 denotes the steady state growth rate of investment.
   We adopt the following utilization cost function:

                        a(u) = 0.5bσ a u2 + b(1 − σ a )u + b((σ a /2) − 1),

where b is selected so that u = 1 in steady state and σ a ≥ 0 is a parameter that controls the
degree of convexity of costs.

2.10     Solution and Estimation
We solved the model by log-linearizing the equilibrium conditions about steady state, using
the strategy in Christiano (2002). There are 29 endogenous variables whose values are
determined at time t, and these are contained in a 29 × 1 vector denoted Zt . Given values
for the parameters of the model, we compute steady state values for each variable in Zt . We
then construct the 29 × 1 vector, zt as follows. If Zit is the ith element of Zt and Zi is the
corresponding steady state, then the ith element of zt is zit = (Zit − Zi )/Zi . Given the shocks
described in the previous section, we can write the equilibrium conditions in the following
form:
                      Et [α0 zt+2 + α1 zt+1 + α2 zt + β 0 st+1 + β 1 st ] = 0,

                                       17
where αi are 29 × 29 matrices, i = 0, 1, 2, and β i are 29 × 15 matrices, i = 0, 1. The solution
to this system, which takes into account the law of motion of the shocks, (23), is:

                                           zt = Azt−1 + Bst ,                               (24)

where A is a 29 × 29 matrix with eigenvalues less than unity and B is a 29 × 15 matrix.
   The variables in zt are chosen partly for computational convenience, and not at all with
the variables in mind that we use in estimation. The 15 variables used in estimation are:
                           ⎛                     ³          ´                ⎞
                                          ∆ log NPt+1
                           ⎜                            t
                                                                             ⎟
                           ⎜                     π                           ⎟
                           ⎜                       t                         ⎟
                           ⎜         log (per capita hourst )                ⎟
                           ⎜                                                 ⎟
                           ⎜      ∆ log (per capita     real  GDP          ) ⎟
                           ⎜                      ³ ´                    t   ⎟
                           ⎜                                                 ⎟
                           ⎜               ∆ log W    Pt
                                                        t
                                                                             ⎟
                           ⎜                                                 ⎟
                           ⎜        ∆ log (per  capita      real   I   )     ⎟
                           ⎜                                         t       ⎟
                           ⎜               ∆ log (M1t )                      ⎟
                     Xt = ⎜⎜                                                 ⎟,        (25)
                                      ∆ log (broad    money        )         ⎟
                           ⎜                                     t           ⎟
                           ⎜ ∆ log (per capita real consumptiont ) ⎟
                           ⎜                                                 ⎟
                           ⎜      External Finance Premiumt                  ⎟
                           ⎜                                                 ⎟
                           ⎜                    R  e                         ⎟
                           ⎜                       t                         ⎟
                           ⎜                    Rt a                         ⎟
                           ⎜                                                 ⎟
                           ⎜                ∆  log   P                       ⎟
                           ⎜                           I,t                   ⎟
                           ⎝           ∆ log real oil pricet                 ⎠
                                              10          e
                                            Rt − Rt

where Rt10 is the 10-year government bond rate.11 For both the EA and US models, we
measure Nt+1 /Pt by the value of the Dow Jones Industrial average, scaled by the GDP
deflator. For the US, the external finance premium is measured by the diﬀerence between
BAA and AAA yield on corporate bonds. For the EA it is measured using the spread
between, on the one hand, banks’ lending rates and on the other hand, corporate bonds
yields and government bonds of similar maturity. Here, the weights used to aggregate rates
of return correspond to outstanding amounts. For the US, we measure broad money using
M2t and for the EA we measure broad money using M3t . For both the US and the EA, we
measure inflation, π t , using the GDP deflator. The interest rate, Rte , is measured for the
US by the Federal Funds rate and for the EA it is the short-term interest rate taken from
  11
    In the case of the US the bond is issued by the US Federal government and in the case
of the EA, the bond corresponds to a weighted average of member country government
bonds.


                                           18
the Area Wide Model dataset described in Fagan, Henry and Mestre (2001). The interest
rate, Rta , is measured in the US as the own rate of return on M2 (as reported on FRED,
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis’ data website) and in the EA it is measured as the
rate on overnight deposits. In the case of hours worked, for the US we use the Bureau of
Labor Statistics’ Nonfarm Business Sector Index, Hours of All Persons. For the EA, we use
the hours worked data provided by the Groenigen database. In the case of wages, for the
US we use compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector provided by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and for the EA we use the data on compensation from the Area Wide
Model dataset. The sample period used in the estimation is 1983Q2-2006Q2. We use this
rather short sample because of data limitations in the EA and because we want to preserve
comparability between the US and the EA results. In addition, by using this sample period,
we minimize the impact of various structural breaks that are said to have occured in the
early 1980s.12
    The model’s implication for Rt10 is based on the model’s first order condition for a 10-year
nominally risk free rate of interest. For more details on these and other variables in Xt , see
Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2007).
    To derive our model’s implications for Xt , we log-linearize the mapping from Xt to zt
and st :
                                 Xt = α + τ zt + τ s st + τ̄ zt−1 .                         (26)
The real oil price in our model corresponds to τ oil
                                                 t , discussed in section 2.3. Equations (23),
(24) and (26) represent a complete description of the joint (linearized) distribution of the
variables, Xt . We estimate the parameters using standard Bayesian maximum likelihood
methods.


3      The EA and US in the 2001 Recession
This section reports our analysis of the EA and US experiences in the 2001 recession. The
first subsection discusses our estimates of the parameters governing the monetary policy rules
of the ECB and the Fed. We show that, because ECB monetary policy is characterized by
greater persistence, monetary policy shocks have a much bigger impact on the EA economy
than on the US economy. The second subsection discusses the diﬀerent shocks that drove
the EA and the US in the 2001 recession. This section shows that monetary policy shocks
generated by the ECB had a cumulative eﬀect of increasing output by 17 percent in the
EA. The analogous number for the US is only 3 percent. The notion that by comparison
with the Fed, the ECB stood by passively as the economy languished in the 2001 recession
  12
    That is, a possible break in monetary policy and the ‘Great Moderation’, the apparent
decline in macroeconomic volatility.



                                           19
is hard to reconcile with these findings. The third subsection helps document our point that
an important reason for the diﬀerent inflation, interest rate and GDP outcomes in the US
and the EA had to do with the shocks that they experienced. The fourth subsection asks
how the EA data would have evolved after 1999 if wages and prices in the EA had been set
as in the US. We find that diﬀerences in wage and price setting in the two regions goes a
long way in explaining the diﬀerences in inflation and policy outcomes, although they have
little to do with the diﬀerent GDP outcomes. The final subsection suggests that if the Fed
policy rule had been used in the EA, output would have been lower and inflation, higher.

3.1    Monetary Policy Rules
The Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2007) estimates of the parameters of the Fed and ECB
monetary policy rules, (20), are:
                   US:      ρi = 0.82, απ = 1.93, αy = 0.17, αM = 0
                   EA:      ρi = 0.91, απ = 1.58, αy = 0.19, αM = 0.031.
Several things are worth noting. First, the ECB’s monetary policy rule exhibits more inertia
than the Fed’s. We explore the consequences of this further, below. Second, the two central
banks’ responses to inflation are diﬀerent. At the same time, the diﬀerence is probably
overstated by the fact that the ECB is also estimated to respond to M3 growth, a variable
that is presumably positively correlated with inflation. Third, both central banks respond
about equally to output.
    To understand the consequences of our monetary policy rules for the eﬀects of the iid
monetary policy shocks, εt , consider Figure 5. It displays the dynamic eﬀects on output,
consumption, investment, the interest rate, inflation and hours worked of a shock to monetary
policy. In both cases, the shock represents roughly a 22 basis point negative, iid, shock to
the interest rate. Note that the response of consumption, output, investment and hours
is much stronger in the EA model than in the US model. The policy shock leads to 0.9
and 0.3 percent cumulative increases in real GDP within the first year in the EA and US,
respectively. The analogous figures for investment are 1.61 and 0.33 percent, respectively.
The figure shows that when the ECB policy persistence (or, inertia) parameter, ρi , is set to
the Fed’s value, then the diﬀerence between the US and the Fed’s impulse response functions
falls substantially.
    Later, we report that our estimate of the degree of price stickiness in the EA is greater
than what it is for the US. Figure 5 displays the impulse response functions when the EA’s
price stickiness parameter is replaced by the US’s. Note that this change makes very little
diﬀerence. Other diﬀerences in price and wage setting parameters (see below) also have little
impact on the impulse response functions in Figure 5. The key parameter accounting for the
pronounced diﬀerence in impulse response functions is the persistence parameter, ρi .

                                     20
    The dynamic impact of unexpected monetary policy innovations on output and inflation
that are reported in Figure 5 are broadly in line with existing evidence based on identified
VAR analysis for the US and the EA. For instance, Peersman and Smets (2003) find that
the eﬀect of a monetary policy shock on real activity is much more persistent in the EA than
in the US, so that the cumulative response is stronger in the EA.13

3.2     Shocks
This section establishes two results. First, the shocks driving the 2001 recession in the EA
and the US economies diﬀered in terms of their timing and nature. The shocks that pushed
the US into recession hit almost a year before the ones that produced the recession in the EA.
Also, in the EA technology shocks followed the usual negative pattern during the recession,
while the US experienced favorable supply shocks in almost every quarter of the recession.
Second, our estimates indicate that as soon as recession-producing shocks struck, each central
bank deviated from its normal policy rule in a way that, while maintaining inflation under
control, had the eﬀect of supporting real economic activity. The contribution of monetary
policy shocks to output was greater in the EA than in the US.
    There are too many shocks in our model to study the individual role of each one on the
post-2000 data. To keep the analysis manageable, we organize our fifteen shocks into six
broad categories. The ‘Goods Technology’ category is composed of the technology shocks
aﬀecting the production of the final output good, Yt . The ‘Capital producers and Entrepre-
neurs’ category is composed of shocks that aﬀect the demand and supply of capital. On the
demand side, we include all the shocks that aﬀect the entrepreneurs: the oil shock, τ oil
                                                                                        t , the
riskiness shock, σ t , and the asset valuation shock, γ t . On the supply side, we include the
shocks that aﬀect the producers of capital: the marginal eﬃciency of investment shock, ζ it ,
and the shock to the price of investment goods, μΥ,t . Two of these shocks, γ t and ζ it , are
particularly important in the dynamics of the stock market, which we identify with entre-
preneurial net worth. The ‘Demand’ category includes the shock to government spending,
as well as to the preference for current utility. The ‘Banking and Money Demand’ category
includes the two shocks perturbing households’ demand for and banks’ provision of inside
money. The ‘Monetary policy’ category contains the high frequency disturbance to monetary
policy, εt . Finally, the inflation objective is in its own category. The six groups of shocks
  13
    We refer, in particular, to their model specification including M3. However, they find
that the peak eﬀect of a monetary policy shock on real economic activity is similar in the
EA and the US.




                                           21
are summarized as follows:14

                                            Goods supply:           λf t ,   t,   μ∗z,t
                Capital producers and entrepreneurs:                μΥ,t , ζ i,t , τ oil
                                                                                     t , γ t, σt
                                           Demand:                  ζ c,t , gt
                           Banking and Money demand : χt , xbt
                                       Monetary policy : εt
                                   Inflation objective:  π ∗t

    A by product of our estimation strategy is a time series of fitted shocks. A property of
these shocks is that, when they are fed simultaneously to our estimated model, the simulated
Xt (see (25)) coincides exactly with the actual data. Thus, because of the linearity of our
approximation of the model’s solution, the shocks provide us with an additive decomposition
of the data. The decomposition of the (demeaned, year-over-year, percent) growth rate of
GDP in the 2001 recession for the US and the EA appears in Figures 6 and 7, respectively.
    Consider the US results first. Note how the primary shocks responsible for the recession
are a combination of demand shocks and shocks to capital producers and entrepreneurs. Be-
ginning in 2000Q1, the first in a string of negative demand shocks occurs, and these are later
reinforced by negative shocks from capital producers and entrepreneurs. Interestingly, while
technology shocks become smaller during the recession, they remain positive in each quar-
ter, with the exception of 2001Q3 and Q4. Thereafter, technology shocks become stronger
and help bring the recession to an end. Regarding monetary policy, we can see that the
Fed deviated from its monetary policy rule in a way that supported output as the economy
began to weaken in 2000, and then deviated much more strongly as the recession began to
unfold in earnest in 2001. We estimate that monetary policy shocks contributed at least
one-half percent to GDP growth in each of the 4 quarters from 2001Q2 to 2002Q2. On
average, monetary policy shocks contributed 0.75 percentage points over these four quarters,
for a cumulative eﬀect of roughly 3 percent of GDP. The sequence of expansionary monetary
policy shocks came to an end in the beginning of 2002, when the strong positive technology
shocks took over and drove the economy out of recession.
    Now consider the EA in Figure 7. Note how the growth in the EA does not begin to
weaken until the end of 2000, almost a year after the start of the US recession. As in the
US, the recession is attributed primarily to a combination of demand shocks and shocks
to capital producers and entrepreneurs. Unlike the US, unfavorable technology shocks also
contributed to the recession. When the recession got underway, the ECB deviated from
its normal monetary policy rule. It did so over an extended period, and with considerable
  14
    A fifteenth shock, σ ℵ,t , is not included here, because it has no impact on the alloca-
tions.

                                            22
eﬀect. Monetary policy shocks added more than one-half percent to growth in each of the 13
quarters from 2001Q4 to 2004Q4. On average, it contributed 1.27 percent to GDP growth
over these 13 quarters, for a cumulative eﬀect of 17 percent of GDP.

3.3    Swapping Shocks
Figure 8 indicates that if the EA had been hit by the US shocks, it would have fallen into
the recession sooner than it actually did (see Figure 8, ‘GDP Growth (US shocks)’). The
calculations in this figure assume that the ECB follows its estimated policy rule, as well as the
estimated inflation target and monetary policy shocks. According to Figure 10, there would
have been a policy loosening comparable to the Fed’s, in the sense that the ECB interest rate
would eventually have been brought down to nearly the level of the Fed’s rate (see ‘Policy
Rate (US shocks)’). This policy easing, together with the favorable technology shocks, would
have produced a sharp recovery without much inflation (see Figure 9). On the whole, this
counterfactual resembles what happened in the US. The results support our conclusion that
diﬀerences in shocks are an important factor underlying the diﬀerent economic performance
of the EA and the US over the 2001 recession.
    In comparing the US and the EA in response to the US shocks, we see that there is
one diﬀerence worth noting. The EA policy rate does not exhibit the abrupt drop we see
in the US rate. The more moderate response of the ECB rate in part reflects the greater
persistence in the ECB monetary policy rule. We can see this in Figure 13, which shows how
the EA would have responded to US shocks, if the ECB policy rule had the Fed degree of
persistence. Note how this change creates greater volatility in the ECB policy rate (compare
‘EA policy rate (US shocks and Fed inertia)’ with ‘EA policy rate (US shocks)’). Figure 13
shows that the diﬀerent weights assigned to inflation in the ECB and the Fed policy rules
make very little diﬀerence to the policy rate (compare ‘EA policy rate (US shocks and Fed
inflation reaction)’ with ‘EA policy rate (US shocks)’). Finally, Figure 13 shows that the
Fed policy shocks are part of the explanation for the abrupt drop in the interest rate in the
wake of US shocks (compare ‘EA policy rate (US shocks and Fed policy innovations)’ with
‘EA policy rate (US shocks)’).

3.4    Swapping Structures
Among the parameters governing the dynamics of the model, the biggest diﬀerences between
the EA and the US concern the parameters that govern the setting of wages and prices. Our
estimates for the two regions are as follows:

                    US:      ξ p = 0.63, ξ w = 0.80, ι1 = 0.16, ιw1 = 0.86
                    EA:      ξ p = 0.81, ξ w = 0.83, ι1 = 0.70, ιw1 = 0.79.

                                       23
Consistent with conventional wisdom, we find that prices are more flexible in the US than in
the EA. The rigidity of wages is roughly the same across the EA and the US. The indexation
of prices to the central bank’s inflation target is very diﬀerent in the two regions. This may
be a consequence of the fact that the ECB is more explicit than the Fed about its inflation
objective.15
    According to Figure 8, GDP growth in the EA would have been roughly what it actually
was if the EA had been characterized by the US wage and price-setting parameters (compare
‘GDP growth (US structure)’ with ‘EA Actual GDP growth’). Although diﬀerences in
structure do not help explain diﬀerences in growth outcomes, they do account for a good
part of the diﬀerence in inflation and the interest rate. Note from Figure 9 that inflation in
the EA would have been even more volatile than it was in the US, if the EA had had the
US wage and price setting parameters. It is then perhaps not surprising, turning to Figure
10, that the EA policy rate would have been more volatile too (though, still somewhat less
volatile that the actual US rate).

3.5     Swapping Policy Rules
Our experiments suggest that if the ECB had followed the Fed’s monetary policy rule and
shocks, the EA would have had lower output and higher inflation. According to Figure
10 (‘Policy rate (Fed rule)’), under the counterfactual experiment the ECB’s policy rate
would have been higher than the Fed’s throughout most of the 2001 recession and recovery.
Output growth in the contraction phase of the recession would not have been strongly aﬀected
(Figure 8, ‘GDP growth (Fed rule)’). However, output growth during the recovery phase
would have been more anemic than it actually was. According to Figure 9, the EA would
have experienced higher inflation throughout most of the 2001 recession (see ‘Inflation (Fed
rule)’). In short, the EA would have had higher inflation, higher interest rates, and lower
output growth during the expansion if it had followed the Fed’s monetary policy rule and
shocks.
    In results not reported here, we investigated what it is about the Fed’s monetary policy
that produces these results. The key reason that inflation is higher under the counterfactual
simulation is our finding that there is a rise in the Fed’s inflation objective after 2002Q1.
This has a substantial impact on inflation in the EA in part because of our estimate that
EA price setters are quick to incorporate the inflation objective into their wage and price
decisions (see the EA value of ι1 above). The higher realized inflation is part of the reason
that the ECB’s policy rate in the counterfactual is so high. This in turn helps to account
for the relatively anemic EA recovery in the counterfactual. Still, we found that the single
   15
      The analysis of Gurkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005) is related to our indexation
finding. They argue that because the Fed does not announce its inflation objective, long-
term inflation expectations display excess sensitivity relative to short-term inflation news.


                                             24
most important factor accounting for the relatively weak EA recovery in the counterfactual
is our estimate of the Fed’s monetary policy shocks. These are smaller than the monetary
policy shocks, εt , that we estimate for the EA.


4    Conclusion
We noted in the introduction that the ECB moved its policy rate by less than the Fed did
during the 2001 recession. Our results show that this is not due to "passivity" on the side
of the ECB. Both central banks deviated from their policy rules during the 2001 recession.
The policy shocks produced by the ECB had a bigger eﬀect supporting output than did the
policy shocks produced by the Fed. The reason ECB policy shocks had a bigger eﬀect is
that the ECB’s policy rule is characterized by greater persistence. As a result, to achieve
a given eﬀect on output, the ECB has to move its policy rate by less than the Fed. Other
reasons that policy outcomes in the EA and the US diﬀered in the 2001 recession is that the
two regions were hit by diﬀerent shocks and have diﬀerent degrees of stickiness in wages and
prices. According to our results, recession-producing shocks arrived in the US before the
EA, and this is why the Fed moved its policy rate first. Bad shocks lingered longer in the
EA, and this is why the ECB kept its policy rate low longer. Also, wages and prices in the
EA are characterized by greater stickiness. If the degree of stickiness in the EA had been
the same as it is in the US, then inflation would have been more volatile and so would the
realized ECB policy rate.
    Our work suggests one important area for additional research. In our analysis we adopt
the standard Taylor-rule formulation of monetary policy. However, we find that deviations
from this Taylor rule (‘monetary policy shocks’) play an important role in policy in the
2001 recession. For example, the abruptness with which the Fed reduced rates in response
to the recession is largely attributed to deviations from past behavior. ECB policy is also
characterized by a willingness to depart from the estimated simple rule postulated in the
model. We suspect that actual policy is in fact more predictable than these findings suggest.
As a result, we think there are gains to be had from exploring alternative representations of
monetary policy which assign less responsibility to shocks.




                                     25
References
 [1] Adolfson, M., Laseen, S., Linde, J., and Villani, M., 2004. Bayesian esti-
     mation of an open economy DSGE model with incomplete pass-through.
     Working Paper Series 179, Sveriges Riksbank.
 [2] Bernanke, B., Gertler, M. and Gilchrist, S., 1999. The financial accel-
     erator in a quantitative business cycle framework, in: Taylor, J.B.,
     Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1C. North
     Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 1341-1393.
 [3] Calvo, G., 1983. Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework.
     Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 383-398.
 [4] Carlstrom, C., Fuerst, T., 1997. Agency costs, net worth, and business
     fluctuations: a computable general equilibrium analysis. The American
     Economic Review 87(5), 893-910.
 [5] Chari, V.V., Christiano, L.J., and Eichenbaum, M., 1995. Inside money,
     outside money and short term interest rates. Journal of Money, Credit
     and Banking 27, 1354-86.
 [6] Christiano, L.J., 2002. Solving dynamic equilibrium models by a method
     of undetermined coeﬃcients. Computational Economics 20(1-2), 21-55.
 [7] Christiano, L.J., Eichenbaum, M., 1992. Current Real Business Cycle
     theories and aggregate labor market fluctuations. The American Eco-
     nomic Review 82(3), 430-450.
 [8] Christiano, L.J., Eichenbaum, M., and Evans, C., 2005. Nominal rigidi-
     ties and the dynamic eﬀects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of
     Political Economy 113(1), 1-45.
 [9] Christiano, L.J., Motto, R., and Rostagno, M., 2003. The Great Depres-
     sion and the Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis. Journal of Money, Credit
     and Banking 35(6,2), 1119-1198.
[10] Christiano, L.J., Motto, R., and Rostagno, M., 2007. Financial factors
     in Business Cycles. manuscript.
[11] Erceg, C.J., Henderson, D., and Levin, A.T., 2000. Optimal monetary
     policy with staggered wage and price contracts. Journal of Monetary
     Economics 46(2), 281-313.

                                      26
[12] Fagan, G., Henry, J., and Mestre, R., 2001. An area-wide model for the
     euro area. European Central Bank Working Paper No. 42.
[13] Fisher, I., 1933. The debt-deflation theory of the Great Depression.
     Econometrica 1, 337-357.
[14] Fisher, J.D.M., 1999. Credit market imperfections and the heteroge-
     neous response of firms to monetary shocks. Journal of Money, Credit
     and Banking 31(2), 187-211.
[15] Gerlach, S., Svensson, L., 2001. Money and inflation in the euro area: a
     case for monetary indicators?. BIS Working Paper No. 98.
[16] Gurkaynak, R.S., Sack B., and Swanson, E., 2005. The sensitivity of
     long-term interest rates to economic news: evidence and implications
     for macroeconomic models. The American Economic Review 95(1), 425-
     36.
[17] Peersman, G., Smets, F., 2003. The monetary transmission mechanism
     in the euro area: evidence from VAR analysis, in: Angeloni, I., Kashyap,
     A., and Mojon, B. (Eds.), Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro
     Area, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 36-55.
[18] Rotemberg, J., Woodford, M., 1999. Interest rate rules in an esti-
     mated sticky-price model, in Taylor, J.B. (Ed.), Monetary Policy Rules,
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[19] Schorfheide, F., 2005. Learning and monetary policy shifts. Review of
     Economic Dynamics (8), 392-419.
[20] Sahuc, J.G., Smets, F., 2007. Diﬀerences in interest rate policy at the
     ECB and the Fed: an investigation with a medium-scale DSGE model.
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (forthcoming).
[21] Smets, F., Wouters, R., 2003. An estimated stochastic general equilib-
     rium model of the euro area. Journal of the European Economic Asso-
     ciation 1, 1123-1175.
[22] Smets, F., Wouters, R., 2003. Comparing shocks and frictions in US
     and euro area business cycles: a Bayesian DSGE approach. Journal of
     Applied Econometrics 20(2), 161-183.


                                     27
[23] Woodford, M., 1999. Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia. NBER Working
     Paper No. 7261.
[24] Woodford, M., 2003. Optimal interest-rate smoothing. Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 70, 861-886.




                                  28
                                                                                     Figure 1: Main Economic Developments in EA and US

                                                                   Interbank Loan Rates                                                                US versus Euro Area GDP
                                            7
                                                                         US Federal Funds Rate
                                                                         ECB Policy Rate                                                   1.12
                                            6
                                                                                                                                                           US Per Capita GDP
                                                                                                                                                           Euro Area GDP




                                                                                                                 Log, normalized in 1999
                                            5                                                                                               1.1
                      Annualized, Percent



                                            4                                                                                              1.08


                                            3                                                                                              1.06


                                            2                                                                                              1.04


                                            1                                                                                              1.02

                                            0                                                                                                1
                                            1999   2000   2001    2002     2003   2004   2005    2006                                        1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006




                                                     Inflation in US and Euro Area

                                 3.5                                       US CPI Inflation
                                                                           Euro Area HICP Inflation
Annual, percent inflation




                                            3


                                 2.5


                                            2


                                 1.5


                                            1
                                            1999   2000    2001     2002      2003    2004      2005
                         FIGURE 2: One Period in the Life of an Entrepreneur


              Period t                   Period t+1

                                                                                      Entrepreneur pays
                                                       Entrepreneur supplies          off debt to bank,
                                                       capital services to            determines current
                                                       capital services rental        net worth.
                                                       market




* End of period t: Using net worth,
Nt+1, and loans, entrepreneur         After realization of period
                                      t+1 shocks, entrepreneur              Entrepreneur
purchases new, end-of-period stock                                          sells                If entrepreneur survives
of capital from capital goods         decides on capital utilization                             another period, goes
                                      rate.                                 undepreciated
producers. Entrepreneur observes                                            capital to capital   back to *.
idiosyncratic disturbance to its                                            producers            Otherwise, entrepreneur
newly purchased capital.                                                                         consumes fraction of net
                                                                                                 worth and exits
                                                                                                 economy
                Figure 3: Financing the Entrepreneurs

                                           Time Deposits, Tt

                   Ret+1
                                             Interest, RT,t+1



Entrepreneurs               Banks
                                                                Households


                                         Savings
                 Bt+1                    Deposits, Dmt+1


                                    Interest, Rm,t+1
                                    And Transactions Services
All
                                                             All Period
Period t                    All Period
                                                             t+2 Shocks
Shocks                      t +1Shocks
                                                             Realized
Realized                    Realized
        Demand Deposits
        Created Before Current
        Goods Market, and
t       Liquidated After                                     t+2
        Current Goods Market




       Time and Savings Deposits Created at End of Current Period Goods
       Market and Liquidated at End of Next Period Goods Market.




    Figure 4: Maturity Structure of Time,
    Savings, and Demand Deposits
               Figure 5: Dynamic Response to Monetary Policy Shock, US Model and Various Versions of EA Model
                                                                      output                                                           consumption                                                                         investment

                                                 0.25
                                                                                                                        0.25                                                                                 0.6
           % deviation from steady state




                                                                                        % deviation from steady state




                                                                                                                                                                             % deviation from steady state
                                                     0.2                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                         0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                        0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.3

                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                         0.1                                                                                 0.2


                                                 0.05                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                        0.05

                                                           0    5        10       15                                            0    5        10       15                                                          0    5        10       15
                                                               quarters since shock                                                 quarters since shock                                                               quarters since shock
US baseline
EA baseline
EA with Fed inertia                                                interest rate                                                          inflation                                                                           hours
EA with US price stickiness
                                                                                                                        0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                      -5                                                                 0.1




                                                                                                                                                            % deviation from steady state
                          Basis points, annualized




                                                                                                                        0.08                                                                                 0.2
                                                     -10                                                                0.06
                                                                                       APR




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                                                        0.04

                                                     -15                                                                0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                        -0.02                                                                          0.05
                                                     -20
                                                                                                                        -0.04
                                                           0    5        10       15                                            0    5        10       15                                                          0    5        10       15
                                                               quarters since shock                                                 quarters since shock                                                               quarters since shock
                         Figure 6: US, GDP Growth Decomposition
                                      (1999Q1-2006Q2)

2.5



1.5



0.5



-0.5



-1.5



-2.5



-3.5



-4.5



-5.5
       1999Q1   2000Q3            2002Q1                          2003Q3       2005Q1

                                  Inflation objective
                                  Demand (Households and Government)
                                  Banking and Money demand
                                  Capital producers and Entrepreneurs
                                  Monetary policy
                                  Goods supply
                                  GDP Growth (in deviation from sample mean)
                              Figure 7: EA, GDP Growth Decomposition
                                           (1999Q1-2006Q2)
3.5



2.5



1.5



0.5



-0.5



-1.5



-2.5



-3.5



-4.5
       1999Q1   2000Q1   2001Q1        2002Q1                2003Q1                 2004Q1   2005Q1   2006Q1

                                       Inflation objective
                                       Demand (Households and Government)
                                       Banking and Money demand
                                       Capital producers and Entrepreneurs
                                       Monetary policy
                                       Goods supply
                                       GDP Growth (in deviation from sample mean)
                                        Figure 8: EA, GDP Counterfactuals


4.0




3.0




2.0




1.0




0.0




-1.0




-2.0




-3.0




-4.0
       1999Q1   2000Q3                           2002Q1                           2003Q3                     2005Q1

                         EA Actual GDP Growth             GDP Growth (Fed rule)            GDP Growth (US shocks)

                         GDP Growth (US structure)        US Actual GDP Growth
                                  Figure 9: EA, Inflation Counterfacuals




4.0




3.0




2.0




1.0




0.0




-1.0




-2.0




-3.0
       1999Q1   2000Q3                         2002Q1                          2003Q3                           2005Q1



                         EA Actual Inflation            Inflation (Fed rule)            Inflation (US shocks)

                         Inflation (US structure)       US Actual Inflation
                                 Figure 10: EA Interest Rate Counterfactuals




6.5




5.5




4.5




3.5




2.5




1.5




0.5
      1999Q1   2000Q3                            2002Q1                            2003Q3                         2005Q1

                    EA: Actual Policy Rate                Policy Rate (Fed rule)            Policy Rate (US shocks)

                    Policy Rate (US structure)            US Actual Policy rate
                                                Figure 11: EA, GDP Counterfactuals with US Shocks

4.0




2.0




0.0




-2.0




-4.0
       1999Q1   2000Q1                 2001Q1                  2002Q1           2003Q1                2004Q1                  2005Q1   2006Q1



                         Actual US GDP Growth                                   EA GDP Growth (US shocks and Fed inertia)

                         EA GDP Growth (US shocks and Fed inflation reaction)   EA GDP Growth (US shocks and Fed policy innovations)

                         EA GDP Growth (US shocks)
                                       Figure 12: EA, Inflation Counterfactuals with US Shocks

1.5




0.5




-0.5




-1.5
       1999Q1   2000Q1               2001Q1                  2002Q1        2003Q1               2004Q1                   2005Q1     2006Q1



                     Actual US Inflation                                      EA Inflation (US shocks and Fed inertia)

                     EA Inflation (US shocks and Fed inflation reaction)      EA Inflation (US shocks and Fed policy innovations)

                     EA Inflation (US shocks)
                                   Figure 13: EA, Interest Rate Counterfactuals with US Shocks



6.5




4.5




2.5




0.5
      1999Q1   2000Q1               2001Q1                 2002Q1          2003Q1                2004Q1                   2005Q1     2006Q1



                   Actual US Policy Rate                                     EA Policy Rate (US shocks and Fed inertia)

                   EA Policy Rate (US shocks and Fed inflation reaction)     EA Policy Rate (US shocks and Fed policy innovations)

                   EA Policy Rate (US shocks)
