NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTIVITY AND U.S. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE: INTERPRETING
THE PAST AND PREDICTING THE FUTURE WITH A TWO-SECTOR REAL BUSINESS
CYCLE MODEL
Peter N. Ireland
Scott Schuh
Working Paper 13532
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13532

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

All data and programs used in this research are freely available at http://www2.bc.edu/~irelandp. The
authors would like to thank Susanto Basu, Jonas Fisher, Jeff Fuhrer, Jordi Galí, Blake LeBaron, Hong
Li, Cathy Mann, Giovanni Olivei, John Roberts, Charles Steindel, Andrea Tambalotti, and two anonymous
referees, as well as seminar and conference participants at Brandeis University, the Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston, Cleveland, and New York, the Federal Reserve Board, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and the University of Quebec at Montreal, for extremely helpful comments and suggestions
and Suzanne Lorant for expert editorial assistance. Some of this work was completed while Peter Ireland
was visiting the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston; he would like to thank the Bank and its staff for
their hospitality and support. This material is also based on work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. SES-0213461 to Peter Ireland. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed herein are the authors' own and do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the National
Science Foundation.
© 2007 by Peter N. Ireland and Scott Schuh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Productivity and U.S. Macroeconomic Performance: Interpreting the Past and Predicting the
Future with a Two-Sector Real Business Cycle Model
Peter N. Ireland and Scott Schuh
NBER Working Paper No. 13532
October 2007
JEL No. E32,O41,O47
ABSTRACT
A two-sector real business cycle model, estimated with postwar U.S. data, identifies shocks to the
levels and growth rates of total factor productivity in distinct consumption- and investment-goods-producing
technologies. This model attributes most of the productivity slowdown of the 1970s to the consumption-goods
sector; it suggests that a slowdown in the investment-goods sector occurred later and was much less
persistent. Against this broader backdrop, the model interprets the more recent episode of robust investment
and investment-specific technological change during the 1990s largely as a catch-up in levels that
is unlikely to persist or be repeated anytime soon.

Peter N. Ireland
Boston College, Department of Economics
Administration Building
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu
Scott Schuh
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue, T-8
Boston, MA 02210
Scott.Schuh@bos.frb.org

1

Introduction

Two pictures motivate this analysis. First, Figure 1 traces out the evolution of total factor
productivity in private, nonfarm, U.S. businesses as measured by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. This first graph reveals that there have been large and extended swings in the level,
and possibly the growth rate, of total factor productivity. In particular, productivity growth
slowed during the 1970s but revived more recently in the 1990s. Persistent fluctuations in
total factor productivity such as these play a key role in Kydland and Prescott’s (1982)
real business cycle model. But what, more specifically, can a real business cycle model tell
us about the recent increase in productivity growth? Looking back with the help of this
model, how does the recent productivity revival relate, if at all, to the earlier productivity
slowdown? And looking ahead, how long might the productivity revival last?
Second, Figure 2 compares the behavior of real, per-capita consumption and investment
in the U.S. economy. This second graph highlights the fact that growth in real investment
has outpaced growth in real consumption throughout the entire postwar period but especially during the most recent aggregate productivity revival. Diﬀerential growth rates of
consumption and investment play a key role in multi-sector extensions of the real business
cycle model, like those developed by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman (1988); Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997, 2000); and Whelan (2003), that distinguish between
improvements to consumption- versus investment-goods-producing technologies. But what,
more specifically, can a multi-sector real business cycle model tell us about the nature of the
recent investment boom, the coincident revival in aggregate productivity growth, and the
links, if any, between these recent phenomena and the earlier productivity slowdown?
To answer these questions, this paper applies a two-sector real business cycle model
directly to the postwar U.S. data, estimating its parameters via maximum likelihood. This
extended real business cycle model allows for distinct shocks to both the levels and the
growth rates of total factor productivity in distinct consumption- and investment-goodsproducing sectors. According to the model, these diﬀerent types of technology shocks–
1

to levels versus growth rates and to the consumption- versus investment-goods-producing
sectors–set oﬀ very diﬀerent dynamic responses in observable variables, including those
used in the estimation: aggregate consumption, investment, and hours worked. Although
some of these diﬀerences have been noted before, for example, by Kimball (1994), this study
exploits them more fully to identify with aggregate data the historical realizations of each
type of shock and thereby estimate parameters summarizing the volatility and persistence
of each type of shock–parameters that help to interpret the past and predict the future.
Through these estimates, the econometric results provide answers to the questions raised
above. They show, for instance, that the model and data combine to attribute most of the
productivity slowdown of the 1970s to the consumption-goods sector; they suggest, as well,
that a slowdown in the investment-goods sector occurred later and was much less persistent.
Against this broader backdrop, the estimated model interprets the more recent episode of
robust investment and investment-specific technological change during the 1990s largely as a
catch-up in levels that is unlikely to persist or be repeated anytime soon. Instead, the model
points to future sector-specific total factor productivity growth rates that match their healthy
but unexceptional longer-run averages, estimated at 1.15 percent annually for consumption
and 1.55 percent annually for investment.
In previous work, Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997, 2000); Marquis and Trehan
(2005); and Fisher (2006) use data on the relative price of investment goods to distinguish
between technology shocks to the consumption and investment-goods-producing sectors. Hobijn (2001) emphasizes that these price data, though informative under certain assumptions,
do not always lead to reliable conclusions about the rate of investment-specific technological
progress. Motivated partly by the diﬃculties highlighted by Hobijn (2001), Basu, Fernald,
Fisher, and Kimball (2005) construct sector-specific measures of technological change without the help of price data, relying instead on industry-level figures to distinguish between
outputs that are used primarily for consumption and those that serve chiefly for investment.
This paper takes an alternative approach to complement these existing studies. As noted

2

above, it uses data on aggregate quantities only and exploits the dynamic implications of the
multi-sector real business cycle model to disentangle the eﬀects of shocks to consumptionand investment-goods-producing technologies and to distinguish, further, between shocks to
the levels and growth rates in these two sectors.
In other related work, DeJong, Ingram, and Whiteman (2000) use aggregate quantity
data to estimate a version of Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman’s (1988) model of neutral
versus investment-specific technological change, but allow shocks to impact only on the level,
and not the growth rate, of productivity in each sector. Pakko (2002, 2005), on the other
hand, studies versions of Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell’s (2000) model with shocks to
both the levels and growth rates of neutral and investment-specific productivity; those models, however, are calibrated and simulated rather than estimated. Finally, Roberts (2001),
French (2005), and Kahn and Rich (2007) use less highly constrained time-series models to
detect and characterize persistent shifts in labor or total factor productivity growth in the
postwar U.S. economy. The present study addresses similar issues, but using a more tightly
parameterized theoretical model that distinguishes, as well, between productivity developments in separate consumption- and investment-goods-producing sectors. Thus, the present
study contributes to the recent literature on productivity and postwar U.S. macroeconomic
performance through its use of new data, new methods, and new identifying assumptions,
in hopes of shedding new light on these enduring issues.

2
2.1

The Model
Overview

This two-sector real business cycle model resembles most closely the one developed by Whelan (2003), in which a logarithmic utility function over consumption and separate CobbDouglas production functions for consumption and investment goods combine to allow nominal expenditure shares on consumption and investment to remain constant along a balanced
3

growth path, even as the corresponding real shares exhibit trends driven by diﬀerential rates
of technological progress across the two sectors. As suggested by the data shown in Figure 2 and as discussed more fully by Whelan (2003, 2004), these basic features–constant
nominal and trending real shares of expenditure on consumption versus investment goods–
characterize most accurately the postwar U.S. data. Whelan (2003) also describes how this
two-sector model reinterprets Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell’s (1997, 2000) earlier formulation by recasting their distinction between neutral and investment-specific technological
change alternatively as one between consumption-specific and investment-specific technological change.
The model used here elaborates on Whelan’s (2003) in a number of ways, so as to enhance
its empirical performance and thereby make it more suitable for a structural econometric
analysis of productivity shifts in the consumption- and investment-goods-producing sectors
of the postwar U.S. economy. In particular, the model extends Whelan’s by allowing leisure
as well as consumption to enter into the representative household’s utility function; hence,
the extended model has implications for the behavior of aggregate hours worked as well
as for consumption and investment. Here, a preference shock also appears in the utility
function. As discussed below, this preference shock competes with the various technology
shocks in accounting for fluctuations in consumption, investment, and hours worked so that
the extended model, when applied to the data, need not attribute all or even most of the
action observed in those variables to the eﬀects of technology shocks. The extended model
used here also includes habit persistence in preferences and adjustment costs for labor and
capital in production–features that enrich the model’s dynamics. Finally, to allow for a
detailed focus on the persistence of sector-specific technology shocks, the extended model
borrows from Pakko’s (2002) specification by introducing shocks to both the levels and the
growth rates of productivity in the consumption- and investment-goods-producing sectors.

4

2.2

Preferences and Technologies

The infinitely-lived representative household has preferences described by the expected utility
function
E0

∞
X
t=0

β t [ln(Ct − γCt−1 ) − (Hct + Hit )/At ],

(1)

where Ct denotes consumption and Hct and Hit denote labor supplied to produce consumption and investment goods, respectively, during each period t = 0, 1, 2, .... The discount factor
β and the habit persistence parameter γ both lie between zero and one; Boldrin, Christiano,
and Fisher (2001) and Francis and Ramey (2005) also work with this specification for internal
habit persistence in real business cycle models. The representative household’s utility is logarithmic in consumption to make the model consistent with the balanced growth properties
mentioned above. The representative household’s utility is linear in leisure; this specification
can be motivated, following Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988), by assuming that the economy consists of a large number of individual households, each of which includes a potential
employee who either works full time or not at all during any given period.
The preference shock At in (1) impacts on the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and leisure; it enters the utility function in a way that associates an increase
in At with an increase in equilibrium hours worked. Parkin (1988), Baxter and King (1991),
Bencivenga (1992), Holland and Scott (1998), and Francis and Ramey (2005) also consider
preference shocks of this kind in real business cycle models, while Hall (1997), Mulligan
(2002), Chang and Schorfheide (2003), Galí (2005), Chang, Doh, and Schorfheide (2006),
Comin and Gertler (2006), Galí, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2007), and Kahn and Rich
(2007) all emphasize that preference shocks of this kind can stand in for a wide variety of
nontechnological disturbances that potentially play a role in driving aggregate fluctuations
at short, medium, and long horizons. Here, At serves in this broader sense as a general
competitor to technology shocks as a source of business-cycle dynamics so that, as noted
above, the estimated model is not forced to attribute all or even most of the action found in

5

the postwar U.S. data to the various technology shocks.
During each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., the representative household produces consumption
and investment goods according to the stochastic technologies described by
"

φ
1 − hc
2

µ

¶2 # "
¶2 #
µ
φkc Ict
1−
Kctθc (Zct Hct )1−θc ≥ Ct
− κc
2 Kct

(2)

¶2 # "
¶2 #
µ
φki Iit
1−
Kitθi (Zit Hit )1−θi ≥ Ict + Iit .
− κi
2 Kit

(3)

Hct
− ηc
Hct−1

and
"

φ
1 − hi
2

µ

Hit
− ηi
Hit−1

In (2) and (3) as in (1), Ct denotes consumption and Hct and Hit denote labor used to
produce, respectively, the consumption and investment goods. Likewise, Kct and Kit denote
capital stocks allocated to the two sectors and Zct and Zit denote sector-specific technology
shocks. The Cobb-Douglas share parameters θc and θi lie between zero and one.
In (2) and (3), labor and capital adjustment costs subtract from output in each of the
two sectors according to a specification adapted from Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro (2001).
These costs apply to any change in labor or capital that takes places in the consumptionor investment-goods-producing sectors; hence, the household incurs these costs regardless of
whether it is shifting previously-used resources across sectors or employing new resources in
one sector. The nonnegative parameters φhc , φhi , φkc , and φki govern the magnitude of the
adjustment costs, and the parameters η c , ηi , κc , and κi will eventually be set equal to the
steady-state growth rates of hours worked and the steady-state investment-capital ratios in
the two sectors so that steady-state adjustment costs equal zero.
Finally, capital stocks in the two sectors evolve according to

(1 − δ c )Kct + Ict ≥ Kct+1

6

(4)

and
(1 − δ i )Kit + Iit ≥ Kit+1

(5)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... The depreciation rates δ c and δ i both lie between zero and one.

2.3

Equilibrium Allocations

Since the two welfare theorems apply, Pareto optimal and competitive equilibrium resource
allocations correspond to those that solve the social planner’s or representative household’s
problem: choose contingency plans for Ct , Hct , Hit , Ict , Iit , Kct+1 , Kit+1 for all t = 0, 1, 2, ...
to maximize the utility function (1), subject to the constraints imposed by (2)-(5) for all
t = 0, 1, 2, .... Letting Λct and Λit denote the nonnegative multipliers on the production
possibility constraints (2) and (3) and Ξct and Ξit denote nonnegative multipliers on the
capital accumulation constraints (4) and (5), the first-order conditions for this problem can
be written as
1
− βγEt
Ct − γCt−1

µ

1
Ct+1 − γCt

¶

(6)

= Λct ,

µ
¶µ
¶"
¶2 #
µ
1
Hct
1
φkc Ict
(1 − θc )Λct Ct
Kctθc (Zct Hct )1−θc (7)
1−
=
− φhc Λct
− ηc
− κc
At
Hct
Hct−1
Hct−1
2
Kct
(
)
µ
¶µ
¶"
¶2 #
µ
Hct+1
Hct+1
φkc Ict+1
θc
Kct+1
1−
− ηc
− κc
(Zct+1 Hct+1 )1−θc ,
+βφhc Et Λct+1
Hct
Hct2
2 Kct+1
µ
¶µ
¶"
¶2 #
µ
1
Hit
1
φki Iit
(1 − θi )Λit It
Kitθi (Zit Hit )1−θi (8)
1−
=
− φhi Λit
− ηi
− κi
At
Hit
Hit−1
Hit−1
2 Kit
(
)
µ
¶µ
¶"
¶2 #
µ
Hit+1
Hit+1
φki Iit+1
θi
Kit+1
1−
− ηi
− κi
(Zit+1 Hit+1 )1−θi ,
+βφhi Et Λit+1
Hit
Hit2
2 Kit+1
Ξct = Λit + φkc Λct

"

φ
1 − hc
2

µ

Hct
− ηc
Hct−1

¶2 # µ

7

Ict
− κc
Kct

¶µ

1
Kct

¶

Kctθc (Zct Hct )1−θc ,

(9)

Ξit = Λit

(

1 + φki

"

φ
1 − hi
2

µ

Hit
− ηi
Hit−1

¶2 # µ

µ

Λct+1 Ct+1
Kct+1

µ

¶

Iit
− κi
Kit

¶µ

1
Kit

¶

Kitθi (Zit Hit )1−θi

)

,

(10)

¶

(11)
Ξct = βEt [(1 − δ c )Ξct+1 ] + βθc Et
(
"
)
¶2 # µ
¶µ
¶
µ
φhc Hct+1
Ict+1
Ict+1
θc
Kct+1 (Zct+1 Hct+1 )1−θc ,
− ηc
− κc
+βφkc Et Λct+1 1 −
2
2
Hct
Kct+1
Kct+1

Λit+1 It+1
Kit+1

Ξit = βEt [(1 − δ i )Ξit+1 ] + βθi Et
(12)
(
"
)
¶2 # µ
¶µ
¶
µ
φhi Hit+1
Iit+1
Iit+1
θi
+βφki Et Λit+1 1 −
Kit+1
− ηi
− κi
(Zit+1 Hit+1 )1−θi ,
2
2
Hit
Kit+1
Kit+1
and (2)-(5) with equality for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where aggregate investment has been defined
as
It = Ict + Iit ,

(13)

and aggregate hours worked can be defined similarly as

Ht = Hct + Hit .

(14)

Intuitively, (6) indicates that Λct measures the representative household’s marginal utility
of consumption during each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., accounting for both the direct contribution
of Ct to utility during period t and the habit persistence eﬀect that carries over into period
t+1. Equations (7) and (8) then show how labor adjustment costs drive a wedge between the
marginal product of labor in each sector and the household’s marginal rate of substitution
between consumption and leisure; likewise, (9) and (10) show how capital adjustment costs
drive a q-theoretic wedge between the shadow price Λit of newly produced investment goods
and the shadow prices Ξct and Ξit of installed capital in both sectors. Finally, when solved
forward, (11) and (12) equate the shadow prices Ξct and Ξit of installed capital in either
8

sector to the present discounted value of the additional output produced by an additional
unit of capital in that sector after accounting for adjustment costs and depreciation.

2.4

Driving Processes

The model is closed through assumptions about the stochastic behavior of the preference
and technology shocks: At , Zct , and Zit . To allow for a detailed analysis of the persistence
properties of each of these shocks, suppose, in particular, that each contains two separate
autoregressive components, one that is stationary in levels and the other that is stationary
in growth rates, so that
ln(At ) = ln(alt ) + ln(Agt ),

(15)

ln(alt ) = ρla ln(alt−1 ) + εlat ,

(16)

ln(Agt /Agt−1 ) = (1 − ρga ) ln(ag ) + ρga ln(Agt−1 /Agt−2 ) + εgat ,

(17)

l
ln(Zct ) = ln(zct
) + ln(Zctg ),

(18)

l
l
ln(zct
) = ρlc ln(zct−1
) + εlct ,

(19)

g
g
g
ln(Zctg /Zct−1
) = (1 − ρgc ) ln(zcg ) + ρgc ln(Zct−1
/Zct−2
) + εgct ,

(20)

ln(Zit ) = ln(zitl ) + ln(Zitg ),

(21)

l
ln(zitl ) = ρli ln(zit−1
) + εlit ,

(22)

g
g
g
ln(Zitg /Zit−1
) = (1 − ρgi ) ln(zig ) + ρgi ln(Zit−1
/Zit−2
) + εgit

(23)

and

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where the autoregressive parameters ρla , ρga , ρlc , ρgc , ρli , and ρgi all lie
between zero and one. Suppose, in addition, that the innovations εlat , εgat , εlct , εgct , εlit , and
εgit are serially and mutually uncorrelated and normally distributed with zero means and
standard deviations σ la , σ ga , σ lc , σ gc , σ li , and σ gi . In the short run, of course, both components
9

of each shock impact simultaneously the level and the growth rate of that shock. In the long
run, however, only the “growth rate” component (that is, the component that is stationary
in growth rates), and not the “level” component (that is, the component that is stationary in
levels), can account for the nonstationary behavior of consumption, investment, and hours
worked in the U.S. data.
Equations (15)-(23) adapt Pakko’s (2002) approach to apply to this two-sector framework
with consumption and investment-specific shocks as opposed to Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Krusell’s (2000) model of neutral versus investment-specific shocks; as noted above, Whelan
(2003) discusses the connections between these two alternative depictions of sector-specific
technological change in more detail. Equations (15)-(23) also extend Pakko’s approach to
apply to the preference shock as well as to the technology shocks. Hence, the estimated
model can attribute nonstationary behavior in consumption, investment, and hours worked
to the preference shock, instead of or in addition to, the technology shocks. And, to account
for the diﬀerential trends in real consumption and investment per capita shown in Figure 2,
the specification allows for diﬀerential average growth rates ag , zcg , and zig of At , Zct , and
Zit , respectively.
Finally, note that the laws of motion (17), (20), and (23) for the growth rate components
nest, as the special cases in which one or more of the persistence parameters ρga , ρgc , and ρgi
equals zero, formulations in which one or more of the shocks follows a pure random walk.
More generally, when ρga , ρgc , or ρgi becomes strictly positive, the relevant shock exhibits even
more persistence than a random walk. Commentators who interpret the origin and nature of
the recent boom in U.S. productivity since the 1990s have debated, without resolution, the
issue of whether the observed increase in productivity growth represents a permanent increase
in long-run growth (a totally “new economy”) or a transitory change in productivity growth
with no change in the long-run trend. Although the model’s stochastic structure assumes
that the (very) long-run growth-rate averages ag , zcg , and zig remain constant, it can still
account for shifts in productivity growth that are enormously persistent–consistent in spirit

10

with the “new economy” view–using values of ρgc or ρgi that approach their upper bound
of unity, while remaining flexible enough to depict a wide range of alternative scenarios, all
within a fully specified and coherent theoretical framework.

2.5

Solution and Estimation Procedures

Equations (2)-(23) now describe the behavior of the model’s 22 variables: Ct , Ht , Hct ,
l
, Zctg , Zit , zitl , and Zitg . In
Hit , It , Ict , Iit , Kct , Kit , Λct , Λit , Ξct , Ξit , At , alt , Agt , Zct , zct

equilibrium, these variables grow at diﬀerent average rates, and some inherit unit roots
from the nonstationary components of the shocks. However, the transformed (lower-case)
g
g
)θc (Zct−1
)1−θc ], ht = Ht /Agt−1 , hct = Hct /Agt−1 , hit = Hit /Agt−1 ,
variables ct = Ct /[Agt−1 (Zit−1
g
g
g
g
), ict = Ict /(Agt−1 Zit−1
), iit = Iit /(Agt−1 Zit−1
), kct = Kct /(Agt−1 Zit−1
), kit =
it = It /(Agt−1 Zit−1
g
g
g
g
g
), λct = Agt−1 (Zit−1
)θc (Zct−1
)1−θc Λct , λit = Agt−1 Zit−1
Λit , ξ ct = Agt−1 Zit−1
Ξct ,
Kit /(Agt−1 Zit−1
g
g
g
g
l
Ξit , at = At /Agt−1 , alt , agt = Agt /Agt−1 , zct = Zct /Zct−1
, zct
, zct
= Zctg /Zct−1
, zit =
ξ it = Agt−1 Zit−1
g
g
, zitl , and zitg = Zitg /Zit−1
remain stationary, as do the growth rates of consumption,
Zit /Zit−1

investment, and hours worked, computed as
g
g
)θc (zct−1
)1−θc (ct /ct−1 ),
gtc = Ct /Ct−1 = agt−1 (zit−1

(24)

g
(it /it−1 ),
gti = Ii /It−1 = agt−1 zit−1

(25)

gth = Ht /Ht−1 = agt−1 (ht /ht−1 ).

(26)

and

Equations (2)-(26) then imply that in the absence of shocks, the model converges to a balanced growth path, along which all of the stationary variables are constant. Equations (24)(26) imply, more specifically, that along the balanced growth path consumption, investment,
and hours worked grow at diﬀerent rates, with
gtc = ag (zig )θc (zcg )1−θc ,
11

(27)

gti = ag zig ,

(28)

gth = ag

(29)

and

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....
When log linearized around the stationary variables’ steady-state values, (2)-(26) form a
system of linear expectational diﬀerence equations that can be solved using the methods of
Blanchard and Kahn (1980) and Klein (2000). These linear methods provide an approximate
solution to the nonlinear real business cycle model that quite conveniently takes the form of
a state-space econometric model. In this case, the solution links the behavior of three observable stationary variables–the growth rates of aggregate consumption, investment, and
hours worked–to a vector of unobservable state variables that includes the six autoregresg
l
, zct
, zitl , and zitg . Hence, the Kalman filtering algorithms outlined by
sive shocks alt , agt , zct

Hamilton (1994, Ch.13) can be used to estimate the model’s structural parameters via maximum likelihood and to draw inferences about the behavior of the unobserved shocks, most
importantly the shocks to the levels and growth rates of productivity in the two sectors.
The quarterly U.S. data used in this econometric exercise are those displayed, above,
in Figure 2 and, below, in Figure 8 and are drawn from the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis’ FRED website. The sample period runs from 1948:1 through 2006:3. Readings
on real personal consumption expenditures in chained 2000 dollars provide the measure of
Ct ; readings on real gross private domestic investment in chained 2000 dollars provide the
measure of It ; and readings on hours worked by all persons in the nonfarm business sector
provide the measure of Ht . All three series are seasonally adjusted and expressed in percapita terms by dividing by the civilian noninstitutional population, ages 16 and over.
Several features of these data deserve special mention. First, as discussed in more detail
by Whelan (2002), the chain-weighting procedures now used in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts imply that the series for real consumption and investment are measured in

12

diﬀerent units: Ct in units of consumption goods and It in units of investment goods. When,
as in the U.S. data, the relative price of consumption and investment goods changes over
time, these two series can no longer be added together to obtain a measure of real GDP. The
theoretical model is fully consistent with these properties of the data. Since consumption
and investment goods are produced in separate sectors of the model economy, according to
the distinct technologies described by (2) and (3), in competitive equilibrium the relative
price of these goods fluctuates and, again, Ct and It cannot simply be added up to obtain a
meaningful measure of aggregate output.
Second and related, since the theoretical model allows nonstationary components to be
present in the preference shock At and the sector-specific technology shocks Zct and Zit , it
also allows for nonstationarity in all three observable variables and, unlike the simpler onesector growth model of King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson (1991), does not generally imply
that real consumption and investment, if nonstationary, will be cointegrated. Hence, as
indicated above, the growth rates of all three variables are used in the estimation; after this
logarithmic first-diﬀerencing, however, the data are not filtered or detrended in any other
way.
Finally, although the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts provide convenient
and readily-available measures of the model’s sector-specific outputs Ct and It , they do not
decompose investment It , as the model does with (13), into units allocated to separate consumption and investment-goods-producing sectors so as to allow, as the model does with the
sector-specific capital accumulation constraints (4) and (5), for the construction of sectorspecific measures of the capital stock. Likewise, the index Ht of aggregate hours worked
does not break down in the data, as it does in the model with (14), into separate components allocated to the production of consumption versus investment goods. As noted above,
in the introduction, Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball (2005) work with more detailed
industry-level data to distinguish between inputs employed by, as well as outputs produced
by, the consumption- and investment-goods-producing sectors of the U.S. economy. Here,

13

by contrast, the sector-specific inputs Kct , Kit , Hct , and Hit are treated as unobservable and
the tightly-parameterized real business cycle model is used instead to draw inferences about
the behavior of these unobservables, given the measured behavior of Ct , It , and Ht .
The model has 29 parameters describing preferences, technologies, and the stochastic
behavior of the exogenous shocks: β, γ, θc , θi , φhc , φhi , φkc , φki , ηc , ηi , κc , κi , δ c , δ i , ag ,
zcg , zig , ρla , ρga , ρlc , ρgc , ρli , ρgi , σ la , σ ga , σ lc , σ gc , σ li , and σ gi . Of these, η c , η i , κc , and κi are set
equal to the model’s implied steady-state growth rates of hours worked and the steady-state
investment-capital ratios in the two sectors so that, as mentioned above, adjustment costs
equal zero in the steady state. Here, as in many attempts to estimate real business cycle
models going all the way back to Altug’s (1989) early work, the discount factor β and the
depreciation rates δ c and δ i proved extremely diﬃcult to pin down with maximum likelihood;
hence, Hansen’s (1985) settings of β = 0.99 and δ c = δ i = 0.025 are simply imposed prior to
estimation so that, consistent with the frequency of the data, each period in the model can
be interpreted naturally as one-quarter year in real time. Likewise, preliminary attempts to
estimate the model revealed that various combinations of very diﬀerent values for θc , θi , φhc ,
φhi , φkc , and φki led to similar values the log-likelihood function, suggesting that the data
simply do not contain enough information to separately identify all of these parameters; much
sharper results, described next, were obtained after the symmetry conditions θc = θi = θ,
φhc = φhi = φh , and φkc = φki = φk were imposed. Note that the symmetry condition
θc = θi = θ for capital’s share across sectors is also imposed, explicitly, by Whelan (2003)
and Marquis and Trehan (2005) and, implicitly, by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997,
2000) if their model is given a two-sector reinterpretation.

3

Results

Table 1 shows maximum likelihood estimates of the model’s remaining 19 parameters. The
standard errors, also shown in Table 1, come from a parametric bootstrapping procedure

14

similar to those used by Cho and Moreno (2006) and Malley, Philippopoulos, and Woitek
(2007) and described in more detail by Efron and Tibshirani (1993, Ch.6). This procedure
simulates the estimated model in order to generate 1,000 samples of artificial data for aggregate consumption, investment, and hours worked, each containing the same number of
observations as the original sample of actual U.S. data, then re-estimates the model 1,000
times using these artificial data sets. The standard errors shown in Table 1 correspond
to the standard deviations of the individual parameter estimates taken across these 1,000
replications.
The estimate of γ = 0.0775 implies only a modest amount of habit persistence in preferences; Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001) require a much higher value for this parameter,
but use their model to explain the behavior of asset returns as well as macroeconomic quantities. The estimate of θ = 0.3918 for capital’s share in the valued-added Cobb-Douglas
production functions is only slightly larger than the calibrated value of 0.36 used by Hansen
(1985) and others throughout the real business cycle literature. The estimate of φh = 4.3788
is smaller in absolute terms, but larger relative to its own standard error, than the estimate
of φk = 17.3319, indicating that the data give mixed signals on the relative importance of
adjustment costs for labor versus capital. The maximum likelihood estimates of ag = 0.9999,
zcg = 1.0047 and zig = 1.0063, when coupled with the estimate of θ = 0.3918, translate into
estimates of 1.15 and 1.55 percent for the average annual rates of total factor productivity growth in the consumption- and investment-goods-producing sectors, respectively, and
also match, via (27)-(29), the average quarterly gross growth rates of consumption (1.0054),
investment (1.0063), and hours worked (0.9999) in the data.
Of special interest here, of course, are the parameters summarizing the volatility and
persistence of the model’s shocks, each of which displays distinctive behavior all its own.
The estimates ρla = 0.3652, ρga = 0.0000, σla = 0.0363, and σga = 0.0088 imply that the
preference shock At contains a very large transitory component as well as a sizeable random walk element. More strikingly, the estimates ρlc = 0.0000, ρgc = 0.5964, σ lc = 0.0063,

15

and σ gc = 0.0068 indicate that the consumption-specific technology shock Zct has a very
persistent growth rate component–one that is quite a bit more persistent than a pure random walk–while the estimates ρli = 0.8229, σ li = 0.0706, and σ gi = 0.0000 imply that the
investment-specific technology shock has a level component that is extremely large and persistent but lacks a stochastic growth rate component altogether. Broadly consistent with
the results obtained by Marquis and Trehan (2005), who use aggregate data on prices alone,
and Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball (2005), who use industry-level data on inputs and
outputs, those shown here in Table 1, which are derived from aggregate data on quantities
alone, attribute the diverging evolution of productivity across the U.S. consumption- and
investment-goods-producing sectors primarily to highly persistent consumption-specific, as
opposed to investment-specific, technology shocks.
The results from Table 1 foreshadow all of the others discussed below, so before moving
on, let us ask: what lies behind these estimates, which assign very diﬀerent properties
to the various shocks? Here, it should be noted, the model’s structural disturbances are
identified based not on the timing assumptions, described by Hamilton (1994, Ch.11), that
are frequently invoked in studies that work with less highly constrained vector autoregressive
time-series models, but instead on the dynamic eﬀects that the real business cycle model
itself associates with each distinct type of shock. Thus, Figures 3-5 trace out the estimated
model’s implied responses of each observable variable to each of the shocks: Figure 3 collects
the impulse responses to the preference shocks, while Figure 4 and 5 display the impulse
responses to the consumption and investment-specific technology shocks.
As noted previously by Kimball (1994), a two-sector real business cycle model with logarithmic and additively time-separable utility over consumption has the striking implication
that consumption-specific technology shocks impact only consumption, leaving investment
and hours worked completely unchanged. Kimball’s result applies directly and exactly to the
model studied here when γ = 0, so that habit persistence is absent. However, Figure 4 reveals that Kimball’s result carries over as a close approximation to the estimated model with

16

γ = 0.0775: the graph shows that investment and hours worked remain nearly unchanged
following a consumption-specific technology shock (note that the scales on the y-axes diﬀer,
sometimes greatly, across the panels of Figures 3-5). Hence, Figure 4 implies that the two
components of the consumption-specific technology shock are identified as those that aﬀect
either the level or the growth rate of consumption, leaving other variables unchanged.
Figures 3 and 5 show that, by contrast, the preference and investment-specific technology
shocks impact simultaneously all three observable variables. But whereas the shock to the
level of At aﬀects consumption, investment, and hours worked by roughly equal amounts,
the shock to the level of Zit generates a response in investment that is an order of magnitude
larger than the coincident movements in consumption and hours worked. The shock to the
growth rate of At , meanwhile, stands out as the only disturbance that has a permanent
eﬀect on the level of hours worked and hence can account for nonstationary behavior in the
observable variable Ht .
The estimate of σ gi = 0.0000 shown in Table 1 suggests that no shocks to the growth rate
of investment-specific technology have hit the postwar U.S. economy, but the theoretical
model can still be used to trace out the eﬀects those shocks would have had under the
counterfactual assumption that ρgi = 0.50 and σ gi = 0.01: these are the impulse responses
shown in the second column of Figure 5. Those graphs reveal that the growth rate component
of the model’s investment-specific technology shock has a permanent eﬀect on the level of
consumption that is delayed by habit persistence and a permanent eﬀect on the level of
investment as well. Unlike the growth rate shock to At , however, the investment-specific
technology shock has a persistent but ultimately transitory aﬀect on the level of hours
worked.
Thus, Figures 3-5 explain why the maximum likelihood estimates turn out as shown in
Table 1. Evidently, the data prefer a version of the model in which the growth rate shock to
preferences introduces a pure random walk component into all three observable variables–
consumption, investment, and hours worked–and the growth rate shock to consumption-

17

specific technology introduces a second, and even more persistent, nonstationary component
into consumption alone; meanwhile, the growth rate shock to investment-specific technology,
which would introduce an additional stochastic trend into consumption and investment, but
not hours worked, is “zeroed out.” These results are, again, broadly consistent with those
obtained using diﬀerent data and diﬀerent methods by Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball
(2005) and Marquis and Trehan (2005); they may also bear some relation to Bansal and
Yaron’s (2004) model of long-run risks, which appeals to extremely persistent movements in
the growth rate of consumption, like those isolated by the model that is estimated here, to
help account for a number of puzzling features of asset market data.
The various insights gleaned from the impulse-response analysis also help explain the
results shown in Table 2, which decompose the forecast error variances in consumption,
investment, and hours worked into percentages dues to each of the model’s shocks. Since
consumption-specific technology shocks have only miniscule eﬀects on variables besides consumption, these shocks play no role in accounting for the variability in investment and hours
worked. And since σ gi is estimated to be zero, investment-specific growth-rate shocks contribute nothing to the volatility of any variable. Instead, level shocks to investment-specific
productivity and growth-rate shocks to preferences join together to explain most of the variability in investment, and level shocks to investment-specific productivity and both level and
growth rate shocks to preferences explain the variability in hours worked.
Figure 6 goes a step further by plotting estimates that show how the various shocks
themselves have evolved over the postwar period. All of these estimates reflect information
contained in the full sample of data; that is, they are constructed using the Kalman smoothing algorithms described by Hamilton (1994, Ch.13) and generalized by Kohn and Ansley
(1983) to accommodate cases like the one that arises here, in which the covariance matrix
of the unobserved state vector turns out to be singular. Consistent once again with the results derived by Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball (2005) and Marquis and Trehan (2005),
the estimates shown in Figure 6 point to the consumption-goods-producing sector as the

18

most significant source of the aggregate productivity slowdown of the 1970s. Here, in particular, the estimated level of total factor productivity in the consumption-goods-producing
sector remains essentially unchanged from the beginning of 1973 through the middle of 1983.
More generally, movements in the level of consumption-specific productivity appear to be
enormously persistent, reflecting the importance of the growth rate component of that sectorspecific shock: the estimates of Zct lie above their deterministic trend for an extended period
beginning in 1954 and ending in 1980, then spend nearly all of the period since 1980 either
at or slightly below trend.
The investment-specific technology shock, by contrast, crosses over its deterministic trend
line much more frequently of the full sample period. Like the results from Basu, Fernald,
Fisher, and Kimball (2005) but unlike the results from Marquis and Trehan (2005), the
estimates derived here show evidence of a productivity slowdown in the investment-goodsproducing sector as well as the consumption goods sector. But whereas Basu, Fernald,
Fisher, and Kimball’s (2005) estimates suggest that the productivity slowdown occurred
contemporaneously across the two sectors, here the investment-specific slowdown begins
later–the level Zit of productivity in investment peaks in the middle of 1984 and bottoms
out in 1991. Viewed against this broader backdrop, the more recent period of robust growth
in investment-specific productivity appears as a snap-back to trend following the earlier,
transitory slowdown.
In Figure 6, consumption-specific productivity Zct , through persistent in its movements,
ends the sample period growing at a rate that is quite close to its postwar average. Meanwhile, investment-specific productivity Zit is less persistent and ends the sample period
slightly above its long-run deterministic trend. Thus, when Figure 7 extends the series for
these two variables with forecasts running out through 2012, it shows Zct continuing to grow
at its long-run average rate and Zit decelerating so as to converge towards its stationary
long-run growth path. The estimated model, therefore, oﬀers up a mixed view of the future.
The good news is that the productivity slowdown appears to have ended in both sectors of

19

the U.S. economy. The not-so-good news is that the model interprets the more recent episode
of robust growth in investment and investment-specific productivity as largely representing a
catch-up in levels after the previous productivity slowdown–hence, the model predicts that
this recent episode of unusual strength is unlikely to persist or to be repeated anytime soon.
Finally, Figure 8 reinforces the intuition built up earlier by the impulse responses, shown
in Figures 3-5, and the variance decompositions, shown in Table 2, by illustrating the role of
each shock in the model’s interpretation of the actual historical data. The figure compares
each series from the U.S. data used in the estimation, the log of per-capita consumption,
investment, or hours worked, to the model’s smoothed, or full-sample, estimate of how that
series would have behaved in the counterfactual scenario in which one of the three shocks–to
preferences, consumption-specific technology, or investment-specific technology–no longer
hits the economy. Panels in the first column show consumption, panels in the second column
show investment, and panels in the third column show hours. The first row plots the actual
data (thin line) alone, while the remaining rows contrast the counterfactual data (thick line)
with the actual data.
The panels in the first column highlight the importance of the consumption-specific technology shock in allowing the model to capture the highly-persistent movements in consumption before and during the productivity slowdown of the 1970s in this sector; such highlypersistent movements are less apparent in the series for investment and hours worked (see
remaining panels of the third row). During the 1990s and 2000s, however, the preference
shock, which boosted consumption, and the investment-specific technology shock, which inhibited consumption, exhibited oﬀsetting (and somewhat smaller) eﬀects. The panels in
the second column show how the persistent, but ultimately transitory, investment-specific
technology shock allows the model to reproduce the volatile movements in investment and
to account for the sustained investment boom of the 1990s. The panels in the third column
confirm that the model’s preference shock serves mainly to soak up movements in hours
worked, particularly at the lower frequencies, that the technology shocks cannot explain.

20

Taken together, Figures 6-8 demonstrate how this tightly-parameterized, two-sector real
business cycle model provides a plausible, data-consistent interpretation of productivity fluctuations in the postwar U.S. economy. The econometric results highlight the usefulness of a
modern, structural, microfounded model as a credible–and in many ways more attractive–
alternative to the less highly-constrained, pure time-series approaches used elsewhere in the
literature.

4

Summary and Extensions

The two-sector real business cycle model studied here implies that diﬀerent types of technology shocks–to the levels versus the growth rates of productivity in distinct consumptionversus investment-goods-producing sectors–have very diﬀerent eﬀects on observable variables, including aggregate consumption, investment, and hours worked. Hence, when the
model is estimated via maximum likelihood, these theoretical implications help to identify
the realizations of these various shocks in the postwar U.S. data. The results of this estimation exercise point to the consumption-goods-producing sector as the principal source of
the productivity slowdown of the 1970s. The results also show evidence of a productivity
slowdown in the investment-goods-producing sector, but this investment-specific slowdown
occurred later and is much less persistent than its consumption-specific counterpart.
Viewed against this broader backdrop, the more recent episode of accelerated growth in
investment and investment-specific technological change appears largely as a snap-back in
levels to a long-run deterministic trend rather than a persistent shift in growth rates. Thus,
the results oﬀer up a mixed outlook for the future. The estimated model confirms that the
productivity slowdown of the 1970s has ended. But it also suggests that the productivity
revival of the 1990s is not likely to persist or be repeated. Instead, the model points to
future productivity growth rates in both sectors that match their healthy but unexceptional
longer-run averages (as reported above, 1.15 percent annually for consumption and 1.55

21

percent annually for investment) from the entire postwar period. Interestingly, these modestly optimistic predictions stand in broad accordance with those presented by Jorgenson,
Ho, and Stiroh (2007) in a study that takes a very diﬀerent approach to forecasting future
productivity trends.
In work that relates most closely to the present study, Marquis and Trehan (2005) use data
on aggregate prices to distinguish between consumption and investment-specific technological
change in the postwar U.S. economy. Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball (2005) exploit
industry-level quantity data to pursue the same goal. The results obtained here echo some
of those presented in these earlier studies. Consistent with earlier findings, for instance, the
results obtained here highlight the central role played by the consumption-goods-producing
sector during the productivity slowdown of the 1970s. But unlike results from Marquis and
Trehan (2005), which suggest that the investment-goods-producing sector largely escaped
the productivity slowdown, and unlike the results from Basu, Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball
(2005), which suggest instead that productivity growth slowed coincidently across the two
sectors of the U.S. economy, the results obtained here point to a slowdown in investmentspecific technological progress that came later and was less severe than the downturn in
the consumption-specific sector. In addition, neither Marquis and Trehan (2005) nor Basu,
Fernald, Fisher, and Kimball (2005) distinguishes between level and growth-rate shocks to
the consumption and investment goods sectors in an eﬀort to generate forecasts of future
productivity growth that can be compared to those presented here.
Before closing, mention should be made of several possible extensions of the present
analysis. First, the model developed here allows private agents to always distinguish perfectly between shocks to the levels and growth rates of sector-specific productivities. Edge,
Laubach, and Williams (2004), by contrast, argue that private agents in the U.S. economy
were slow to recognize the persistent shifts in productivity growth that occurred first during
the 1970s and then again during the 1990s. Using a calibrated real business cycle model similar to the one that is estimated here, they also show that growth-rate shocks to consumption-

22

and investment-specific technologies can have diﬀerent eﬀects when private agents lack full
information and instead must gradually learn about the magnitudes of those shocks. These
results suggest that it would be fruitful to extend the present analysis by allowing for learning
behavior on the part of U.S. households and firms.
Second, the model developed here treats the United States as a closed economy and
therefore abstracts completely from the large and growing current account deficits that accompanied the most recent period of robust investment and investment-specific technological
change. But Guerrieri, Henderson, and Kim (2005) calibrate an open economy real business
cycle model with both level and growth-rate shocks to consumption- and investment-specific
technologies and find that these diﬀerent shocks also have diﬀerent implications for the behavior of the trade balance. These results suggest that estimating an open-economy version
of the model developed here ought to be another high priority for future research.
Third and finally, the model developed here, like most other variants of the basic real
business cycle model, includes a single, homogeneous capital stock that can be reallocated,
albeit subject to adjustment costs, across distinct sectors of the economy. However, Tevlin
and Whelan (2003) argue that in explaining the investment boom of the 1990s it is helpful
to distinguish between diﬀerent types of capital goods and to account more specifically for
the special features of information technology capital. Tevlin and Whelan’s results suggest
additional insights could be found by estimating an extended version of the model developed
here that disaggregates the total capital stock and assigns a key role to the capital goods
associated with the information technology sector. Importantly, the results from such an
exercise would also speak more directly to the issues debated by Gordon (2000) and Oliner
and Sichel (2000) concerning the role of information technology in the productivity revival
of the 1990s and the potential for that information-technology-driven growth to persist into
the future.

23

5

References

Altug, Sumru. “Time-to-Build and Aggregate Fluctuations: Some New Evidence.” International Economic Review 30 (November 1989): 889-920.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron. “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles.” Journal of Finance 59 (August 2004): 1481-1509.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, Jonas Fisher, and Miles Kimball. “Sector-Specific Technical
Change.” Manuscript. Chestnut Hill: Boston College, July 2005.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Matthew D. Shapiro. “Productivity Growth in the
1990s: Technology, Utilization, or Adjustment?” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy 55 (December 2001): 117-165.
Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King. “Productive Externalities and Business Cycles.”
Discussion Paper 53. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Institute for
Empirical Macroeconomics, November 1991.
Bencivenga, Valerie R. “An Econometric Study of Hours and Output Variation with Preference Shocks.” International Economic Review 33 (May 1992): 449-471.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Charles M. Kahn. “The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence Models
Under Rational Expectations.” Econometrica 48 (July 1980): 1305-1311.
Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jonas D.M. Fisher. “Habit Persistence, Asset
Returns, and the Business Cycle.” American Economic Review 91 (March 2001): 149166.
Chang, Yongsung and Frank Schorfheide. “Labor-Supply Shifts and Economic Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (November 2003): 1751-1768.
Chang, Yongsung, Taeyoung Doh, and Frank Schorfheide. “Non-stationary Hours in a
DSGE Model.” Manuscript. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, June 2006.
24

Cho, Seonghoon and Antonio Moreno. “A Small-Sample Study of the New-Keynesian
Macro Model.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (September 2006): 14611481.
Comin, Diego and Mark Gertler. “Medium-Term Business Cycles.” American Economic
Review 96 (June 2006): 523-551.
DeJong, David N., Beth F. Ingram, and Charles H. Whiteman. “Keynesian Impulses
Versus Solow Residuals: Identifying Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations.” Journal
of Applied Econometrics 15 (May/June 2000): 311-329.
Edge, Rochelle M., Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. “Learning and Shifts in LongRun Productivity Growth.” Working Paper 2004-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, March 2004.
Efron, Bradley and Robert J. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Boca Raton:
Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, 1993.
Fisher, Jonas D.M. “The Dynamic Eﬀects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
Shocks.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (June 2006): 413-451.
Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey. “Is the Technology-Driven Real Business Cycle
Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations Revisited.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 52 (November 2005): 1379-1399.
French, Mark W. “A Nonlinear Look at Trend MFP Growth and the Business Cycle: Results
from a Hybrid Kalman/Markov Switching Model.” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2005-12. Washington: Federal Reserve Board, February 2005.
Galí, Jordi. “Trends in Hours, Balanced Growth, and the Role of Technology in the Business
Cycle.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87 (July/August 2005): 459-486.

25

Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido. “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
Costs of Business Fluctuations.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (February
2007): 44-59.
Gordon, Robert J. “Does the ‘New Economy’ Measure up to the Great Inventions of the
Past?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (Fall 2000): 49-74.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huﬀman. “Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle.” American Economic Review 78 (June 1988):
402-417.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. “Long-Run Implications of InvestmentSpecific Technological Change.” American Economic Review 87 (June 1997): 342-362.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. “The Role of Investment-Specific
Technological Change in the Business Cycle.” European Economic Review 44 (January
2000): 91-115.
Guerrieri, Luca, Dale Henderson, and Jinill Kim. “Investment-Specific and Multifactor Productivity in Multi-Sector Open Economies: Data and Analysis.” International Finance
Discussion Paper 828. Washington: Federal Reserve Board, February 2005.
Hall, Robert E. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.” Journal of
Labor Economics 15 (January 1997, Part 2): S223-S250.
Hamilton, James D. Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.
Hansen, Gary D. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 16 (November 1985): 309-327.
Hobijn, Bart. “Is Equipment Price Deflation a Statistical Artifact?” Manuscript. New
York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 2001.

26

Holland, Allison and Andrew Scott. “The Determinants of UK Business Cycles.” Economic
Journal 108 (July 1998): 1067-1092.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh. “A Retrospective Look at the U.S.
Productivity Growth Resurgence.” Staﬀ Report 277. New York: Federal Reserve Bank
of New York: February 2007.
Kahn, James A. and Robert W. Rich. “Tracking the New Economy: Using Growth Theory to Detect Changes in Trend Productivity.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54
(September 2007): 1670-1701.
Kimball, Miles. “Proof of Consumption Technology Neutrality.” Manuscript. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan, August 1994.
King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson. “Stochastic
Trends and Economic Fluctuations.” American Economic Review 81 (September 1991):
819-840.
Klein, Paul. “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear Rational Expectations Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24 (September
2000): 1405-1423.
Kohn, Robert and Craig F. Ansley. “Fixed Interval Estimation in State Space Models
when Some of the Data are Missing or Aggregated.” Biometrika 70 (December 1983):
683-688.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
Econometrica 50 (November 1982): 1345-1370.
Malley, Jim, Apostolis Philippopoulos, and Ulrich Woitek. “Electoral Uncertainty, Fiscal
Policy and Macroeconomic Fluctuations.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
31 (March 2007): 1051-1080.
27

Marquis, Milton and Bharat Trehan. “On Using Relative Prices to Measure Capital-Specific
Technological Progress.” Working Paper 2005-02. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, March 2005.
Mulligan, Casey B. “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions.” Working Paper 8774. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2002.
Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel. “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is
Information Technology the Story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (Fall 2000):
3-22.
Pakko, Michael R. “What Happens When the Technology Growth Trend Changes? Transition Dynamics, Capital Growth, and the ‘New Economy.’” Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (April 2002): 376-407.
Pakko, Michael R. “Changing Technology Trends, Transition Dynamics, and Growth Accounting.” Contributions to Macroeconomics 5 (Issue 1, 2005): Article 12.
Parkin, Michael. “A Method for Determining Whether Parameters in Aggregative Models
are Structural.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 29 (1988):
215-252.
Roberts, John M. “Estimates of the Productivity Trend Using Time-Varying Parameter
Techniques.” Contributions to Macroeconomics 1 (Issue 1, 2001): Article 3.
Rogerson, Richard. “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 21 (January 1988): 3-16.
Tevlin, Stacey and Karl Whelan. “Explaining the Investment Boom of the 1990s.” Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking 35 (February 2003): 1-22.
Whelan, Karl. “A Guide to U.S. Chain Aggregated NIPA Data.” Review of Income and
Wealth 48 (June 2002): 217-233.
28

Whelan, Karl. “A Two-Sector Approach to Modeling U.S. NIPA Data.” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 35 (August 2003): 627-656.
Whelan, Karl. “New Evidence on Balanced Growth, Stochastic Trends, and Economic Fluctuations.” Research Technical Paper 7/RT/04. Dublin: Central Bank and Financial
Services Authority of Ireland, October 2004.

29

Table 1. Maximum Likelihood Estimates and Standard Errors
Parameter

Estimate

Standard Error

γ
θ
φh
φk
ag
zcg
zig
ρla
ρga
ρlc
ρgc
ρli
ρgi
σ la
σga
σlc
σgc
σli
σgi

0.0775
0.3918
4.3788
17.3319
0.9999
1.0047
1.0063
0.3652
0.0000
0.0000
0.5964
0.8229
−
0.0363
0.0088
0.0063
0.0068
0.0706
0.0000

0.1471
0.0572
1.0549
22.6317
0.0006
0.0011
0.0004
0.1556
0.0497
0.1435
0.1170
0.0582
−
0.0098
0.0021
0.0011
0.0014
0.0099
0.0022

Notes: During the estimation, the constraints β = 0.99 and δ c = δ i = 0.025 and the
symmetry conditions θc = θi = θ, φhc = φhi = φh , and φkc = φki = φk are imposed,
and η c , η i , κc , and κi are set to make steady-state capital adjustment costs equal to
zero. The parameter ρgi is unidentified, given the point estimate of σ gi = 0.0000.

Table 2. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions
Consumption
Quarters Ahead

εla

εga

εlc

εgc

εli

εgi

1
4
8
12
20
40

19.0
9.4
4.0
2.4
1.3
0.6

6.4
13.8
17.2
19.0
21.4
26.9

34.3
5.0
1.8
1.1
0.6
0.2

40.3
71.4
75.3
74.3
71.0
66.1

0.0
0.4
1.6
3.2
5.8
6.2

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Quarters Ahead

εla

εga

εlc

εgc

εli

εgi

1
4
8
12
20
40

0.5
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4

0.1
0.8
2.3
4.3
9.1
19.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

99.4
98.6
97.2
95.2
90.5
80.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Quarters Ahead

εla

εga

εlc

εgc

εli

εgi

1
4
8
12
20
40

56.3
25.4
12.1
7.9
4.8
2.5

18.3
37.2
53.8
65.4
78.5
87.9

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

25.3
37.4
34.1
26.8
16.7
9.6

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Investment

Hours Worked

Note: Entries decompose the forecast error variance of each variable at each horizon into
percentages due to each of the model’s six shocks.

4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4
3.8
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

Figure 1. Log of Multifactor Productivity, U.S. Private Nonfarm Business Sector (Index, 2000=100).

1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0.95
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

Figure 2. Logs of real, per-capita consumption (dotted line) and investment (solid line), U.S., in
chained 2000 dollars and normalized so that 1948=1 for both series.

C to growth rate of A

C to level of A
0.35

0.7

0.3

0.6

0.25

0.5

0.2

0.4

0.15

0.3

0.1

0.2

0.05

0.1

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

I to level of A

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

I to growth rate of A
1.2

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0 25
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

5

10

15

0

20

5

H to level of A

10

H to growth rate of A

0.6

1.2

0.5

1

0.4

0.8

0.3

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.2

0
-0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

Figure 3. Impulse Responses to Preference Shocks. Each panel shows the percentage-point response of aggregate consumption (C),
investment (I), or hours worked (H) to a one-standard-deviation shock to the level or growth rate of the preference parameter A.

C to level of Zc

C to growth rate of Zc

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

I to level of Zc

10

15

20

I to growth rate of Zc

0.0001

0.00025

0.00005

0.0002

0

0.00015

-0.00005

0.0001

-0.0001

0.00005

-0.00015

0

-0.0002

-0.00005

-0.00025

-0.0001
0

5

10

15

20

0

H to level of Zc

5

10

15

20

15

20

H to growth rate of Zc

0.0005
0

0
-0.0005

-0.0005
-0.001

-0.001

-0.0015
-0.0015

-0.002
-0.0025

-0.002

-0.003
-0.0035

-0.0025
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

Figure 4. Impulse Responses to Consumption-Sector Technology Shocks. Each panel shows the percentage-point response of
aggregate consumption (C), investment (I), or hours worked (H) to a one-standard-deviation shock to the level or growth rate
of productivity Zc in the consumption-goods-producing sector.

C to level of Zi

C to growth rate of Zi

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
0

5

10

15

0

20

5

I to level of Zi

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

I to growth rate of Zi

6

3

5

2.5

4

2

3

1.5

2

1

1

0.5

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

H to level of Zi

10

H to growth rate of Zi
0.35

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

Figure 5. Impulse Responses to Investment-Sector Technology Shocks. Each panel shows the percentage-point response of
aggregate consumption (C), investment (I), or hours worked (H) to a one-standard-deviation shock to the level or growth rate
of productivity Zi in the investment-goods-producing sector.

consumption technology shock Zc

preference shock A
0.25

1.2

0.2

1

0.15

investment technology shock Zi
2
1.5

0.8

0.1
0.05

0.6

1

0

0.4

0.5

-0.05

0.2

-0.1
-0.15

0

-0.2

-0.2
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

0
-0.5
1948

1958

level component of A

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

0.03

0.1

0.02

0.05

0.01

0

0

-0.05

-0.01

-0.1

-0.02

-0.15
1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

1948

1958

growth rate component of Zc

1988

1998

2008

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

1998

2008

growth rate component of Zi
1.6

1.2

0.06

1978

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5

growth rate component of A
0.08

1968

level component of Zi

-0.03
1958

1958

level component of Zc

0.15

1948

1948

1.4

1

0.04

1.2
0.8

0.02
0

1

0.6

-0.02

0.8
0.6

0.4

-0.04

0.4

0.2

-0.06
-0.08

0.2

0
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

0
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

Figure 6. Smoothed (Full-Sample) Estimates of Preference and Technology Shocks, Decomposed into Level and Growth-Rate Components. All variables shown in logs.

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5
1948

1956

1964

1972

1980

1988

1996

2004

2012

Figure 7. Logs of Productivity in the Consumption- (Zc, dotted line) and Investment- (Zi, solid line)
Goods-Producing Sectors. Estimated through 2006:3 and forecast through 2012:1.

I - log of real investment per capita

C - log of real consumption per capita

H - log of hours worked per capita

9.5

10.5

6.4

9
10

6.3
8.5
8

9.5

6.2
7.5

9
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

7
1948

1958

C - no preference shocks

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

6.1
1948

1958

I - no preference shocks

10.5

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

1998

2008

H - no preference shocks

9.5

6.4

9
10

6.3
8.5
8

9.5

6.2
7.5

9
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

7
1948

C - no consumption-specific technology shocks

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

6.1
1948

I - no consumption-specific technology shocks

1968

1978

1988

H - no consumption-specific technology shocks

9.5

10.5

1958

6.4

9
10

6.3
8.5
8

9.5

6.2
7.5

9
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

7
1948

C - no investment-specific technology shocks

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

6.1
1948

I - no investment-specific technology shocks

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

H - no investment-specific technology shocks

9.5

10.5

1958

6.4

9
10

6.3
8.5
8

9.5

6.2
7.5

9
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

7
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

6.1
1948

1958

1968

1978

1988

1998

2008

Figure 8. Counterfactuals. The top three panels show the actual U.S. data. Consumption and investment are expressed in chained 2000 dollars; hours
worked are indexed, 1992=100. Each remaining panel displays the model's estimate (thick line) of how the actual series (thin line) would have
behaved in the absence of one of the shocks.

