NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MOSQUITOES: THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF MALARIA ERADICATION IN
INDIA
David Cutler
Winnie Fung
Michael Kremer
Monica Singhal
Tom Vogl
Working Paper 13539
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13539

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

We are grateful to the National Malaria Eradication Programme of India for its generous assistance,
to Petia Topalova for help with the National Sample Survey, to Scott Walker for help with GIS, and
to Lakshmi Iyer for making available her data on agriculture in Indian districts. We also thank participants
of the Center for International Development Conference on Health Improvements for Economic Growth,
the Harvard Initiative on Global Health seminar series. We are grateful to the editor, Esther Duflo,
and to anonymous referees for their comments. Vogl thanks the NSF for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by David Cutler, Winnie Fung, Michael Kremer, Monica Singhal, and Tom Vogl . All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mosquitoes: The Long-term Effects of Malaria Eradication in India
David Cutler, Winnie Fung, Michael Kremer, Monica Singhal, and Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 13539
October 2007, Revised August 2009
JEL No. H51,I18,J24
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of malaria on educational attainment and income by exploiting geographic
variation in malaria prevalence in India prior to a nationwide eradication program in the 1950s. We
find that the program led to modest increases in income for prime age men. This finding is robust to
using very localized sources of geographic variation and to instrumenting for pre-eradication prevalence
with climate factors. We do not observe improvements in income for women, suggesting that observed
effects are likely driven by increased labor market productivity. We find no evidence of increased
educational attainment for men, and mixed evidence for women.

David Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu

Monica Singhal
Harvard University
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
monica_singhal@harvard.edu

Winnie Fung
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
fung@fas.harvard.edu

Tom Vogl
Harvard University
tvogl@fas.harvard.edu

Michael Kremer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center M20
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Malaria has afflicted humans for more than 10,000 years (Dunn 2003). Today, malaria is
endemic in over 100 countries and affects 40% of the world's population. The World Health
Organization (2001) estimates that 300 million people suffer from malaria in the world each year,
with almost one million deaths from malaria. Faced with this huge global burden, international
organizations have redoubled their efforts to combat the disease. The United Nations has made
combating malaria one of its Millennium Development Goals. The Roll Back Malaria Global
Partnership, formed by the WHO, United Nations Children's Fund, United Nations Development
Program, and the World Bank, aims to halve the malaria burden relative to 2000 levels by 2010.
Many argue that improving health, while important in itself, can also lead to higher economic
growth and development. Gallup and Sachs (2001) use cross-country growth regressions to show
that countries with intensive malaria grew 1.3% less per year and that a 10% reduction in malaria
was correlated with 0.3% higher growth.1 In contrast, Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) argue that the
wave of international health innovations that began in the 1940s did not lead to a disproportionate
increase in log per capita GDP in the areas with high pre-intervention disease burden.
In this paper, we examine some of the channels through which health may have a causal
impact on development by studying the effects of childhood exposure to malaria eradication on
human capital accumulation and income in adulthood. We use the national malaria eradication
program in India in the 1950s as a quasi-experiment and exploit geographic variation in malaria
prevalence prior to the eradication campaign. We compare gains for cohorts born before and after
the program in areas with varying pre-eradication prevalence. These differences-in-differences
estimates show no gains in literacy or primary school completion for areas that experienced large
reductions in malaria to those that experienced small reductions.2 We do, however, observe modest
relative increases in income (proxied by per capita household expenditure) for prime age men. This
effect is robust to using quite localized sources of geographic variation and to instrumenting for preeradication prevalence using geographic and climate factors.3 We do not observe increases in
expenditure as a result of the program for women, who have much lower labor force participation

1

Other macroeconomic studies, such as those by Bloom and Canning (2005) and Alleyne and Cohen (2002), also
conclude that improvements in health can lead to higher economic growth.
2
These results differ from an earlier working paper draft. This version corrects errors discovered in the original program
files and extends the empirical analysis along a number of dimensions.

1

rates than men, suggesting that the primary channel underlying the observed effects for men may be
improved labor market productivity.
Our findings relate most closely to two recent papers that examine the effect of malaria
eradication campaigns in other parts of the world. Bleakley (2007) studies the effect of malaria
eradication campaigns on the income and education of native males in the United States, Brazil,
Colombia, and Mexico. Using malaria mortality rates and an ecology index to identify preeradication disease prevalence, Bleakley finds that childhood exposure to malaria lowers labor
productivity and leads to lower adult income. Results for years of schooling are mixed. Lucas
(2009) studies ever-married women in Paraguay and Sri Lanka in the 1940s to 1960s and finds that
malaria eradication leads to increases in female education and literacy rates.4 Two other studies use
weather conditions to instrument for malaria exposure in the United States and examine the effects
on long run health and economic outcomes. Hong (2007) finds that malarial risk leads to adverse
long run health outcomes, lower labor force participation, and lower wealth. Barecca (2009) finds
that in utero and postnatal malaria exposure leads to lower educational attainment. We discuss our
findings relative to this literature in Section 5.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the epidemiology of
malaria and the mechanisms through which malaria may affect educational attainment, describes
malaria in India in the pre-eradication era, and discusses the National Malaria Control Program in
India and its effectiveness. Section 3 outlines our empirical strategy. Section 4 describes the data.
Section 5 presents our results, and Section 6 concludes.

2 Malaria in India
“The problem of existence in very many parts of India is the problem of malaria.
There is no aspect of life in this country which is not affected either directly or
indirectly by this disease. It constitutes one of the most important causes of economic
misfortune, engendering poverty, diminishing quantity and quality of food supply,
lowering the physical and intellectual standards of the nation and hampering
increased prosperity in every way.”
- John Sinton, Director of the Malaria Survey of India, 1936

3

The IV results do suggest improvements in educational attainment resulting from the program for women; we discuss
these results in detail below.
4
Lucas (2007) finds that malaria eradication in Sri Lanka led to an initial increase in fertility followed by lowered
fertility in the second generation.

2

2.1 Overview of Malaria Epidemiology
Malaria is a protozoal infection transmitted to human beings by mosquitoes. The classic
symptom of malaria is bouts of fever with spikes on alternating days. Headaches, malaise, fatigue,
nausea, and anemia are also common. Severe forms of the disease can result in organ failure,
delirium, impaired consciousness, and generalized convulsions, followed by persistent coma and
death.5 Infants and children suffer the worst from malaria and high morbidity and mortality rates.
The other high-risk group is pregnant women, for whom malaria often results in pre-term labor or
low birth weight full-term births, as well as spontaneous abortions and still-births.
Malaria has been hypothesized to have lifelong effects on skill acquisition through at least
three channels: effects on cognitive activity, school absenteeism, and fetal development (Sachs and
Malaney, 2002). Epidemiological studies have associated malaria with anemia, epileptic
convulsions, and growth faltering during the first three years of life (Shiff et al., 1996), potentially
leading to learning disabilities and negative effects on cognitive development (Boyle et al., 1994).
Malaria in pregnancy can cause low birth weight because of fetal growth retardation or premature
delivery (Duffy and Desowitz, 2001). This can in turn reduce the physical, cognitive, and
neurosensory development of the child, resulting in lower human capital accumulation (McCormick
et al., 1992). Randomized evaluations have documented effects of malaria on school absenteeism,6
but no randomized evaluation has so far, to the best of our knowledge, examined the effect of
malaria prevention or treatment programs on longer run outcomes.
Importantly, malaria’s various sequelae do not necessarily imply that its eradication will lead
to improvements in schooling outcomes in the population. Eradication may lead to the survival of
children with poorer health and weaker cognitive skills. This is unlikely to be the case here because,
as described below, the most prevalent form of malaria in India is generally non-fatal. Second, as
emphasized by Bleakley (2007), in a country with widespread child labor, the effect of improved
childhood health on the labor-schooling decision is ambiguous because malaria could affect
children’s productivity not just in education but also in work. Similarly, the cognitive gains from
eradication can lead to increased or decreased schooling investment depending on the balance of
income and substitution effects. The conventional wisdom is that cognitive ability is complementary
to schooling (Card 2001), but this is an empirical claim, not a theoretical prediction.
5
6

WHO, http://www.who.int/malaria/faq.html.
See, for example, Leighton and Foster (1993), Aikins (1995), and Brooker, et al. (2000).

3

In addition, malaria may have effects on other outcomes, even for a given level of schooling.
Fewer school absences could lead to greater learning, leading to improvements in literacy and
earnings holding the years of schooling constant (Bleakley, 2007). The health benefits of malaria
reduction could also result in improved physical and mental condition later in life and therefore
higher labor market productivity.

2.2 The Pre-Eradication Era
References to malaria can be found in Vedic writings dating to 1600 B.C. (Desowitz, 1991),
and two classical books on Ayurveda describe malaria as the “king of diseases” (Rao, 1959). Efforts
to control malaria date back to the early 1900s but were revolutionized in the mid-1940s with the
advent of DDT (dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethylene).7 DDT was effective, non-toxic to humans, and
“dirt-cheap to manufacture” (Desowitz, 1991). Aggressive campaigns using DDT were launched
almost simultaneously around the world, leading to the rapid eradication of malaria in Taiwan, much
of the Caribbean, the Balkans, parts of northern Africa, northern Australia, and large parts of the
South Pacific (Davis, 1956).
DDT was first used in India by the military in 1944 and became available for civilian antimalaria operations in 1945. During the late 1940s, a number of pilot programs and trials took place
throughout the country. International organizations such as WHO, UNICEF, and the Rockefeller
Foundation also sponsored demonstration projects. These pilot projects were very successful, and in
1951, the national Planning Commission endorsed the development of a comprehensive, nationwide
malaria control program. In April of 1953, the National Malaria Control Program (NMCP) was
launched. Funding for the program was primarily from bilateral and international sources, and
program implementation was overseen by the WHO. The timing of the program is plausibly
exogenous, since it was driven by the advent of DDT.
Prior to the eradication program, malaria was considered the greatest health problem facing
India. Survey evidence estimates that immediately after partition in 1947, India suffered from 75
million cases of malaria (doubled during epidemic years) and 800,000 deaths directly attributable to
malaria annually (Sinton, 1935, 1936; Rao, 1959). The population of India in 1947 was 344 million,

7

Early experiments prior to 1910 focused on breeding control. These attempts were generally considered failures. From
1910 to 1944, various actors undertook measures such as drainage and the filling up of breeding places. The use of
larvicidal chemicals such as oil, Paris green, and later pyrethrum also achieved limited success (NMEP 1986, p. 2).

4

implying an annual incidence rate of 22%.
Of the four human malaria parasites (Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae, and P.
ovale), two are endemic in India: P. vivax and P. falciparum.8 P. falciparum is associated with the
most severe forms of malaria and accounts for most malaria fatalities. It is the primary cause of
malarial infections in Africa, where 90% of malaria deaths currently occur. Data on the relative
prevalence of these parasites in India during the pre-eradication era are unfortunately unavailable;
data from the immediate post-eradication period suggest that approximately 30% of cases were due
to P. falciparum (NMEP, 1996).

2.3 National Malaria Control Program
The National Malaria Control Program's main operational activity was to spray DDT in
human dwellings and cattle sheds. Two rounds of spraying were conducted per year, usually
between May and September, the peak transmission times.
A five-year plan was formed with the goal of establishing 125 Malaria Control Units by
1956, each covering a population of one million (NMEP, 1986). The program was successful in
achieving this target (Table 1). By 1956, 134 units had been established and 112 million people
were estimated to be protected. By 1958, almost 200 units had been established and 165 million
people were under protection.
The program was so successful that in 1958 it was reformulated as the National Malaria
Eradication Program, with the goal of completely eradicating malaria from the nation. This effort
was adopted in coordination with a WHO campaign to eradicate malaria from the entire region,
launched after the Eighth World Health Assembly in 1955 (WHO, 1967). By 1960-61, the entire
country was brought under the program.
Figure 1 illustrates the rapid geographic expansion of coverage as districts were phased into
the program. Once a district was incorporated into the program, it remained in the program in all
subsequent years. The statement of the Planning Commission indicated that priority targeting of
areas should be based on endemicity and food producing capacity. The timing of the phase-in for
particular districts may therefore not be exogenous.
Large urban areas were relatively free from malaria prior to the eradication era (League of
Nations, 1930). In fact, urban malaria was considered to be a negligible problem, so the NMCP left

5

malaria control efforts to local governments.9 Prevalence of malaria in urban areas increased only
later (although only to much lower levels than pre-eradication rural malaria), and the government
launched an Urban Malaria Scheme in 1971 to address the growing problem of urban malaria. We
therefore focus our analysis on rural areas.

2.4 Program Effectiveness
While the campaign was unsuccessful in eradicating malaria from India, it did achieve
tremendous reductions in malaria prevalence. The NMEP, which began tracking malaria prevalence
from 1961 using blood smear data, estimates the 1965 national malaria caseload at 100,000 per year,
compared to 75 million annual cases in the pre-eradication era (Table 2).
Although the 1965 figures are likely to underestimate true malaria prevalence, there is no
doubt that there was a dramatic reduction in malaria prevalence over this period. Table 3 shows
state level child spleen rates (the percentage of examined children aged 2-9 with an enlarged spleen)
over the eradication era.10 We observe substantial declines in this measure in all states over this
period. Furthermore, vital statistics data on causes of death indicate that the number of malaria
deaths between 1952 and 1963 dropped by 91.2% and 98.3% in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal,
respectively (Figure 2). Figure 2 focuses on these two states because they are large states with
relatively complete data, and their boundaries remained stable through the reorganization of Indian
states in 1956; the malaria death rate for these states prior to the program is similar to the nationwide
death rate implied in Table 1.
Malaria prevalence remained low throughout the 1960s but experienced a slight resurgence
in the 1970s, peaking in 1976. However, even at the peak of the resurgence, the prevalence rate was
only 1.1% (Table 2). Reported prevalence decreased again, although not to the low levels seen in
the immediate post-eradication period. This may partially be a result of increased accuracy in
reported caseloads over time.

8

P. malariae also exists, but is confined to tribal areas of the country (NMEP, 1986).
The following quote describes the treatment of urban malaria during this time: “As per the plan of operations
formulated at the time of launching of the National Malaria Eradication Programme, all the roofed structures in the rural
areas received indoor residual insecticidal spray except urban areas with a population of over 40,000. In such urban
areas, the indoor residual insecticidal spray was confined only to the peripheral belt to a depth of 1 to 1.5 km. Antilarval
measures were recommended in towns and cities. The implementation of antilarval operations was made the
responsibility of the local bodies. Due to financial constraints many local bodies failed to implement the control
measures. Though malaria epidemics were recorded earlier in Bombay, Delhi, Lucknow, etc., these could be
immediately contained. Hence, malaria in urban areas was not considered as a major problem” (NMEP 1996, p. 251).

9

6

3 Empirical Strategy
Our study focuses on the effects of early-life malaria exposure on subsequent human capital
attainment and expenditure in adulthood. We use a differences-in-differences design, exploiting
geographic variation in the prevalence of malaria prior to the eradication program.11 We compare
outcomes at a point in time for individuals in birth cohorts born before and after the eradication era
in areas with varying pre-eradication malaria prevalence. Ideally, we would know each individual’s
district of birth, but our outcomes data report only the district of current residence. An identifying
assumption of our analysis is therefore that district of residence is a good proxy for district of birth.
In the 1991 Census of India, only 7.5% of rural residents reported living in districts other than their
districts of birth.
We focus on the effects of malaria exposure in very early life for two reasons, one conceptual
and one practical. First, as suggested in Section 2.1, malaria likely exerts its most powerful
influence on cognitive development and educational attainment during infancy and childhood.
Second, the outcomes data we use exhibit age heaping, preventing us from employing a doseresponse model as in Bleakley (2007). Bleakley allows the effect size to vary with years of exposure
to eradication in childhood, which requires precise age reporting. We take an approach that places
fewer demands on the quality of the age data, using a binary treatment variable to separate pre- and
post-eradication cohorts. We thus use malaria prevalence at birth as an approximation of an
individual's malaria exposure during the first few years of life, when the effect of malaria is likely
the strongest.
To study the effects of early-life malaria exposure, we run regressions of the following form,
for individual i in birth cohort c in district d:

  post   icd
  pre  ( Post ) c * X icd
Outcomeicd   ( Post ) c  ( Malaria) d   d   c  X icd

(A)

where Post indicates whether the individual was born after the eradication era and Malaria is a
measure of pre-eradication endemicity in individual i’s district. δ and α are district and birth cohort
fixed effects. The vector X includes membership in a scheduled caste, membership in a scheduled
10

The spleen rate is a commonly used measure of childhood malaria infection over a long period.
Although districts were phased into the program over several years during the eradication era, the timing of phase-in
may be related to malaria severity and other relevant factors. In addition, measures of malaria prevalence such as the
child spleen rate show declines in both sprayed and unsprayed areas over this period, suggesting that even those in
unsprayed areas may have benefited from the program (NMCP, 1986). Finally, the phase-in of the program was quite

11

7

tribe, and household religion. The influence of this vector, captured in γ, is permitted to vary across
the pre and post periods. Our coefficient of interest is β, representing the difference-in-difference
estimate of the effect of malaria eradication. We run specification (A) separately for men and
women. In robustness checks, we add several other time-varying district-, state-, and region-level
covariates to this specification, as well as district-specific linear trends.
To represent our results visually, we also plot cohort-specific relationships between preeradication malaria endemicity and our socioeconomic outcomes of interest. The cohort-specific
relationships derive from regressions of the form:
    icd
Outcomeicd    c  ( Malaria ) d   c  X icd

(B)

c

where βc gives the cohort-specific relationship between pre-eradication endemicity and later-life
outcomes. If malaria eradication affected the human capital accumulation and economic wellbeing
of exposed cohorts, these effects should be visible in a break from preexisting trends in βc. This
method would also shed light on the partial effects of malaria exposure in late childhood (rather than
at birth), if such effects exist. Due to age heaping on ages ending in the digits 0 and 5, we group
individuals into 5-year birth cohorts for the graphical analysis, centered on years ending in the digits
2 and 7.

4 Data
4.1 Map of Pre-Eradication Endemicity
A central problem in assessing the impact of malaria is the identification of a suitable
indicator for the prevalence of the disease. As Gallup and Sachs (2001) point out, the most severely
affected countries often lack high-quality data on malaria prevalence or incidence. In their study,
they use historical maps of the geographical distribution of malarial risk to derive an index of
malaria prevalence.
In this paper, we use a 1948 government map that classifies areas of India into categories of
malaria endemicity. The map was obtained from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India. The pre-eradication malaria map classifies areas into six endemicity
categories: (1) areas above 5000 feet; non malarious, (2) known healthy plain areas; spleen rate

rapid, raising further difficulties in exploiting variation in timing of coverage.

8

under 10%, (3) variable endemicity associated with dry tracts; potential epidemic areas, (4) known
areas liable to fulminant epidemic diluvial malaria, (5) moderate to high endemicity; fulminant
epidemics unknown, and (6) hyperendemicity of jungly hill tracts and terai land. This map was
based on spleen rate surveys and climate factors, although the exact mechanism by which category
boundaries were constructed is not known.
Using geographic information system (GIS) software, we digitized the 1948 malaria
endemicity map. Figure 3 shows the digitized map, overlaid with district boundaries as defined by
the 1991 Census. The National Sample Survey (NSS), which we use for our outcome measures,
groups some of the 466 Census districts together, resulting in 431 NSS composite “districts.” We
follow the NSS district coding. We drop the island district of Lakshadweep, for which malaria
prevalence data are unavailable, as well as fourteen further districts that lack observations in the NSS
that satisfy our sample inclusion criteria (described below), leaving 416 districts in our main sample.
The digitization procedure subdivided districts into polygons of roughly equal size, so that
some districts have more than one possible classification. To aggregate the polygons at the district
level, we take two approaches. In the first approach, we average all polygon values (ranging from 1
to 6, as described above) within a district to generate a continuous measure of endemicity, which we
call the malaria index. However, the effects of malaria eradication may be nonlinear, so our second
approach uses a categorical classification of pre-eradication endemicity. To generate this
classification, we first map the original six-category endemicity measure into a new three category
variable, as specified in Table 4. This new variable classifies each polygon as non-malarious,
potential epidemic, or malarious.12 We then categorize each district by its modal polygon malaria
category. 77 districts do not have unique modes. For example, some mountainous districts in
northern India have equal numbers of non-malarious, high altitude polygons as malarious, low
altitude polygons. To avoid classifying bimodal districts arbitrarily, we omit them from the analysis
that uses this categorical classification.
The resulting measures of pre-eradication malaria endemicity are strongly correlated with the
sequelae and ecological determinants of malaria. Figure 4 plots the state-level child spleen rate
12

In areas where malaria is endemic, individuals can acquire limited immunity over time through years of continued
exposure and multiple infections. The effects of malaria are therefore most pronounced in childhood and youth, when
individuals have not acquired immunity. Immunity may also be reduced during pregnancy. In areas where malaria is
epidemic, individuals may have little or no acquired immunity. In these areas, malaria can affect both children and
adults and can result in severe adverse health consequences.

9

against our map-based state-level malaria index, constructed in the same way as the district-level
index. In 1953-54, just as the NMEP was starting its operations, the child spleen rate was strongly
positively associated with the malaria index. By 1959-60, as the eradication program was nearing
completion, states converge to very low child spleen rates, so that states with high pre-eradication
levels of malaria experienced the largest reductions in malaria over the eradication era. Furthermore,
Appendix Table A1 reports regressions of the district-level malaria index on four known ecological
determinants of malaria endemicity, also measured at the district level.13 Consistent with the
accumulated knowledge on malaria ecology (e.g., Sharma 2002), the malaria index is positively
associated with precipitation and humidity and negatively associated with elevation. The coefficient
on temperature is negative (and the coefficients of the quadratic in column 3 imply a negative
relationship over relevant temperatures), but the unconditional correlation between the malaria index
and temperature is strongly positive (unreported).14
The 416 districts in our sample are grouped into 75 regions according to the NSS definition
of regions, and these regions are in turn grouped into 29 states. When we drop bimodal districts, we
observe the following patterns. Of the 74 remaining regions, 51 (69%) have districts in only one
category of malaria endemicity, 22 (30%) have districts in two malaria categories, and one region
has districts belonging to all three malaria categories. Of the 28 remaining states, 13 (46%) have
districts in only one malaria category, another 13 (46%) have districts in two malaria categories, and
two (7%) have districts belonging to all three malaria categories.

4.2 Outcomes
We use data on human capital attainment and economic status from the 43rd round of the
Indian National Sample Survey (NSS), conducted in 1987. The NSS is an all-India representative
household consumer expenditure survey run by the Government of India starting in 1950. It
includes a parallel employment and unemployment survey every five years. The NSS has four
"thick" rounds that have the largest samples: namely, 1983, 1987, 1993, and 1999. We use the 43rd

The ecology data are drawn from the International Water Management Institute World Water and Climate Atlas
(http://www.iwmi.org) and the Climatic Research Unit (http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk). The dataset consists of a 10’
latitude/longitude mean monthly climatology of surface climate over global land areas, and is interpolated from station
means for the period 1961 to 1990. New et al. (2002) provide a detailed description of the dataset. We use GIS to
overlay the ecology data with district boundaries.
14
Ordered probits of the modal malaria category on the same ecological variables yield similar conclusions.
13

10

round because it is the earliest thick round that contains district identifiers. Choosing an early round
mitigates possible mortality bias, and using the district identifiers allows us to examine outcomes at
a very local level. The NSS reports district of current residence but not district of birth.
The human capital analyses draw on literacy and primary school attainment data, whereas the
economic status analyses use household-level expenditure data.15 Past research has used earnings or
occupational wage data to estimate the productivity effects of childhood malaria exposure (e.g.,
Bleakley, 2007), under the implicit assumption that employers pay workers their marginal product.
However, only seven percent of the NSS sample has a non-zero wage, and three-quarters of workers
aged 20-60 (68% of men, 78% of women) report one of two occupations (out of 463 in the
classification), both agricultural. Given the unsuitability of the labor force data, we use the survey’s
rich data on household consumption (including goods produced in the household) to measure the
effects of eradication on economic status. We construct two income measures: log household
monthly per capita expenditure (measured in 1987 rupees) and poverty, using the 1987 all-India
rural poverty line of 115.70 rupees per person per month. We trim the top and bottom one percent of
the expenditure data to remove implausible values.
Because we are primarily interested in the productivity effects of malaria exposure in
childhood, we restrict our consumption sample to adults of the ages with the highest labor force
participation rates.16 Appendix Figure A1 shows age profiles in labor force participation for men
and women separately. Men aged 20-60 are far more likely to work than men in other age groups or
women of any age. We therefore focus our attention on men in this age group, whom we call primeage men. For completeness, we report estimates for women in the same age group.17 Schedule 1
(consumer expenditure schedule) of the NSS gives information on household consumption, and
Schedule 10 (employment schedule) gives information on education.
Table 5 provides summary statistics for our sample, which omits individuals born during the
eradication era (1953 to 1961). For literacy and primary school completion, we analyze individuals
15

We have also run our analyses using higher education outcomes, including middle school, secondary school, and
college attainment. The results were substantively similar to those we report here for literacy and primary schooling.
16
In theory, households might save to smooth consumption after a member’s retirement, so that older adults could still
be included in the sample. Although past research has found evidence of consumption smoothing in rural India
(Townsend 1994), we feel uncomfortable assuming that this smoothing is complete, so we omit older adults from our
sample.
17
Many households have multiple workers, but we expect household consumption on average to be higher in households
with workers who benefited from eradication. This approach is common in settings without good individual earnings
data; in a recent example, Maccini and Yang (2009) regress a household-level asset ownership index on individual-level
exposure to early-life economic shocks.

11

between the ages of 15 and 75. In this sample, individuals born during 1912-1952 thus comprise the
pre-eradication cohorts, whereas those born during 1962-1972 comprise the post-eradication cohorts.
As discussed above, to analyze expenditures and poverty, we restrict the sample to adults aged 2060. Here, the pre-eradication era spans 1927-1952 and the post-eradication era includes 1962-1967.
77,071 households, containing 111,308 men and 107,642 women, satisfy our inclusion criteria for
the human capital outcomes. Women in our sample are about half as likely as men to be literate or
to have finished primary school. Roughly a third of our sample is poor, and 28 percent are members
of a scheduled caste or tribe, which are at the bottom of the Indian social hierarchy. The mean age is
36. Finally, although the weighted proportion of our sample in non-malarious areas is merely two
percent, the unweighted proportion is five percent, or roughly 10,000 people.

5 Results
5.1 Differences-in-Differences Analysis
We next examine the effects of the eradication program using the differences-in-differences
specification described in Section 3. We examine effects separately by gender, and include controls
for membership in a scheduled caste, membership in a scheduled tribe, and indicators for the two
largest religious categories (Hindu and Muslim). We also interact these controls with the posteradication dummy to allow their influence to vary across cohorts from the pre-eradication and posteradication eras.
Table 6 shows the results of our baseline specification for literacy and primary school
completion, followed by several robustness checks. Panel A presents results for men, and Panel B
presents results for women. Each panel shows the treatment effects using first our three category
district classification (where bimodal districts are excluded) and then using our continuous
endemicity index.
The results show no robust evidence of an effect of malaria eradication on human capital
attainment. For example, the first column of Panel A1 shows the effects of the program on male
literacy. The coefficients on post*potential epidemic and post*malarious capture the effect of being
born post-eradication versus pre-eradication in a district that was formerly potentially epidemic or
malarious, relative to the effect of being born in a non-malarious district. If malaria reduction
increased educational attainment, we would expect these coefficients to be positive. We also report
F-tests for equality of the post*potential epidemic and post*malarious coefficients. We see no
12

significant differences in gains for those born in potential epidemic or malarious areas relative to
those born in non-malarious areas. The baseline specification implies that those born in malarious
areas experienced significantly smaller gains in literacy relative to those born in potential epidemic
areas; however this effect is not robust to the inclusion of state*post controls (column 2),
region*post controls (column 3), or the inclusion of region*post controls with district specific linear
trends (column 4). We observe a similar pattern in Panel A2, which shows the effects using our
continuous malaria index measure; again, positive treatment effects of the program would imply
positive coefficients. The baseline specification implies a negative treatment effect, driven by the
smaller gains in malarious areas relative to potential epidemic areas shown in Panel A1. However,
this result is not robust to allowing differential trends by geographic area. Similarly, we observe no
robust treatment effect on primary education for men.
Panel B presents results for women, also revealing little evidence that eradication increased
human capital. The literacy estimates are not statistically significant, and they change sign across
specifications. The primary education results imply that those in potential epidemic and malarious
areas experienced smaller gains than those in non-malarious areas; the point estimates also indicate
that the gains in malarious areas were larger than those in potential epidemic areas. However, the
coefficients become insignificant and change sign in our most demanding specification (region*post
controls and district specific linear trends). We discuss these results further in relation to our
instrumental variables estimates in Section 5.3.
We next examine the effects of the program on income, measured by per-capita household
expenditure and a poverty dummy, as described above (Table 7). Unlike the human capital results,
these results indicate a positive effect of eradication on adult male income. In Panel A1, the baseline
specification (column [1]) implies a positive, monotonic program effect across the three categories
of malaria endemicity. The treatment effect estimate for potential epidemic areas relative to nonmalarious areas changes sign in the robustness checks, but the differences-in-differences between
potential epidemic and malarious areas, which account for over 95 percent of or sample, are always
positive.
Panel A2 presents the results for men using the index measure of malaria endemicity. A one
unit increase in the pre-eradication malaria index is associated with a 0.8% increase in per-capita
household expenditure. To put this magnitude in context, we can convert the malaria index into an
approximate measure of the corresponding spleen rate using the slope of the 1953-54 regression line

13

in Figure 4. If we assume that malaria levels were reduced to zero in the post eradication period, this
estimate implies that a 40 percentage point reduction in the spleen rate, as was experienced in the
most malarious states, is associated with a 2 percent increase in per-capita household expenditure.
Stated somewhat differently, a move from the ninety-fifth to the fifth percentile of the district-level
malaria index distribution increases per-capita expenditure by 3 percent. The effect is quite robust to
using very localized sources of geographic variation: the point estimate remains significant, and in
fact increases, when we include state*post and region*post effects. When we include both
region*post controls and district-specific linear trends, the effect is no longer significant but the
point estimate is identical to the baseline specification. Consistent with these findings, we observe
negative (but insignificant) coefficients on the poverty dummies.
Notably, we do not observe significant effects of the program on income outcomes for
women (Panel B). Given women’s lower rate of participation in the extra-household labor market,
this suggests that the effects for men may be driven by improvements in labor market productivity
arising from the eradication program.18 Note that even if improvements in income are driven
through this channel, we might have expected to see improvements for women if they are married to
treated men. However, the average age gap among married couples in our sample is five years:
women defined to be in our treatment group are, on average, married to men who were born during
rather than after the eradication era. We have examined the effects for women using a five year lag,
and we still observe no significant effects on income (unreported). This is likely a result of the fact
that the “treated” women are now in the 1967-1972 birth cohorts, making them age 15-20 at the time
of the survey. Only 41% of this treated group is married, and those that are married are likely to be a
quite selected group.

5.2 Cohort Analysis
In this section, we examine outcomes by birth cohort over time. Motivated by the
differences-in-differences results, we focus on the income and poverty effects for men. We run
regression (B), using 5-year birth cohorts as described in the empirical strategy section. If the
program had a positive treatment effect, we would expect to see increases in the plotted coefficients
for post-eradication cohorts relative to pre-eradication cohorts.
18

The human capital results are similar if we restrict the sample to prime ages (20-60), and the expenditure results for
men are similar in the unrestricted age sample (unreported).

14

The top two panels of Figure 5 show the coefficients on birth cohort*malaria index; the
bottom two panels show the coefficients on birth cohort*potential epidemic and birth cohort*
malarious. We do observe relative improvements in per-capita expenditure for those post-cohorts
born in more malarious areas. If anything, relative outcomes appear to be trending down in
malarious areas prior to the program and rise sharply for those born after eradication. The cohort
effects for poverty do not exhibit a clear break at the time of the eradication era, which is not
surprising, given the differences-in-differences results.
Our concerns that improvements for those affected by the program might reflect pre-existing
trends are also alleviated by the robustness of the differences-in-differences estimates to geographic
controls. This implies that any spurious trends across high and low prevalence areas would have to
be reflected not only at the national level, but within state and within region as well. In the next
section, we consider several possible sources of bias in our estimates.

5.3 Robustness Analysis
The cohort analysis gives a clear visual representation to our results, suggesting that our main
estimates are not spurious. In this section, we discuss sensitivity of our results to accounting for
measurement error and confounding trends.
One potential concern is whether the classifications of districts used here reflect true
geographic variation in malaria prevalence in the pre-eradication period. The most likely source of
bias is attenuation of the coefficients resulting from measurement error in our prevalence
classifications.19 We therefore instrument for the map classifications using the ecological factors
shown in Table A1. Specifically, we use the interaction of the Post dummy with the covariates in
column (3) as our excluded instruments in the first-stage of our instrumental variables specifications.
The second-stage equation is identical to equation (A).
Table 8 reports the results of the IV estimates for educational and income outcomes for both
men and women. For simplicity, we report all results using the malaria index measure of
prevalence. The effects for men generally reflect the OLS estimates presented in Tables 6 and 7.
We see implied negative treatment effects for men on educational outcomes, but these effects are not
robust to the choice of geographic controls. The point estimates for per-capita expenditure and

15

poverty are now slightly larger in magnitude than the OLS estimates, and the IV estimates imply
significant reductions in poverty as a result of the program, consistent with the effects on per-capita
expenditure.
For women, we now observe positive coefficients on the index measure for literacy and
primary outcomes, although the significance is not robust to the inclusion of region*post controls.
When we use the three category measure in an otherwise identical instrumental variables setup, we
obtain a non-monotonic pattern as with the OLS results: malarious areas experienced improvements
relative to potential epidemic areas, but both experienced smaller gains than non-malarious areas
(unreported). In the OLS specifications, this non-monotonicity resulted in no overall effect when
using the index measure. In the IV specifications, the difference between potential epidemic and
malarious areas is more pronounced, which is likely what drives the positive net effect in the index
measure. These results provide suggestive evidence that the eradication program led to
improvements in educational outcomes for women in malarious areas relative to potential epidemic
areas. We find no robust effects for household expenditure for affected women.
Two other potential concerns arise with evaluating the effects of changes in disease burden:
selective mortality and migration. With a lower disease burden, the weakest members of affected
cohorts may survive, leading to potential compositional biases when evaluating outcomes among
survivors. Mortality bias is unlikely to be a problem in our experiment since the predominant form
of malaria in India is P. vivax, which leads to morbidity but only rarely mortality. Consistent with
this, the pre-eradication era estimates in Table 2 indicate an annual death rate from malaria of only
0.2%. In regards to migration, as mentioned above, we unfortunately do not observe individuals’
districts of birth. However, only 7.5% of individuals in rural areas are living outside their districts of
birth. In addition, the robustness of our point estimates to the source of geographic variation
suggests that the effects are unlikely to be driven by migration alone.
It is also unlikely that these effects can be explained by other programs whose targeting was
correlated with pre-eradication endemicity. All of the results presented above control for
interactions between individual level demographics and an indicator for being born in the post
period. The expenditure results for men are also robust to controlling for an interaction between
income at the district level, averaged over the pre-cohorts, and the post indicator (unreported). In

19

The instrumental variables estimates will produce consistent estimates if the measurement error is classical. This is an
approximation in our case, given the categorical nature of the underlying variable; see Kane, Rouse and Staiger (1999).

16

order to generate the observed results, targeting would have also had to be correlated with malaria
prevalence within localized geographic areas. We also directly examine one potential confounder:
the early adoption of new agricultural technologies, defined by the use of high-yielding variety
(HYV) seeds and chemical fertilizers in 1970, early in the Green Revolution. We do not find
evidence that HYV adoption is correlated with malaria endemicity: the correlation between the
district-level map index and proportion of land cropped with HYV in 1970 is -0.0019 (p-value =
0.97) and the correlation with the intensity of fertilizer use in 1970 is 0.0475 (p-value = 0.44).20
As a final pair of robustness checks, we have conducted two falsification exercises using our
baseline specification. In the first, we assume that eradication took place one decade earlier than in
reality. If our estimates were driven by pre-existing differential trends across districts of varying
malaria endemicity, then the estimate of this “placebo” treatment’s effect on male income would be
positive, significant, and similar in magnitude to our main estimate. However, the coefficient on the
interaction of the malaria index and a post placebo treatment dummy is small and insignificant (coef.
= 0.003, SE = 0.004). The second falsification test draws on the unimportance of malaria in urban
areas during the pre-eradication era. Consistent with this unimportance, we find no evidence of a
positive treatment effect on male income (coef. = -0.014, SE = 0.014).

5.4 Interpretation of the Findings
Our estimates shed light on whether malaria eradication had effects, but our use of the 1948
malaria endemicity classifications makes their magnitudes difficult to interpret. What do the
estimates imply for individuals who grew up in India’s most malarious areas? How do the results
compare with the existing literature’s findings on eradication programs in other countries (Bleakley
2007, Lucas 2009)?
As discussed above, one way to gain further understanding from our estimates involves
focusing on differences between India’s most and least malarious districts. The ninety-fifth
percentile of the malaria index is 5.7, while the fifth percentile is 2. Therefore, a move from the
ninety-fifth to the fifth percentile induces an effect equal to 3.7 times the coefficient on the
interaction of post with the malaria index. The men’s expenditure point estimates range from 0.008

for further discussion.
20
To study agricultural technology adoption, we use the India Agriculture and Climate Data Set from the World Bank.
For the 271 districts in the dataset, we relate the malaria index with the quantity of fertilizer used per hectare of gross

17

to 0.035, implying that a move between these two percentiles increases per-capita expenditure by 3
to 13 percent. The baseline OLS regressions for women’s human capital yield imprecisely estimated
zeros, but the instrumental variables procedure increases these point estimates to at least 0.013,
signifying that a move between the two percentiles increases female literacy and primary schooling
by nearly 5 percentage points. We can glean further insight into the estimates by comparing them
with those of the existing literature. The malaria index does not lend itself to a clear comparison
with results from other settings, but we can rescale the coefficients to represent the effect in terms of
a more recognizable measure. In line with Lucas (2009), we rescale the coefficients to infer the
effect of a ten percent decline in malaria incidence. Unfortunately, NMEP materials (1986, 1996) do
not report pre-eradication incidence at the sub-national level, thus preventing us from directly
estimating the relationship between malaria incidence and the malaria index. However, the posteradication data are rich enough to allow us to estimate the relationship between incidence and the
child spleen rate. If eradication did not alter the relationship between incidence and the spleen rate
(which is plausible), we can supplement this with the information in Figure 4 on the correlation
between the child spleen rate and the malaria index. Regression estimates using these data sources
indicate that a ten percentage point increase in state-level malaria incidence is associated with a 28.8
percentage point rise in the child spleen rate. Furthermore, a percentage point increase in the spleen
rate is associated with an increase of 0.067 in the malaria index (Figure 4). If we multiply our
coefficients by the product of these two numbers, 1.93, the result tells the impact of a ten percentage
point decrease in incidence.
The rescaled OLS and IV point estimates indicate that a ten percentage point decrease in
incidence raises per-capita expenditure of between 1.5 and 6.8 percent, similar in magnitude to
Bleakley’s estimates for male earnings in Latin America. For women’s human capital, the OLS
results do not imply positive treatment effects. However, the rescaled IV estimates imply that a ten
percentage point decrease in incidence increases female primary school attainment and literacy by
2.5 to 5.6 percentage points, with the most demanding specification (column [7] of Table 8) yielding
estimates at the bottom of this range. These estimates are slightly higher than both Bleakley (2007)
and Lucas (2009), who find that a change in incidence of the same magnitude raises literacy 0.08 to
2 percentage points.

cropped area and the proportion of the gross cropped area sown with high-yielding varieties (HYV), both in 1970.

18

Importantly, the primary malaria parasite in India differs from the primary parasite
responsible for malaria in sub-Saharan Africa, where malaria is most prevalent today. The effects of
present-day malaria control efforts on long-run outcomes may therefore differ from the effects
estimated in this study. For instance, in the absence of a large offsetting fertility response,
eradication of the more fatal P. falciparum in sub-Saharan Africa is more likely to result in
population growth, as discussed in Acemoglu and Johnson (2007). As a result, effects on cohorts
exposed to eradication in childhood may differ in general equilibrium.

6 Conclusion
This paper examines the effects of a large scale eradication program that drastically reduced
malaria in India over a short time period. Exploiting the heterogeneity in indigenous malaria rates
and the exogenous implementation of the eradication program, we find that malaria eradication
resulted in improvements in income for males. We do not observe robust treatment effects for
education, which may reflect the tradeoff between schooling and labor emphasized by Bleakley
(2007). The program does not appear to have resulted in similar improvements in income for
women, suggesting that the observed effects for men are likely driven by increased productivity in
the labor market, where male participation rates much higher than female.
The estimated income gains for men who benefited from the program are similar when we
exploit national, state, or regional sources of geographic variation in pre-eradication prevalence,
alleviating concerns that the effects are driven by other omitted factors. Furthermore, the results are
robust to instrumenting for pre-eradication prevalence with the ecological determinants of malaria
endemicity.
Our results provide support for the belief that improvements in health and in the disease
environment can have a causal effect on income. This may be an important causal channel linking
health and economic growth.

19

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson (2007). “Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
Expectancy on Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(6): 925-985.
Aikins MKS (1995). “Cost-effectiveness Analysis of Insecticide-impregnated Mosquito Nets
(Bednets) Used as a Malaria Control Measure: A Study from the Gambia,” PhD thesis,
Department of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
University of London.
Alleyne, George and Daniel Cohen (2002). “The Report of Working Group I of the Commission on
Macroeconomics and Health,” WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, April.
Barreca, Alan (2009). “The Long-Term Economic Impact of In Utero and Postnatal Exposure to
Malaria,” Tulane University mimeo.
Bleakley, Hoyt (2007). “Malaria in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood
Exposure,” University of Chicago mimeo.
Bloom, David and David Canning (2005). “Health and Economic Growth: Reconciling the Micro
and Macro Evidence,” CCDRL working paper.
Boyle, C.A., P. Decoufle, M. Yeargin-Allsopp (1994). “Prevalence and Health Impact of
Developmental Disabilities in U.S. Children,” Paediatrics, 93(3): 399-403.
Brooker, S., H. Guyatt, J. Omumbo, R. Shretta, L. Drake and J. Ouman (2000). “Situation Analysis
of Malaria in School-aged Children in Kenya - What Can Be Done?” Parisitology Today, 16(5):
183-186.
Card, David (2001). “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric
Problems,” Econometrica 69: 1129-1160.
Davis, Kingsley (1956). “The Amazing Decline of Mortality in Underdeveloped Areas,” American
Economic Review, 46(2): 305-318.
Desowitz, Robert (1991). The Malaria Capers: More Tales of Parasites and People, Research and
Reality, New York: W.W. Norton.
Duffy, P.E. and R.S. Desowitz (2001). “Pregnancy Malaria Throughout History: Dangerous Labors,”
in Malaria in Pregnancy: Deadly Parasite, Susceptible Host, ed. by P.E. Duffy, and M. Fried,
London: Taylor and Francis.
Duraisamy, P. (2002). “Changes in Returns to Education in India, 1983-94: by Gender, Age-cohort
and Location,” Economics of Education Review, 21(6): 609-622.
Dunn, Frederick (2003). "Malaria." In Kenneth Kiple, ed., Cambridge Historical Dictionary of

20

Disease. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 203-207.
Gallup, John Luke and Jeffrey Sachs (2001). “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 64: 85-96.
Hoff, Brent and Carter Smith III (2000). Mapping Epidemics: A Historical Atlas of Disease,
Franklin Watts, New York.
Hong, Sok Chul (2007). “A Longitudinal Analysis of the Burden of Malaria on Health and
Economic Productivity: The American Case,” University of Chicago mimeo.
Kane, Thomas, Cecilia Rouse and Douglas Staiger (1999). “Estimating Returns to Schooling When
Schooling is Misreported.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #7235.
Kiple, Kenneth (1993). The Cambridge World History of Human Disease, Cambridge University
Press.
League of Nations (1930). “Report of the Malaria Commission on its Study Tour in India,” Geneva,
August.
Leighton, Charlotte and Rebecca Foster (1993). “Economic Impacts of Malaria in Kenya and
Nigeria,” Major Applied Research Paper Number 6, Office of Health, Health Services Division,
Bureau of Research and Development Agency for International Development.
Lucas, Adrienne (2007). “The Impact of Disease Eradication on Fertility and Education,” Wellesley
College mimeo.
Lucas, Adrienne (2009). “Malaria Eradication and Educational Attainment: Evidence from Paraguay
and Sri Lanka,” Wellesley College mimeo.
Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang (2009). “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall.” American Economic Review 99(3): 1006-1026.
McCormick, M.C., J. Brooks-Gunn, K. Workman-Daniels, J. Turner, and G.J. Peckman (1992).
“The Health and Development Status of Very Low-Birth-Weight Children at School Age,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 267:16.
New, M., D. Lister, M. Hulme, and I. Makin (2002). “A High-Resolution Data Set of Surface
Climate over Global Land Areas.” Climate Research, 21: 1-25.
NMEP (1986). Malaria and its Control in India, Vol. 1. National Malaria Eradication Program,
India.
NMEP (1996). Epidemiology and Control of Malaria in India. National Malaria Eradication
Program, India.
Rao, B.A. (1959). Malaria in India, New Delhi: Central Health Education Bureau.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Pia Malaney (2002). “The Economic and Social Burden of Malaria,” Nature 415:
21

680–685.
Sharma, V. P. (2002). “Determinants of Malaria in South Asia,” in The Contextual Determinants of
Malaria, ed. by E.A. Casman and H. Dowlatabadi, pp. 110–32. Washington, D.C.: Resources for
the Future.
Shiff, C., W. Checkley, P. Winch, J. Minijas, and P. Lubega (1996). “Changes in Weight Gain and
Anaemia Attributable to Malaria in Tanzanian Children Living under Holoendemic Conditions,”
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 90: 262-265.
Sinton, J. A. (1935). “What Malaria Costs India, Nationally, Socially and Economically.” Records of
the Malaria Survey of India 5: 223--64 and 413–89.
Sinton, J.A . (1936). “What Malaria Costs India, Nationally, Socially and Economically.” Records of
the Malaria Survey of India 6: 91--169.
Townsend, Robert (1994). "Risk and Insurance in Village India." Econometrica 62(3): 539–591.
World Health Organization (1967). The World Health Organization: Twenty Years in South-East
Asia, 1948-1967, New Delhi: World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia.
World Health Organization (2001). Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for Economic
Development.

22

FIGURE 1
Phases of the National Malaria Eradication Program
1954-55
1953-54

1956-57

1959-61

Source: NMEP (1986). Shaded areas have begun undergoing eradication efforts.

23

FIGURE 2
Declines in Malaria Deaths

Source: Health Statistics of India, 1951-1965. We show West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh due
to these states’ relatively complete time series, as well as the stability of their borders through
the States Reorganization Act of 1956. The figures above imply a ratio of malaria deaths to
population of 0.3% in Uttar Pradesh and 0.1% in West Bengal in 1952. These rates are
similar to the nationwide rate in 1947 (0.2%) implied by the NMCP figures in Table 1.

24

FIGURE 3
Malaria Endemicity Map

25

FIGURE 4
1948 Malaria Endemicity and Child Spleen Rates in 15 States and Territories

Source: NMCP (1986). Sample includes all states and territories with child spleen rate data
for both 1953-54 and 1959-60. See notes to Table 3 for details on the construction of statelevel spleen rates for 1953-54. We obtain the state-level average malaria category by
averaging the categories of all GIS polygons within each state. The slopes of the 1953-54 and
1959-60 regression lines, respectively, are 14.9 and 1.4.

26

FIGURE 5
Pre-Eradication Malaria Endemicity and Adult Economic Status: Cohort-Specific Relationships
1. Districts Classified by Average Malaria Category

2. Districts Classified by Modal Malaria Category

Note: Relationships were estimated in regressions of economic outcomes on cohort fixed effects and interactions of cohort fixed effects with measures of
malaria endemicity: modal malaria category (relative to non-malarious) in the top panel and average malaria category in the bottom. The 5-year birth
cohorts are centered on birth years ending in 2 and 7 (ages ending in 5 and 10). To focus on individuals of relevant ages (20+), the last birth cohort in each
panel is three years long. Regressions also included dummies for membership in a scheduled caste or tribe and household religion

27

TABLE 1
Expansion of the National Malaria Control Program
Population
protected
# Units established
(cumulative, in
% of population
# Units established
(cumulative)
millions)
protected
1953-54
84.00
84.00
49.50
13.2
1954-55
26.75
110.75
79.90
20.9
1955-56
23.00
133.75
112.00
28.7
1956-57
35.50
169.25
144.50
36.3
1957-58
23.25
192.50
165.57
40.8
Source: NMCP (1986). A “unit” is defined as “a contiguous area comprising of one million
population for undertaking anti-malaria activities” (NMEP, 1986). Since units are defined by
population covered, they are not always in integers. The population statistics used to calculate
the percentage of the population protected are from the United Nations Demographic
Yearbook Historical Supplement. We use the 1953 midyear population figure for 1953-54, etc.

TABLE 2
National Malaria Prevalence over Time
Population (in
Malaria cases (in
% of population
# Deaths
millions)
millions)
with malaria
1947
344
75
21.8
800,000
1965
483
0.1
0.02
0
1976
616
6.5
1.1
59
1984
735
2.2
0.3
247
1994
900
2.5
0.3
1122
Source: NMCP (1986), NMCP (1996). The population statistics used to calculate the
percentage of the population with malaria are from the United Nations Demographic Yearbook
Historical Supplement.

28

TABLE 3
Child Spleen Rates in 15 Indian States and Territories
1953-54
1954-55
1955-56
1956-57
States
Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
Bombay
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Mysore
Orissa
Punjab
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

18.2
22.5
5.6
19.2
41.1
4.6
37.0
5.3
4.9
14.8
20.6

14.2
23.2
4.5
5.3
22.7
3.0
29.0
5.2
4.4
19.6
16.5

12.8
18.2
4.1
4.6
12.6
2.7
19.0
2.5
21.2
13.5
6.9

13.0
11.8
3.6
4.6
12.3
1.9
—
2.0
18.0
13.9
4.0

1959-60
2.1
1.2
0.6
0.2
3.5
0.4
8.0
0.5
2.8
1.3
0.4

Union Territories
Delhi
1.1
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.1
Himachal Pradesh
18.2
14.1
2.7
1.2
0.2
Manipur
23.3
17.8
12.0
13.2
1.7
Tripura
55.9
61.2
18.1
3.9
2.5
Source: NMCP (1986). Sample includes all states and territories with child spleen
rate data for 1953-54. These rates are based on tables that report the results of NMCP
spleen surveys. For the entire eradication era, the tables use consistent administrative
boundaries as defined by the States Reorganization Act of 1956. The tables for 195354 to 1956-57 divide areas within states and territories into those sprayed with DDT
and those still unsprayed. We calculate the total number of enlarged spleens detected
in each state/territory and divide by total number of examinations performed in the
state/territory.

29

TABLE 4
Malaria Endemicity Classifications
Classification
for Paper
Non-malarious

Potential Epidemic

Malarious

1948 Map Category
(1) Areas above 5000 feet; non-malarious.
(2) Known healthy plain areas; spleen rate under 10%.
(3) Variable endemicity associated with dry tracts; potential epidemic.
(4) Known areas liable to fulminant epidemic diluvial malaria.
(5) Moderate to high endemicity; fulminant epidemics unknown.
(6) Hyperendemicity of jungly hill tracts and terai land.

30

TABLE 5
Summary Statistics
Men
Mean
(Std. Dev.)

Mean

Women
(Std. Dev.)

Panel A: Outcomes
Human Capital Sample (Ages 15-75)
Literate
Primary school attainment

0.53
0.39

(0.50)
(0.49)

0.23
0.16

(0.42)
(0.37)

Economic Status Sample (Ages 20-60)
Log per capita household expenditure
Poor

4.97
0.34

(0.48)
(0.47)

4.97
0.35

(0.48)
(0.48)

4.39

(0.98)

0.02
0.23
0.54
0.20

(0.14)
(0.42)
(0.50)
(0.40)

36.39
0.71
0.18
0.10
0.85
0.10

(16.43)
(0.45)
(0.39)
(0.30)
(0.36)
(0.30)

Panel B: Malaria Endemicity Measures (Combined Sample)
Avg. malaria category in district (1-6)
4.38
(0.98)
Modal malaria category in district
Non-malarious (1 and 2)
0.02
(0.14)
Potential epidemic (3 and 4)
0.24
(0.43)
Endemic malaria (5 and 6)
0.53
(0.50)
Bimodal
0.20
(0.40)
Panel C: Demographic Characteristics (Combined Sample)
Age
36.29
(16.61)
Married
0.66
(0.47)
Scheduled caste
0.18
(0.39)
Scheduled tribe
0.10
(0.30)
Hindu
0.85
(0.36)
Muslim
0.09
(0.29)
Number of observations

111,218

Number of states
Number of regions
Number of districts
Number of households

107,551

29
75
417
77,020

Note: Means and standard deviations are weighted using sampling weights. Sample includes
rural residents and excludes those born during the eradication era (1953-1961). Panels
B and C report summary statistics and sample sizes for the sample with non-missing
data on at least one outcome.

31

Dependent Variable:

TABLE 6
Childhood Malaria Exposure and Human Capital Attainment
Literacy
(Ages 15-75)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Primary School
(Ages 15-75)
(6)
(7)

(8)

Panel A: Men
A1. Districts Classified by Modal Malaria Category
(Omitted Category: Post * Non-malarious)
Post * Potential Epidemic
Post * Malarious

F-test: Equal Treatment Effects (p-value)
Observations

0.035
(0.032)
-0.015
(0.032)

-0.007
(0.026)
0.013
(0.021)

-0.030
(0.032)
0.003
(0.025)

-0.105
(0.066)
-0.045
(0.047)

0.021
(0.047)
-0.020
(0.047)

0.009
(0.044)
0.014
(0.041)

0.000
(0.044)
0.001
(0.037)

0.021
(0.060)
0.050
(0.045)

<0.001
88,639

0.213
88,639

0.106
88,639

0.200
88,639

0.003
88,639

0.790
88,639

0.958
88,639

0.220
88,639

-0.017
(.006)***

0.004
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.006)

0.008
(0.011)

-0.016
(0.007)**

0.002
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.008)

0.009
(0.010)

111,139

111,139

111,139

111,139

111,139

111,139

111,139

111,139

X

X
X

A2. Districts Classified by Average Malaria Category
Post * Malaria Index

Observations
State*Post Fixed Effects
Region*Post Fixed Effects
District-Specific Linear Trends

X

X

32

X

X
X
(Table continued on next page.)

Dependent Variable:
(1)

Literacy
(Ages 15-75)
(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

Primary School
(Ages 15-75)
(6)
(7)

(8)

Panel B: Women
B1. Districts Classified by Modal Malaria Category
(Omitted Category: Post * Non-malarious)
Post * Potential Epidemic
Post * Malarious

F-test: Equal Treatment Effects (p-value)
Observations

-0.053
(0.031)*
-0.026
(0.030)

-0.005
(0.028)
0.016
(0.023)

-0.016
(0.034)
-0.018
(0.020)

0.052
(0.066)
0.043
(0.062)

-0.132
(.049)***
-0.101
(0.049)**

-0.071
(0.040)*
-0.045
(0.037)

-0.074
(0.045)*
-0.066
(0.036)*

0.054
(0.038)
0.043
(0.033)

0.076
85,291

0.223
85,291

0.933
85,291

0.708
85,291

0.030
85,291

0.124
85,291

0.764
85,291

0.596
85,291

B2. Districts Classified by Average Malaria Category
Post * Malaria Index

0.005
(0.006)

0.011
(0.006)*

-0.006
(0.006)

0.008
(0.010)

-0.004
(0.007)

0.005
(0.006)

-0.012
(0.008)

0.002
(0.007)

Observations

107,472

107,472

107,472

107,472

107,472

107,472

107,472

107,472

X

X
X

State*Post Fixed Effects
Region*Post Fixed Effects
District-Specific Linear Trends

X

X
X

X
X

Note: OLS coefficients, with standard errors clustered at the district level in parentheses. Sample includes rural residents from pre-eradication (1912-1952) and
post-eradication (1962-1972) cohorts. The sample in Panels A1 and B1 omits individuals living in bimodal districts. All regressions include district and
year of birth fixed effects, as well as demographic covariates and their interaction with post. Demographic covariates include membership in a scheduled
caste, membership in a scheduled tribe, and household religion. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

33

Dependent Variable:

TABLE 7
Childhood Malaria Exposure and Adult Economic Status
Log Per Capita Household Expenditure
(Ages 20-60)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Poverty
(Ages 20-60)
(6)
(7)

(8)

Panel A: Men
A1. Districts Classified by Modal Malaria Category
(Omitted Category: Post * Non-malarious)
Post * Potential Epidemic
Post * Malarious

F-test: Equal Treatment Effects (p-value)
Observations

0.011
(0.015)
0.033
(.014)**

0.011
(0.024)
0.034
(0.021)

-0.054
(0.032)*
0.018
(0.027)

0.037
(0.062)
0.082
(0.052)

-0.012
(0.017)
-0.018
(0.016)

-0.013
(0.028)
-0.016
(0.024)

0.037
(0.035)
-0.005
(0.028)

-0.069
(0.067)
-0.091
(0.048)*

0.055
59,906

0.080
59,906

< 0.001
59,906

0.187
59,906

0.563
59,906

0.807
59,906

0.037
59,906

0.622
59,906

0.008
(0.011)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.005)

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.014
(0.013)

75,230

75,230

75,230

75,230

75,230

75,230

X

X
X

A2. Districts Classified by Average Malaria Category
Post * Malaria Index

Observations
State*Post Fixed Effects
Region*Post Fixed Effects
District-Specific Linear Trends

0.008
0.011
0.019
(0.004)** (0.005)** (.006)***
75,230

75,230
X

X

34

X

X
X
(Table continued on next page.)

Dependent Variable:

Log Per Capita Household Expenditure
(Ages 20-60)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

Poverty
(Ages 20-60)
(6)
(7)

(8)

Panel B: Women
B1. Districts Classified by Modal Malaria Category
(Omitted Category: Post * Non-malarious)
Post * Potential Epidemic
Post * Malarious

F-test: Equal Treatment Effects (p-value)
Observations

0.011
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.013)

-0.006
(0.028)
-0.014
(0.024)

-0.016
(0.039)
-0.015
(0.031)

-0.014
(0.077)
0.027
(0.057)

-0.035
(0.024)
-0.008
(0.023)

-0.012
(0.040)
0.006
(0.037)

0.050
(0.047)
0.026
(0.037)

0.002
(0.093)
-0.050
(0.070)

0.163
59,617

0.570
59,617

0.967
59,617

0.425
59,617

0.018
59,617

0.218
59,617

0.440
59,617

0.396
59,617

B2. Districts Classified by Average Malaria Category
Post * Malaria Index

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

0.004
(0.005)

0.011
(0.014)

0.006
(0.005)

0.006
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.017
(0.014)

Observations

75,212

75,212

75,212

75,212

75,212

75,212

75,212

75,212

X

X
X

State*Post Fixed Effects
Region*Post Fixed Effects
District-Specific Linear Trends

X

X
X

X
X

Note: OLS coefficients, with standard errors clustered at the district level in parentheses. Sample includes rural residents from pre-eradication (1927-1952) and
post-eradication (1962-1967) cohorts. The sample in Panels A1 and B1 omits individuals living in bimodal districts. All regressions include district and
year of birth fixed effects, as well as demographic covariates and their interaction with post. Demographic covariates include membership in a scheduled
caste, membership in a scheduled tribe, and household religion. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

35

(1)

TABLE 8
Instrumental Variables Estimates
Men
(2)
(3)

(5)

Women
(6)

(7)

Dependent Variable:
Literacy
(111,000 men; 107,308 women )

-0.029
(0.009)***

0.018
(0.010)*

0.002
(0.009)

0.013
(0.009)

0.029
(0.011)***

0.014
(0.012)

Primary schooling
(111,000 men; 107,308 women )

-0.022
(0.009)**

0.020
(0.011)*

0.006
(0.010)

0.016
(0.009)*

0.029
(0.011)***

0.018
(0.011)

Log per capita H.H. expenditures
(75.131 men; 75,102 women)

0.0094
(0.006)*

0.026
(0.010)***

0.035
(0.015)**

0.000
(0.006)

0.002
(0.006)

0.009
(0.009)

Poverty
(75.131 men; 75,102 women)

-0.011
(0.006)*

-0.016
(0.008)**

-0.019
(0.011)*

0.001
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.007)

State*Post Fixed Effects
Region*Post Fixed Effects

X

X
X

X

Note: Each cell shows the coefficient on the malaria index from a separate regression. The excluded instruments include average temperature, average
elevation, average humidity, average precipitation, and squared terms in all four variables. The sample sizes differ from Tables 6 and 7 because two
districts did not have ecology data. The OLS results for the subsample used for this table are identical to those reported in earlier tables for the full
sample. See column (3) of Table A1 for the district-level first stage regression. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered at the district level. The
human capital sample includes rural residents from pre-eradication (1912-1952) and post-eradication (1962-1972) cohorts, whereas the consumption
sample includes only the 1927-1952 and 1962-1967 cohorts. All regressions include district and year of birth fixed effects, as well as demographic
covariates and their interaction with post. Demographic covariates include membership in a scheduled caste, membership in a scheduled tribe, and
household religion. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

36

1

FIGURE A1
Age Profiles of Labor Force Participation

Principal Weekly Activity = Working
.2
.4
.6
.8

Men

0

Women

20

40

60

80

Age
Note: Profiles are based on the entire rural sample of the NSS. The curves are from local linear
regressions estimates with a bandwidth of 2 years. We define the following categories as
working: worked in household enterprise (self-employed), worked as helper in household
enterprise, worked as regular salaried wage employee, worked as casual wage labor in public
works, worked as casual wage labor in other types of work.

37

TABLE A1
Ecological Determinants of Pre-Eradication Malaria Endemicity
Summary Statistics,
Malaria Index
Ecology Measures
(1)
(2)
(3)
Avg. temperature (C)

24.05
[4.85]

-0.086
(0.034)**

106.68
[64.16]

0.002
(0.001)

62.44
[9.37]

0.02
(0.007)***

0.50
[0.74]

-1.144
(0.209)***

(Avg. temperature)2/100
Avg. precipitation (mm/month)
(Avg. monthly precipitation)2/100
Avg. humidity (%)
(Avg. humidity)2
Avg. elevation (km)
(Avg. elevation)2
R2
F-statistic (p-value)
Number of Districts

0.25
23.16 (<0.0001)
415

1.22
(0.302)***
-0.027
(0.006)***
0.011
(0.003)***
-0.002
(0.001)**
0.519
(0.060)***
-0.004
(0.0004)***
-1.425
(0.245)***
0.862
(0.196)***
0.43
41.12 (<0.0001)
415

Note: Climatologic and topographic data are from the World Water and Climate Atlas (New et al. 2002). Column (1)
lists means of the independent variables, with standard deviations in brackets. Columns (2) and (3) report
coefficients from regressions of the average malaria category in a district (the malaria index) on the variables
listed in the table, with robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.

38

