NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF
DIVIDEND TAXATION

James M. Poterba
Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 1353

NATIONAi BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 19814

This

paper was prepared for the NYU Conference on Recent Advances
in Corporate Finance, November 1983. We wish to thank Ignacio Mas
for research assistance and Fischer Black, Mervyn King, Andrei
Shleifer and Myron Scholes for helpful discussions. Patrick
Higgins typed and re—typed our numerous drafts. The research
reported here is part of the NBER7s research programs in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics and Taxation and project in

Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1353
May 1984

The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation

ABSTRACT

This paper tests several competing hypotheses about the economic

effects of dividend taxation. It employs British data on security returns,
dividend payout rates, and corporate investment, because unlike the United
States, Britain has experienced several major dividend tax reforms in the last

three decades. These tax changes provide an ideal natural experiment for analyzing the effects of dividend taxes. We compare three different views of how
dividend taxes affect decisions by firms and their shareholders. We reject the
"tax

capitalization" view that dividend taxes are non—distortionary lump sum

taxes on the owners of corporate capital. We also reject the hypothesis that
firms pay dividends because marginal
that

investors are effectively untaxed. We find

the traditional view that dividend taxes constitute a "double—tax" on cor-

porate capital income is most consistent with our empirical evidence. Our
results

suggest that dividend taxes reduce corporate investment and exacerbate

distortions in the intersectoral and intertemporal allocation of capital.

James M. Poterba
Department of' Economics

Massachusetts Institute of Technolor
and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02139
617—253—6673

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02138

6l7_195_217

The question of how taxes on corporate distributions affect econoniic

behavior is central to evaluating a number of major tax reform options.
Shifts towards either consumption taxation or corporate tax integration would

result in dramatic reductions in the taxes levied on dividend income. On the
other hand, movement towards a comprehensive income tax would raise the effec-

tive tax burden on dividends. While many financial economists have studied
the question of why firms pay dividends despite the associated tax penalties
imposed on many investors, no consensus has emerged as to the effects of dividend taxation on firms' investment and financial decisions.

This paper summarizes our research program examining the empirical
validity of several widely held views about the economic effects of dividend

taxation. Empirical analysis of dividend taxation using American data is difficult, because there has been relatively little variation over time in the

relevant legislation. We therefore focus on empirical analysis of the British
experience since 1950, which has been characterized by four major reforms in

the taxation of corporate distributions. These reforms have generated
substantial variation in the effective marginal tax rate on dividend income,
and provide an ideal natural experiment for studying the economic effects of
dividend taxes.

At the outset, it is important to clarify why developing a con-

vincing model of the effects of dividend taxation has been so difficult for
economists. Straightforward analysis suggests that since some shareholders
are tax penalized when firms pay dividends instead of retaining earnings,

firms should not pay dividends. Dividend taxes should collect no revenue and
impose no allocative distortions. Even the most casual empiricism discredits

this analysis. The payment of dividends is a common and enduring practice of

—2—

most large corporations, and it appears to result in substantial tax liabilities for many investors. In modelling the effects of dividend taxes, it Is
therefore necessary to provide some account of why dividends are paid. Given
the simple model's clear no—dividend prediction, any model which rationalizes
dividend payout will seem at least partly unsatisfactory. However, some
choice is clearly necessary if we are to make any headway towards
understanding the economic effects of dividend taxes.

We consider three competing views of how dividend taxes affect decisions

by firms and shareholders. They are not matually exclusive, and each could be
relevant to the behavior of some firms. The first view, which we label the
"tax irrelevance view," argues that contrary to naive expectations, dividend

paying firms are not penalized in the marketplace.1 It holds that in the
United States, because of various nuances in the tax code, marginal investors
do

not require extra pretax returns to induce them to hold dividend—paying

securities. Some personal investors are effectively untaxed on dividend
income.

Other investors, who face high transactions costs or are non—taxable

but face limitations on expenditures from capital, find dividends more attrac-

tive than capital gains for non—tax reasons. These investors demand dividend—
paying securities. If this view is correct and dividend—paying firms are not
penalized, then there is no dividend puzzle. Moreover, changes in dividend
tax rates or dividend policies should affect neither the total value of any

firm nor its investment decisions. Dividend taxes are therefore nondistor—

'Miller and Scholes (1978, 1982) are the principal exponents of
this view.

—3—

tionary. The tax irrelevance view implies that reducing dividend taxes would
have no effect on share values, corporate investment decisions, or the
economy's long—run capital stock.

A second view regarding the dividend payout problem, which also
holds that dividend taxes do not have distortionary effects, may be called the

"tax capitalization hypothesis."2 The premise of this view is that the only
way for mature firms to pass money through the corporate veil is by paying

taxable dividends. The market value of corporate assets is therefore equal to
the present value of the after—tax dividends which firms are expected to pay.
Moreover, because these future taxes are capitalized into share values, shareholders are indifferent between policies of retaining earnings or paying

dividends. On this view, raising dividend taxes would result in an immediate
decline in the market value of corporate equity. However, dividend taxes have

no impact on a firm's marginal incentive to invest. They are essentially lump
sum taxes levied on the initial holders of corporate capital, with no distor—

tionary effects on real decisions. The tax capitalization view implies that
reducing dividend taxes would confer windfall gains on corporate shareowners,
without altering corporate investment incentives.

A third, and more traditional, view of dividend taxes treats them as

additional taxes on corporate profits.3 Despite the heavier tax burden on

2Although this view is linked with the long—standing notion of
"trapped" equity in the corporate sector, it has been formalized by Auerbach
(1979), Bradford (1981), and King (1977).

3mis is the implicit view of many proponents of tax integration;
see, for example, McClure (1977).

_14_

dividends than on capital gains, firms are rewarded for paying dividends. The
explanation for this reward is unclear; managerial signalling could provide one

rationale. Therefore, in spite of their shareholders' higher tax liability,
firms can be indifferent to marginal changes in their dividend payments. This

view suggests that the relevant ax burden for firms considering marginal
investments is the total tax levied on investment returns at both the cor-

porate and the personal level. Dividend tax reductions both raise share
values and provide incentives for capital investment, because they lower the

pre—tax return which firms are required to earn. Dividend tax changes would
therefore affect the economy's long run capital intensity.

Our empirical work is directed at evaluating each of these three

views of dividend taxation. The results suggest that the "traditional" view
of dividend taxation is most consistent with British post—war data on security

returns, payout ratios, and investment decisions. While the effects of dividend
taxes need not be parallel in the United States and the United Kingdom, our
results are strongly suggestive for the United States.

The plan of the paper is as follows. Section I lays out the three
alternative views of dividend taxation in greater detail, and discusses their
implications for the relationship between dividend taxes and corporate invest—

ment and dividend decisions. Section II describes the nature and evolution of
the British tax system in some detail. The "natural experiments" provided by
post—war British tax reforms provide the basis for our subsequent empirical

tests. Section III presents evidence on how tax changes affect investors'
relative valuation of dividends and capital gains by focusing on "ex—dividend"

—5—

share price novements in the United Kingdom. Our results show that tax rates
do appear to influence the value of dividend income. Section IV extends this
analysis by examining share price changes in nonths when dividend tax reforms
were announced, presenting further evidence that tax rates affect security

valuation. Tests of the alternative theories' implications for the effects of
dividend tax changes on corporate payout policies are presented in Section V.
We find that dividend tax changes do affect the share of profits which firms

choose to distribute. Section VI focuses directly on investment decisions,
testing which view of dividend taxation best explains the time series pattern

of British investment. Finally, in Section VII we discuss the implications of
our results for tax policy and suggest several directions for future
research.

—6—

I.

Three Views of Dividend Taxation

The irrelevance of dividend policy in a taxiess world has been

recognized since Miller and Modigliani's (1961) pathbreaking work. If shareholders face differential tax rates on dividends and capital gains, however,
then the irrelevance result may rio longer hold. Dividend policy may affect
shareholder wealth, and shareholders may not be simultaneously indifferent
to investments financed from retained earnings and investments financed
from new equity issues.

To illustrate these propositions, we consider the after—tax return
which a shareholder with marginal tax rates of m and z on dividends and capi-

tal gains, respectively, receives by holding shares In a particular firm)

The

shareholder's after—tax return R

1.1)

'Dt

V°
t+1 -Vt

/
/
',
Rt = .l_m)V— + 'il—zn,

t

is

t

where Dt is the firm's dividend payment, V is the total value of the firm
in period t, and

is the period t+1 value of the shares outstanding in

period t. To focus on tax—related aspects of the firm's problem, we shall

ignore uncertainty, treating V1 as known at time t.5 The total value of the
firm at t+1 Is

The

tax rate z is the marginal effective tax rate on capital

gains, as defined by- King (1977). Since gains are taxed on realization, not
accrual, z is the expected value of the tax liability which is induced by a
capital gain accruing today.

5A closely related model which incorporates uncertainty and investment adjustment costs is solved in Poterba and Summers (1983).

—7—

(12)

t+l_—v0
t+1

v

t

where V equals new shares issued in period t. Equation (1.1) can be rewritten,
assuming that in equilibrium the shareholder earns his required return so

(1.3)

pV = (_m)Dt

—

(1—z)V

+

(1_z)(V1

—

Vt).

Equation (1.3) implies the difference equation for the value of the firm,

=

(i.1)

(i + I2—)v + v. —

P, as

V;

()D.

It nay be solved forward, subject to the transversality condition

(1.5)

urn

T-

(i +

=
P)_Tv
z

to obtain an expression for the value of the firm:

(1.6)

=

+ 121i [(ii)D

—

V+j1.

The total value of the firm is the present discounted value of after—tax dividends, less the present value of new share issues which current shareholders

would be required to purchase in order to maintain their claim on a constant
fraction of the firm's total dividends and profits.

Before turning to consider the different views of dividend taxation,

we shall sketch the firm's optimization problem. The firm's objective is
to maximize its market value, subject to several constraints. The first is
its cash flow identity:

—8—

(1.7)

(1_T)lIt +

where

is

=

+

is pretax profitability and I gross investment expenditures and I

the corporate tax rate. ll =

where Kt is the capital stock at the

beginning of period t.6 Next, thre is an equation describing the evolution of
the firms'
(1.8)

capital

stock:

Kt=Kti+It.

We assume that there is no depreciation, and ignore adjustment costs or the

possible irreversibility of investment. Finally, there are restrictions
on the firm's financial policies: dividends cannot be negative,
and new share issues riust be greater than some minimal level VN,7

reflecting restrictions on the firm's ability to repurchase shares or to engage

in transactions with equivalent tax consequences. These two constraints can
be written

Dt > 0

(1.9)

and
(1.10)

where

'

Before formally solving for the firm's investment and financial
plan, we observe one important feature of any solution to this problem. The

6We consider the firm's problem in discrete time to avoid the difficulties of infinite investment over short time intervals which would result
in a continuous—time model without adjustment costs.
TShare repurchases are possible to some extent in the United
States. However, regular repurchasin can lead to IRS actions tretin
the repurchase as a aividend. In Briain, where share repurcriase is explicitly

—9—

firm would never simultaneously issue new equity and pay dividends. If a firm
sets both Dt > 0 and

>

in

any period, then there would exist a feasible

perturbation in financial policy which would not affect investment or profits

in any period but would raise share values. This perturbation involves a
reduction in dividends, compensated for by a reduction In new share issues.
To vary dividends and new share issues without affecting ' or

(i.ii)

we require

dV =

From equation (1.6), the change in share value caused by a dividend
change in
period t+j which satisfied (i.ii) is

(1.12)

If

dVt =

i'-dDt4 — dVJ(1 +

.2.)—i =

— ::-dD+(1

m exceeds z, reducing dividends whenever feasible will raise

+

Vt.

Since this perturbation argument applies at any positive level of
dividends, it establishes that firms with sufficient profits to cover investment needs should reduce new share issues and repurchase shares to the extent

possible. For some firms, I may exceed (l_T)llt, and there will be new share

issues. Even if m >

z, therefore, some new equity may be issued. Similarly,

some firms may have too few investments to fully utilize their current pro-

fits. If feasible, these firms should repurchase their shares.

Only after

exhausting tax—free distribution channels should these firms pay dividends.

banned, these questions do not arise. The situation is nire complex when transactions equivalent to share repurchase, such as direct portfolio investments,
are considered.

—10—

No firm, however, should ever operate on both the dividend and share issue

margins simultaneously. The "dividend puzzle" consists of the observation
that some firms pay dividends while also having unused opportunities to
repurchase shares or engage in equivalent transactions which would effectively
transmit

tax—free income to sharLholders. Edwards (l98) reports that in a

sample of large British firms, over 25 percent paid dividends and issued new
equity

in

the same year, while 17 percent not only paid but

raised

their divi-

dends during years when they issued new shares.

The conclusions described above apply when there is only one shareholder and his tax rates satisfy m >

z.

However, the actual economy is

characterized by many different shareholders, often with widely different tax

rates. While m may exceed z for some shareholders, there are many investors
for whom m = z and still others facing higher tax rates on capital gains than

on dividends.8 If there were no short selling constraints, then as Brennan
(1970) and Gordon and Bradford (1980) show, there would be a unique market—wide

preference for dividends in terms of capital gains. It would equal a weighted
average of different investor's tax rates, with higher weights on wealthier,

and less risk averse, investors. If there are constraints, however, then different firms may face different investor clienteles, possibly characterized by

different tax rates. If some traders face low transactions costs (Miller and
Scholes (1982), Kalay (1982)) or are nearly risk neutral, then they may effectively determine the market's relative valuation of dividends and capital
gains and become the marginal investors.

The firm chooses I' V, Kt, and Dt to maximize Vt subject to
8The principal class of American investors for whom m is less than
z is corporate holders of common stock, who may exclude 85 percent of their
dividend income from their taxable income, thereby facing a tax rate of .15 x

—11—

(1.7), (1.8), (1.9) and (i.io). The firm's problem ny be rewritten as

Prt

Ci +

(1.13) max

—

+

t[(1_T)u1(K)
and

where Xt,

1I()D — v1
—D

—

It]

—

— Kti

—

—

—

it]

tDt}

are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the

constraints. The first order necessary conditions for an optimal program are:
(i.i1)

It:

(1.15)

K:

(1.16)

V:

(1.17)

D:

X +

=0

+ (3. +
—1 —

ir'x+

Pt(1_T)11'(Kt)

=0

—

() + t

—

—

t

= o

n(V_V)

= 0

0

tDt 0.

By interpreting these conditions under the different views of dividend taxation, we can isolate the implications of each for the effects of dividend
taxation on the cost of capital, investment, payout policy, and security
returns.

l.A. The Tax Irrelevance View
The first view of dividend taxation which we consider assumes that
share prices are set by investors for whom m =
irrelevance" view; it was

z.

We label this the "tax

advanced by Miller and Scholes (1978, 1982). Miller

.b6 = .069, while being taxed at a 28 percent rate on their realized capital
gains.

—12—

and Scholes argue that the marginal investor In corporate equities Is effec-

tively untaxed on both dividends arid capital gains income.9 Hamada and
Scholes (l981.), who call this view the "Before Tax Theory," note that it

essentially assumes "that all personal income taxes —

to

bondholders,

stockholders, and partners of businesses — can be effectively laundered."

Several scenarios could lead to marginal investors being untaxed on

capital income. The marginal investor may be an institutional investor for
whom in = z =

0.

Alternatively, in the United States, the marginal investor

may be an individual investor for whom dividend income relaxes the deduction

limit for interest expenses, making m effectively zero. This investor might,
as a result of tax—minimizing transactions such as holding shares with
gains and selling shares with losses, also face a zero tax rate on capital
gains.

The interpretation of first order conditions (1.l)—(l.l7) in the
m=z=0 case is straightforward. The last two constraint conditions simplify
substantially. As long as the firm is either paying dividends or issuing
shares, one of

or

the shadow values of the Dt and

equal zero. Using either (1.16) or (1.17), and in
= —1.

=z

=

constraints, will

0, this implies that

The value of one dollar of additional profits is just one dollar.

The shadow value of capital, At, can be determined from (l.l4). Since —
we can conclude that At =

1.

=

The shadow value of one more unit of capital

in place, A, corresponds to "marginal q" in the investment literature. Firms
invest until the incremental increase in their market value from a one dollar
investment is exactly one dollar, regardless of the source of their marginal

or

9Another case in which the market would exhibit an indifference
is a broker
both divi—

dividends and capital gains is when the marginal investor
dealer in securities, facing equal (but non—zero) tax rates on

between

—13—

investment funds.

The knowledge that

=

=1

enables us to solve equation (1.15)

for the equilibrium marginal product of capital:

(1.18)

(1_t)I1'(K) =

The Taylor expansion of p/(1+p) around p = 0 allows us to approximate the
right hand side of this expression by p, yielding the standard result that
(1_T)1L'(Kt) =

p.

We define the cost of capital as the value of ll'(K) which

just satisfies (1.18), and using the approximation find

(1.19)

C =

(l—t)

The firm's cost of capital is independent of its payout policy. Chanes in
the corporate tax rate will affect investment decisions.
policy will 'be

independent

However, investment

of both the firm's dividend payout choices and the

prevailing nominal dividend tax rate, since it is always effectively reduced

to zero by tax—wise investors. Assuming that mz=0 for the marginal investor
leads immediately to Miller and Modigliani's (1961) irrelevance result for a
taxiess world.

The tax irrelevance view also implies that the risk—adjusted
required return on all equity securities is equal, regardless of their divi-

dend yield. Assuming that all returns are certain, basic capital market
equilibrium condition is1°

dends and short term capital gains.

10The extension to the CAPM framework which incorporates risk is
straightforward and involves replacing p with rf + j(rm_rf) where r1 is the
post—tax risk free return,
is firm i's beta, and
rm is the expected post—
tax return on the market.

—l4—

(1.20)

p =

d

+

g1

all I

where d1 is the dividend yield and g the expected capital gain on security i.
There should be no detectable differences in the returns on different shares
as a result of firm dividend policies.

The assumption that m=z=0 for marginal investors is ultimately

verifiable only from empirical study. Some evidence, such as the somewhat
controversial finding that on ex—dividend days share prices decline by less
than the value of their dividends, suggests that the marginal investor may not

face identical tax rates on dividends and capital gains. The tax irrelevance
view also has difficulty explaining the substantial amount of dividend tax
revenue collected by both the Internal Revenue Service and (in the U.K.) the

Board of Inland Revenue. If most personal investors were effectively untaxed
on dividend receipts, relatively little tax revenue should be raised.

The second and third views of dividend taxation assume that shares
are valued as if the marginal investor faced a higher effective tax rate on

dividends than on capital gains. They attempt to explain why, in spite of
this tax disadvantage, dividends are still observed. We label the next two
views the "tax capitalization" and the "traditional" views. Each yields
different predictions about how the cost of capital, investment, and dividend
policy are affected by dividend taxation.

I.B The Tax Capitalization View
The "tax capitalization view" of dividend taxes was developed by

Auerbach (1979), Bradford (1981), and King (1977). It applies to mature firms
which have after—tax profits in excess of their desired investment expen—

—15—

ditures. Retained earnings are therefore the marginal source of investment
funds for these firms. This view assumes that firms cannot find tax—free
channels for transferring income to shareholders so that the

constraint

=

binds. Therefore, the firm pays a taxable dividend equal to the

excess of profits over investment:

(1.21) D = (l_t)1L

—

+ VN.

Dividends are determined as a residual.
The first order conditions (l.114)—(l.1T) can be reinterpreted for a

firm in this situation. We showed above that a firm which was paying divi—

N N

dends would repurchase shares to the maximum extent possible, so Vt =

Formally,
=

the knowledge that Dt > 0 allows us to set

— [(l—m)/(l—z)1.

V

= 0 in (1.17), implying

The marginal value of a unit of capital, from equation

(1.114), is therefore

(1.22)

At =

< 1.

Marginal ci is less than one in equilibrium. Firms invest until investors are
indifferent at the margin between receiving additional dividend payments and
reinvesting money within the firm. When the firm pay-s a one dollar dividend,

the shareholder receives (1—rn) after tax. If the firm retains the dollar and
purchases capital, its share value will appreciate by q and the shareholder

will receive (l—z)q in after—tax income. If the shareholder is indifferent
between these two actions, the equilibrium value of marginal q must equal
i(1—m)/(l—z)]

—16—

The cost of capital under the tax capitalization view can be derived

from equation (1.15). It will depend on both the current marginal source of
investment finance, and on the source which is expected to be available in

period t+i)1 This is because

which depends upon whether retentions or

new share issues are next period's "rginal source of funds, affects the cost
of capital in period t. The assumption in the tax capitalization view is that
mature firms will never again issue new shares and always set

= VN, so that

marginal source of funds in this and all future periods is retained earnings.
=

We can therefore set

(1

(a.

—T)1T'tK
't

—

+l

= (1—m)/(1—z), and find that

p/(1—z)

) 1 + p/(l—zY
—

Again using a Taylor approximation to the right hand side, the cost of capital
can be written

I

I

p
— __________
c —

The dividend tax rate has no effect on the cost of capital, and permanent
changes in dividend taxes, unless accompanied by changes in the capital gains
tax, will have no effect on investment activity.

This view implies that the dividend tax is a lump sum levy on wealth

in the corporate sector at the time of its imposition. The total value of
corporate equity, using (1.6) and defining Dt÷j as the dividends paid to
period t shareholders in period t+j,

'1More complete discussions of the importance of the marginal
source of funds over time may be found in King (19Th), Auerbach (1983b, pp.
921_5), and Edwards and Keen (l981).

— iT—

V =

(1 25)

t

(-)

(1+ _.E_YJD'
l—z

l—z

t+j

Changes in the dividend tax rate therefore have direct effects on the total
value of outstanding equity,12 even though they do not affect the rate of return

earned on these shares. The tax capitalization view treats current equity as
"trapped" within the corporate sector, and therefore as bearing the full burden of the dividend tax.

Permanent changes in the dividend tax rate will have no effect

on the firm's dividend policy. The cost of capital, hence the firm's investment and capital stock, are unaffected by dividend taxes. Dividend payments,
the difference between (1_T)JI(Kt) and investment expenditures, are therefore

unaffected as well. Temporary tax changes, however, do have real effects.
For example, consider a temporary dividend tax which is announced in period

t—1. It will set the dividend tax rate to m in period t, but zero in all previous and subsequent periods. We set z = 0 in all periods for convenience.

Since A =

1—rn

but

= 1 for all

we can use equation (1.15) to deter-

mine the period—by—period cost of capital around the tax change:

Period
Cost of Capital

t—2

t—1

t

t+1

p

p4-rn

p—rn

p

l—t

l—t

1—i

The general formula for the cost of capital is

121f the desired wealth to income ratio is fixed, then raising
dividend tax rates may actually raise equilibrium capital intensity by reducing
the portfolio value of each unit of physical capital. The discussion in the
text precludes this possibility by assuming that p is fixed.

—18—

(1_T)_1

c =

(1.26)

Ii —

(i-i- Y1(x/x)1

The cost of capital depends in part on the change in the shadow value of capi-

tal which is expected to take place between one period and the next. Since
is low because of the dividend t- x, the cost of capital is high in the
period immediately prior to the imposition of' the tax, and low during

the taxed period. Since changes in the cost of capital have real effects,
temporary tax changes may alter investment and therefore dividend payout.

This result may be seen intuitively. Firms will go to great lengths to avoid
paying dividends during a temporary dividend tax period. As a conseciuence,
they will invest even in very low productivity investments.

Finally, since the capitalization view assumes that dividends face
higher tax rates than capital gains, it predicts that shares which pay dividends will earn a higher pre—tax return to compensate shareholders for their

tax liability. The after—tax capital market line corresponding to (1.20) is
p =

(1.27)

(1_m)di

+

(l—z)g.

which can be rewritten as

R. =

(1.28)

where

1

=

securities

d

1—z

+

g1.

+

1—z 1

There should be detectable differential returns on

with different dividend yields.

There are two principal difficulties with the capitalization view of
dividend

taxation. First, if marginal q is less than one and marginal and

average q are not very different, then firms should always prefer acquiring

—19—

capital by takeovers instead of direct purchases. This is because the
purchase price of a new capital good is unity, but the market value of capital
goods held by other corporations is only (1—in)/(l--z).

Second, this view's premise is that dividends are the only way to

out of the

transfer money

they

corporate sector. Firms are constrained in that

cannot further reduce new equity issues or increase share repurchases.

In the U.S. at least, there are many methods potentially available to firms
which wish to

convert earnings into capital gains. These include both share

repurchases and takeovers, as well as the purchase of

in

equity holdings or debt

other firms and various other transactions. The proposition that all

marginal distributions must flow through the dividend channel may be unte-

nable. The tax capitalization view therefore does not explain dividend payout
in any real sense. Rather it assumes that dividends must be paid and that
firms are not issuing new shares and then analzses the effect of changes in
dividend tax rates.

A further difficulty is this view's assumption that dividend
payments are a residual in the corporate accounts, and therefore subject to

substantial variation. The arrival of "good news," which raises desired
investment, should lead dividends to fall sharply. Most empirical evidence13
suggests both that dividend payments are substantially less volatile than
investment expenditures, and that managers raise dividends when favorable
information about the firm's future becomes available.

13The survey evidence reported by Lintner (1956) and the
regression evidence in Fama and Babiak (1968) suggest that managers adjust
dividend payments slowly in response to new information.

—20—

I.C The

Traditional View

The third view of dividend taxation, which we label the "traditional"

view, takes a more direct approach to resolving the dividend puzzle. It
argues that for a variety of reasons, shareholders derive benefits from the

payment of dividends. Firms deriv, some advantage from the use of cash dividends as a distribution channel, and this is reflected in their market value.
While the force which makes dividends valuable remains unclear, leading explanations include the "signalling" hypothesis, discussed for example by Ross
(1977), Bhattacharya (1979), arid Miller and Rock (1983), or the need to

restrict managerial discretion as outlined in Jensen and Meckling (1976).

To model the effect of the payout ratio on shareholder's valuation of

the firm, we mast generalize our earlier analysis. A convenient device for
allowing for "intrinsic dividend value" is to assume that the discount rate

applied to the firm's income stream depends on the payout ratio: p =

p'

<

0.

Firms which distribute a higher fraction of their profits

are rewarded with a lower required rate of return. This changes the
fundamental expression for the value of the firm, equation (1.6), to

(1.29)

Vt =

(t,j)

[(Z)Dt+j —

V•j1

where

D

i—i
(1.30)

(t,j) =

II

k=—1

[1 +

P((1_)t+k)/(iz)V1.

While dividend taxes make dividend payments unattractive, the reduction in
discount rates which results from a higher payout ratio may induce firms to

—21—

pay dividends.

The first—order conditions characterizing the firm's optimal program
are slightly different in this case than under the previous two views, because

the choice of dividend policy now affects the discount rate. The new first
order conditions are shown below:

=0

+

(1.l1a)

Pt+ii

+

At +

(l.15a)

Dt

________

iç

— (l—z)(1 +

(1.l6a) V:

—l —

(1.lTa)

For convenience, we define

P+iJ(l_z))

Vt = 0

= C,

—

+

—

t t
—

=

n(v_VN)
Dt
(l T)II

0

i

•
11

(1 t)

(l—z)(l +p/(l-z) Vt = 0,

P(D/(l_T)llt),

tDt c 0

so the discount rate in each

period depends on the previous period's payout ratio.

To solve these equations for rginal q and the cost of capital, we
assume that the returns from paying dividends are sufficient to make Dt >

If this were not the case, then this view would reduce to the tax
capitalization del where dividends are just a residual. Positive

1141f despite the fact that p' < 0 firms continued to set Dt = 0 at
the optimum, the analysis would be siailar to the tax capitalization model.

—22—

dividends

=

require

0,

= —l from (1.16a) and A 1 from (l.1la).

so

Therefore, the equilibrium value of marginal q is unity. This follows,
because at the margin firms are effectively relying on new equity finance.

Investors are trading one dollar of after—tax income for one dollar

of corporate capital. For values o q less than unity, these transactions
would cease.

The cost of capital can also be derived from these conditions.
= —1,
equation (l.lTa) may be rewritten as

Since

t

D
P

,(

l.3ljz—m__

',

1—z

be

expression may

(1.32) — + (1

+

Assuming At =

=

pt+l

At+i

t

p

(l—z)(l +

This

V

t
. ______

t

II 1—T

____

used to simplify (l.15a):

t+l)_lA
1,

+

(1_T)IL'(Kt)

•

+

•

(1_t)

(1_T)iL'(K)

and again approximating [Pt+i/(1_zfl/f1+p+1/(1_z)J =

we find

—

(1.33)

1t+l

+

(l_T)IE'(Ic)l1

+

(?) (..)A1

= 0

which can be written

p(a

(1.3k)
where
capital

(1_T)JL'(K)

=

Dt/(1_t)JE,

is therefore

(1_m)cxt +(1_z)(1_a)
the dividend payout ratio. The steady state cost of

=

0.

—23—

(

35)

C =

p(cx)

(l-T)1(l-m)cz

+

(i-z)(i-a)[

It involves a weighted average of the tax rates on dividends and capital gains,
with weights equal to the dividend payout ratio.
The cost of capital will also be affected by a dividend tax change.
The precise effect may be found by differentiating (l.31):

(136)

dc
—ctc
=
L(1—m)cx + (i—z)(i—aTf
d(1—mD

dcx

act d(1—m)

The foregoing conditions for choice of Dt imply ac

— = 0 at the optimal

dividend payout so we can write

(1 37)

dc
d(l—rn)

•

(l—m) =
—(l—m)a
< a
c
(l—m)cx + (1—z)(l—cx)

A reduction in the dividend tax will therefore lower the cost of capital,
increasing current investment spending.

The traditional view implies that when the dividend tax rate falls,

equilibrium capital intensity and the required return p may rise. Under the
extreme assumption that capital is supplied inelastically, the only effect of a

dividend tax cut is an increase in the equilibrium rate of return, p. If capital was supplied with some positive elasticity, then a reduction in the dividend

tax rate would raise both capital intensity and the rate of return.'5 Dividend
tax changes can have substantial allocative effects.

The traditional view suggests that as dividend taxes fall, the divi-

dend payout ratio should rise. The firm equates the marginal benefit from divi—

151n the partial equilibrium rctdel described here, the supply of
capital is perfectly elastic at a rate of return p(cx). Therefore, the whole
adjustment to the new equilibrium would involve changes in capital intensity.

—214W

dend payments with the marginal tax cost of those payments. Dividend tax
reductions, whether temporary or permanent, will lower the marginal cost of
obtaining signalling or other benefits, and the optimal payout ratio should
therefore rise.

Finally, we should note t'-ie implications of this view for the rela-

tive pre—tax returns on different securities. The pricing relation is a
generalization of (1.28):

(1.38)
This

p(a.)

= 1_

+

(IflZ)

implies two effects for dividend yield. First, in periods when firm I

actually pays dividends (d > 0), the measured pre—tax return will rise to
compensate investors for their resulting tax liability. However, even in
periods when no dividend is paid, the required return on higher yield stocks
may be lower than on low yield stocks as a result of the signalling or other
value which payout provides.

While it may provide an explanation of the dividend puzzle, the traditional view depends critically on a clear reason for investors to value high
dividend payout, but as yet provides only weak motivation for the p(a) func—

tio.l6 It is particularly difficult to understand why
as opposed to less heavily taxed means

of

firms

use cash dividends

communicating information to their

shareholders. An additional difficulty with this view is that firms rarely
issue new equity. It is possible that even though firms issue shares infrequently, however, new equity is still the marginal source of funds. For

l6Black (1976), Stiglitz (1980), and Edwards (l98t) discuss many
of the proposed explanations for "intrinsic dividend value'T and find them unsatisfactory in some dimension.

—25—

example, some firms might use short—term borrowing to finance projects in
years when they do not issue equity, and then redeem the debt when they

finally issue new shares. Moreover, the wide variety of financial activities
described above which are equivalent to share repurchase may

allow

firms to

operate on the equity—issue margin without ever selling shares.

I.D Summary

In

this section, we have described three distinct views of the economic

effects of dividend taxation. While we have treated them as opposing alternatives, they may each be partially correct. Different firms may be on different financing margins, and the tax rates on marginal investors may also

differ across firms. We allow for both these possibilities in interpreting
the empirical results reported below.

Table 1 summarizes the cost of capital and equilibrium "q" under
each of the alternative views. We also report each view's prediction for the
responsiveness of investment, the payout ratio, and the pretax return premium
earned by dividend—paying shares to a permanent increase in the dividend tax

rate. In subsequent sections, we test each of these different predictions using
British data from the post—war period.

—26—

Table

1

The Alternative Views of Dividend Taxation

Tax
Traditional
View
Cost
of Capital

p(cz)

[(i—m)a

dl

dm

dc

dm

Equilibrium
Marginal "q"

Dividend Premium

in Pre—tax Returns

+ (l—z)(l—a)j (l—t)

Capitalizat ion

View
p

(l—z)(l—t )

Tax
Irrelevance
View
P

1—i

O

0

0

O

0

0

1

1—rn

1

1—z

m-z
l—z

m-z
l—z

0

Note: These results are derived in the text and are recorded here for later
reference. The level of investment is I, m is the marginal dividend tax
rate, and a is the dividend payout ratio. All of the tax changes are
assumed to be permanent.

—27—

II. The Taxation of Dividends in Great Britain: 1950—1983
The previous section's stylized discussion of taxes focused on the

United States' tax environment. Since our empirical tests rely on the major
changes in British tax policy that have occurred over the last three decades,

this section describes the evolution of the U.K. tax system with respect to

dividends. Subsequent sections present our

empirical

results.

In the United States, discriminatory taxation of dividends and retained
earnings occurs at the shareholder level, where dividends and capital gains

are treated differently. In Britain, however, there have been some periods
when corporations also faced differential tax rates on their retained and

distributed income. During other periods, the personal and corporate tax
systems were "integrated" to allow shareholders to receive credit for taxes

which had been paid at the corporate level. Between 1965 and l9T3, Britain
experimented with a tax system structured after that of the post—war United

States. Five different systems of dividend taxation iave been tried in Britain
during the last three decades.

Two summary parameters are needed to describe the effects of the

various tax regimes on dividends. The first, which measures the amount of the
tax discrimination at the shareholder level, is the investor tax preference

ratio (6). It is defined as the after—tax income which a shareholder receives
when a firm distributes a one pound dividend, divided by his after—tax

receipts when the firm's share price rises by one pound.17 In the United
States, 6 =

(l—m)/(l—z). The investor tax preference ratio is central to ana—

1TFor consistency, in our section on ex—dividend price changes it
will prove helpful to focus on the dividend announced by the firm. Prior to
March, 1973, that was the gross dividend in the notation of King (1977). After
1973, it was the net dividend. We define S relative to the announced dividend.

—28—

lyzing

share price movements around ex—dividend days, since if m and z are the

tax rates reflected in s.rket prices, then a firm paying a dividend of d
should experience a price drop of (l—m)/(1—z)d or ód.

The second parameter which rry affect investment and payout deci-

sions is the total tax preference atio (o).

It is defined as the amount of

after—tax income which shareholders receive when a firm uses one pound of

after—tax profits to increase its dividend payout. This return must be
measured relative to the amount of after—tax income which shareholders would

receive if the firm retained this pound. In the American tax system, where corporate tax payments are unaffected by payout policy, U

=

(l—m)/(l—z).

In

Britain, the relationship is more complex, depending on the change in corporate

tax payments which results from a one pound reduction in gross dividends. This
variable determines firm payout policy under the traditional view of dividend
taxation and equilibrium q under the tax capitalization hypothesis.

II.A. The Different Tax Regimes
To characterize the changes in 5 and 0 which provide the basis for

our empirical tests, we consider each British tax regime in turn. We follow
King (197T) and express the total tax burden on corporate income as a function

of the prevailing tax code parameters, and then derive 6 and 0. More detailed
discussions of British dividend taxation may be found in King (19T7), House of
Commons (1971), the Corporation Tax Green Paper (1982), and Tiley (1978).

King (1977) follows a different procedure for the post—1973 regime. Although
this leads to some semantic differences, the results with respect to e are

identical.

—29—

1950—51: Differential Profits Tax Regime I
Prior to the 1952 Budget, firms faced a two—tier tax system with dif-

ferent tax rates on distributed and undistributed income. The tax code was
described by s, the standard rate of income tax, T,

buted profits, and t,

the

tax rate on undistri—

the tax rate on distributed profits. There was no

capital gains tax, so z—0. Corporations were subject to both income taxes and
profits taxes, although profits taxes could be deducted from a company's

income in calculating income tax liability. Income tax was paid at rate s.
The corporate tax liability of a corporation with pre—tax profits II and gross
dividend payments D wasl8

(2.1)

TC =

Es

+ (l—s)T ](fl—D) + (1—s)t D
u
d

[(l—s)t

=

+

sill

+

[(1_s)(Td

—

t)—slD

In addition, shareholders were liable for

(2.2)

In

= nD.

practice, part

of

this tax was collected by the corporation when it paid

dividends; it withheld sO as prepayment of part of the shareholder's tax.

Shareholders therefore received (l—s)D immediately after a gross dividend D

was paid. A taxpayer whose marginal rate was greater than s would subsequently be liable for taxes of (m—s)D; one with m<s would receive a refund.

The investor tax preference ratio for this system is easy to derive.
The shareholder's after—tax income associated with a one pound dividend equals

l8The term gross dividends refers to dividends received by shareholders prior to paying shareholder taxes, but after the payment of all corporate taxes. Note that King (19171 uses G to represent gross dividends, and
D for net dividends. We use D for gross dividends.

—30—

(i—rn), where m is the marginal dividend tax rate. Since there are no taxes on
capital gains, the shareholder tax preference ratio is 6 = (1—rn).

We can also compute 0 for this tax regime. To raise gross dividends
by one pound, the firm must forego 1 + dTC/dD1 pounds of after—tax retentions, The second term is the marginal change in tax liability which results
from raising D by one pound. The parameter 0, which is the change in gross
dividends per pound of foregone retentions, is defined as
=

(2.3)

1

l+-

1

=

dTC (l)(i +

d

— Iu )

from (2.2). The total tax preference ratio is defined by
= 60 =

(2.)

(i_s)(iJd_TY

For most investors who paid taxes at rates above the standard rate of income

tax, the tax system discriminated against dividend payout. In addition,
exceeded

sometimes by as much as forty percentage points.

1952—58: Differential Profits Tax egime II
The tax law was changed in 1952 to eliminate the deduction of profit

taxes from income subject to income tax. The analysis of this tax regime closely parallels that above. This system required the firm to pay
(2.5)

while

TC =

Es

+

t](fl—D)

+

TdD

=

(S + t)il +

for shareholders (2.2) continued to hold. The payment of a one pound

gross dividend would again provide the shareholder with (1—rn) pounds of after—
tax income, so 6 = (1—rn). Following the earlier expression for 0 we find

—31—

— = td u
dTC
dD

—t —s, so

1

(2.6)

1 — S+t

du
—T

and
(2.T)

=

1—s

+t d

—

u

This tax system was less favorable to the payment of dividends than the previous regime had been, since by eliminating deductability of profits tax it
increased the burden induced by differential corporate profits tax rates.

1958_19614: Single—rate Profits Tax

In 1958, Chancellor Barber Amory announced a major reform in cor-

porate taxation. The differential profits tax was replaced by a single—rate
profits tax: all profits were taxed at the rate T

regardless of a firm's

dividend policy. In addition, the firm was liable for income tax at rate s on
its undistributed earnings, while it withheld sG for shareholders' income tax

liability on the dividends it distributed. Shareholders were still taxed at
rate m on gross dividends, but since firms were not subject to income tax on

distributed profits, there were offsetting burdens at the two levels. The
total tax burden on corporate source income was

(2.8)

TC = (S + t )A1 — sD
p

while T = nD.

(2.9)

This implies ó = (1—rn), but 0

6 = (1—m)/(i—s).

so

—32—

For values of the marginal tax rate near the standard rate of income tax, this

tax system is neutral with respect to distribution policy. For higher rrirgi—
nal rates, it discriminates against dividends. However, it was a more favorable
tax system for dividends than eith r of the previous regimes.

1965—1973:

Classical

Corporation Tax

The Labour Victory- in 19614 marked the beginning of harsher taxation

of corporate income. The 1965 Finance Bill introduced a new system of corporate taxation parallel to that in the United States. Profits were
taxed at a corporate tax rate, T, and there was no distinction between
retained and distributed earnings. This implies TC =

0,

0 =

vJ1,

and since dTC/dD =

1. Shareholders continued to pay dividend taxes at rate m. However,

the shareholder preference ratio was altered by the introduction in early 1965
of a capital gains tax at a flat rate of 30 percent on all realized gains.
Each asset was

ascribed

as a taxable basis its value on 6

April

1965. We use

z to represent the effective marginal capital gains tax rate, taking
account of the reductions afforded by deferred realization.1-9 The investor tax
preference ratio for this tax system is sS
0 = (1—m)/(1—z).

= (1—m)/(l—z).

Since 0 =

1,

Unlike the previous tax regime, the classical system made no

attempt to avoid the double taxation of dividends. As a result, the dividend
tax burden was substantially heavier than that under the previous system.
1973 —

Present:

The Imputation System

The Conservative return to power in 1970 set in motion a further set
of tax reforms, directed at reducing the discriminatory taxation of dividend

19Deferred realization is one of the techniques which enables
American investors to lower their capital gains tax liability. Trading so as to
generate short—term losses and long—term gains, taking advantage of the dif—

—33—

income.

The current tax system resembles the system which was used between

1958 and l961, with several differences. All corporate profits are taxed at
the corporation tax rate, T

When firms pay dividends, they are required to

pay Advance Corporation Tax (ACT) at a rate of Ta per pound of' gross dividends

paid. However, while in the 1958—6k regime this tax on dividends was treated
as a withholding of investor income taxes, under the current regime it is a

prepayment of corporate tax. At the end of its fiscal year, the firm pays
Tdll_TaD in corporate taxes, taking full credit for its earlier ACT payments.2°

Since total corporate tax payments equal ill, 0 = 1 under this tax system.

Shareholders receive a credit for the firm's ACT payment. A shareholder calculates his tax by first inflating his dividend receipts by 1/Cl_Ta)

and then applying a tax rate of m. However, he is credited with tax payments
of •ta/(l_Ta) so his effective marginal tax rate is (m_Ta)/(1_Ta). If his

marginal income tax rate is above Ta

imputation rate, then he is

liable

additional dividend taxes. Shareholders with marginal tax rates below

for

ta

the

are

eligible for tax refunds.
The shareholder tax preference ratio under the imputation system is

is

given by

ferential taxes on the two, is another technique; it is unavailable to British
investors, since the tax rate on all gains is equal. Step—up of asset basis
at death is another feature of the U.S. tax code which lowers effective capital gains rates still further. Prior to 1971, estates in the U.K. were subject to both estate duty and capital gains tax on assets in the estate. Since
1971, however, capital gains liability has been forgiven at death and heirs
become liable for capital gains tax only on the difference between the price
which they- receive when they dispose of the asset, and it's value at the time
of inheritance.
2Oii IT G > TcIl, the firm is unable to fully recover its ACT
payments. The unrelieved ACT" may be carried forward indefinitely and backwards for a period of not more than two years. A substantial fraction of
full ACT payments and
British finns are currently unable to recover

their

—34-

m—T
1—I

a

a

(2.10)

6 =

Since U =

1, we know U =

(2.11)

=

1—z

6 and can rewrite this as

(1—t)(l—z

The imputation rate has typically been set equal to the standard rate of
income tax, the rate paid by riost taxpayers (but not most dividend

recipients). For standard rate taxpayers, the imputation system provides an
incentive for paying dividends; retentions yield taxable capital gains, but

there is essentially no tax on dividends at the shareholder level. For individuals facing marginal dividend tax rates above the standard rate, there may
be an incentive for retention, provided m > z +

Ta(1_Z)•

Pension funds and

other untaxed investors have a clear incentive to prefer dividend payments.
For these investors, m = z = 0 and the tax system provides a sudsidy, since
one pound of dividend income is effectively- worth 11(1_ta) pounds. Finally,
brokers and dealers in securities have a less powerful incentive to encourage
firms

to

pay dividends. They are allowed to reclaim ACT paid by corporations

in which they

hold

shares only up to the amount

of

ACT paid by the brokerage

firm in regard to its dividend distribution. Thus, for many brokers, marginal
dividend receipts cannot be inflated by the 1/(1_ta) factor.

therefore face corporate tax discrimination between retentions and distribu—
tions. See Mayer (1982) and King (1983) for further details on the workings
of' ACT.

—35—

II.B. Summary

Statistics

Table 2 summarizes the tax parameters for each different tax regime.
It relates

and U to the profits tax rates, investor dividend tax rates, and

capital gains tax rates. Estimates of 6 and e based on weighted—average marginal tax rates are reported in Table 3. The values of m and z which we used to
compute these statistics are weighted averages of the marginal tax rates faced
by different classes of investors, with weights proportional to the value of

their shareholdings. These weighted average tax rates were first calculated by
King (1977) and have been updated in King, Naldrett, and Poterba (l98).
These tax rates are indicative of the major changes in tax policy
which have occurred over time. If one type of investor is in fact "the marginal
investor," then the weighted averages are substantially misleading as indicators

of the tax rates guiding market prices. Even if this is the case, however,
there is still some information in our

time

series since the tax burden for most

types of investors moved in the same direction in each tax reform. We present
empirical evidence below suggesting the relevance of weighted average marginal
tax rates.

The time series movements in 6 and U deserve some comment. The
dividend tax burden was heaviest in the 1950—58 and 1965—73 periods, and

lightest in recent years. The most dramatic changes in 6 occur in 1965
(capital gains tax) and 1973 (imputation). For 0, there are additional
changes in 1958 and 1966. These substantial changes raise the prospect of
detecting the effects of dividend taxation on the behavior of individuals and

firms. Similar descriptive statistics for the United States tax system would

—36—
Table 2

Tax Code Parameters and Dividend Taxation

Tax
Regime
Differential
Profits Tax I

Investor
Tax Preference
Years
1950-.

1952

Ratio (iS

)

1—m

Total

Tax Preference
Ratio (8)
1—rn

(1_s)(1_TD_TUl

Differential
Profits Tax II

1952—
1958

m

Single

Rate
Profits Tax

1958—
1965

1 m

1—rn

Classical
Corporation Tax

1966—
1913

1—rn

1—rn

i—z

l—z

Imputation
System

1913—

1—rn

(i_ta)(i_z)

Note: See text for further details and parameter definitions.

1—rn

1—s +

TD

—

•tu

i—s

1—rn

(1_Ta)(1_z)

—37—

Table 3
British Tax Rates, 1950—81

Year

Dividend Tax
Rate (m*)

1950
1951
1952

0.568
0.575
0.560

1953

0.5145

19514

0.530
0.518
0.517
0.515
0.502

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
19614

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1912
1973
19714

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

1981

0.1488
0.1485

0.485
0.14814

0.1483

0.509
0.529
0.500

Capital Gains
Tax Rate (z)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.138
0.1714

0.1488

0.113

0.1483

0.169
0.157
0.152
0.150

0.1472
0.1456
0.141414

0.1425

0.214
0.105
0.0148
—0.0014

—0.031
—0.0140

—0.043
—0.101
—0.120

0.1148
0.1143

0.133
0.130
0.131
0.134
0.135
0.136
0.1314

0.133

Investor Tax
Preference
Ratio (5 )

Total
Tax Preference
Ratio (e)

0.1432

0.6714

0.1425
0.1455

0.619
0.598
0.612

o.bo

0.621

0.1482

0.6214

0.1483
0.1485
0.1498

0.596
0.575
0.673
0.807

0.14140

0.512
0.515
0.515
0.516
0.517
0.1491

0.550
o.6o8
0.619
0.622
0.627
0.6141
0.6514
0.6714

0.916
1.032
1.094
1.156
1.190
1.202
1.207
1.271
1.292

0.8140
0.8141
0.8143
0.81414

o.8oi
0.936

0.706
0.619
0.622
0.627
0.641
0.6514
0.6714

0.916
0.978
0.970
1.019
1.055
1.070
1.0141
1.0147

Notes: Column 1 is the weighted average marginal tax rate on all shareholders,
reported b,r King (1977, p.268) and updated by King, Naldrett, and
Poterba (19814). This is the time series for m* = (mT)/(l"T ) as
reported in the text. Column 2, the effective capital gains ax
rate, is also drawn from King (1977). Columns 3 and 14 were computed by the authors as descibed in the text. They may not correspond
exactly to calculations based on Columns 1 and 2 since they are averages
of uarter1y ratios.

—38--

display far fewer movements in the postwar period, and no dramatic jumps.

The use of legal changes to identify economic relationships is
always problematic since such changes may themselves be endogenous responses

to economic conditions. The hist ry of British corporate tax reform provides
little reason to think that this is an important problem for our empirical

work. Major reforms typically followed elections which brought about changes
in the governing party. For example the 1965 reforms closely followed the
Labour party's victory in the l96I election, and the 1973 reform was a con-

sequence of the Conservative victory in the 1970 elections. A reading of the
press reports suggests that corporate tax reform was not an issue in either
election.

The remainder of the paper is devoted to various tests of how the tax
changes described in this section have influenced Ci) the market's relative
valuation of dividends and capital gains, (ii) the decisions made by firms
with respect to their dividend payout, and (lii) the investment decisions of
British firms.

—39—

III. Dividend Taxes and Dividend Valuation
The changes in investor tax rates on dividend income and capital gains
provide opportunities for testing the "tax irrelevance" view by examining share

price movements around ex—dividend days. If marginal investors value dividend
income as much as they value capital gains, then when shares experience ex—days
their price should decline by the full amount of the dividend payment. If the
marginal investors are taxed more heavily on dividends than on capital gains,
however, then share prices will fall by less than the dividend payment.
Moreover, if marginal investors are untaxed, then changes in dividend tax
rules should not affect the marginal valuation of dividends and capital
gains.

Numerous authors, including Elton and Gruber (1970), Black and

Scholes (1973), Green (1980), Kalay (1982), Eades, Hess and Kim (l98I),
Auerbach (1983a), Hess (1982), and others, have used daily data to analyze
relative share price movements in the United States.

Although their results

are controversial, these studies suggest that share prices decline on ex—days,

but by less than the amount of the dividend. These results have been
interpreted as confirming the hypothesis that marginal investors are taxed.

British data provide an opportunity for studying the general issue
of whether taxes affect dividend valuation, as well as the role of short term
trading in deterniing the ex—dividend day behavior of share prices. As noted
in the last section, there have been substantial changes in the investor
tax preference ratio during the last twenty—five years. The principal changes
occurred in 1965 and 1973.

—40--

There have also been important changes in the tax rates affecting

securities traders involved in tax arbitrage around ex—dividend days. The
most significant changes affecting short term traders were introduced in the

1970 Finance Act.21 Prior to 1970, "dividend stripping" by trading around ex—
days was apparently widespread. Since then, however, the Inland Revenue has
been empowered to levy penalties on investors engaging in securities transac-

tions which are principally motivated by tax considerations. For an individual investor, if trading around ex—days (i.e., selling shares before the
ex—day and repurchasing them later) reduces his tax liability by more than 10
percent in any year, the tax savings from these transactions may be voided by
the Inland Revenue.

After 1970, trading by institutions around ex—days could be declared
void if they bought and then sold the same share within one month of its ex—

dividend day. If its transactions are disallowed, the institution could be

required to pay taxes, in spite of its tax—exempt status. Since 1970, a
dealer who trades in a security around its ex—day arid holds his shares for

less than a month will not be able to deduct his full capital loss from

taxable income.22 A fraction of his capital loss, varying inversely with the
holding period, is disallowed for tax purposes. As the holding period declines to only the ex—day, the fraction disallowed rises to nearly 100 percent.

21The anti—dividend stripping provisions in the 1910 Act are
described in Tiley (1978), pp. 761—}, and Kaplanis (1983).

22Miller and Scholes (1982) suggest brokers and dealers as the ex—
day price setters.

—41—

The interactions among these tax provisions are difficult to
describe, and the extent to which the Board of Inland Revenue exercised its

authority remains unclear. However, one cannot doubt that the opportunities
for avoiding taxes by trading around ex—days were substantially reduced in

1910. To the extent that trading around ex—days is important in determining
ex—dividend price movements, we would expect to observe noticable changes in

dividend valuation, if at all, only around 1970. This should be contrasted
with the traditional and tax capitalization views, which predict major changes
in the relative value of dividends and capital gains when the tax reforms
affecting ordinary investors occurred but none when rules affecting dividend
stripping took place.

III.,A Data and Methods23

To estimate the share price response to dividends, we obtained daily data
on the share prices and dividends of'

the firms in our

data

sixteen

large U.K. firms. A listing of

set and further background data may be found in Poterba

and Summers (19814a). We obtained a listing of ex—dividend dates from the
London Business School Share Price Data Base, and then consulted microfilm

copies of the London Financial Times. The closing share prices on the trading
day before the ex—date and the ex—date itself were recorded for each firm.2l
For each firm

in

the sample, we included all ex—dates between 1955 and 1981

23The data used in this section are described, and further results
are reported, in Poterba and Summers (1981ta).
2l4The prices used are the average of closing bid and asked prices.

—42-

corresponding to cash dividend payments which were taxable as ordinary income
and not accompanied by any dividend rights, stock options, or other special

features. Our data set contained 633 ex—days, distributed evenly among the

years 1955—81. We also obtained data on the value of the Financial Times
Industrial Ordinary Share index, and used this index to construct a market
return series.

We

security
(3.1)

estimated the follow model for R1, the total pretax return on

i:

=

1981

Oi

+

+
J—1955

juj1tdtj + vit

where Rt is the market return, I3o is a firm specific intercept term,

IS 8

company—specific coefficient which should resemble the security's beta. The
dividend yield on each day is d.tj where j denotes the year in which the divi-

dend falls. We also estimate (3.1) constraining

to be constant across firms.

Both equations were estimated by a generalized least squares procedure

which allowed for heteroscedasticity across different firms. Since there were
few instances in which two firms had coincident ex—days, we did not need to
correct

for residual correlation across firms.
When two tax regimes occur within one year, we allow for two

that year. The

coefficients reflect the excess pretax return on

j'S

in

ex—

dividend days, and therefore correspond to 1—ô for each year. If the "tax
irrelevance" view is correct, then the parameter

should not depend upon the

relative tax rates on dividends and capital gains.25 Under the other views we

25The tax changes in l9T3 altered the value of dividend income to
nonprofit institutions and personal investors engaged in tax—free accumulation,
as well as to naive personal investors paying high marginal dividend taxes.

—43—

would

expect

to vary over time, especially when the Imputation system was

Introduced in 1973 but also as the composition of shareholders varies over
time.26

III.B Results
The results of estimating (3.1) are shown in Table 14•

The a coef-

ficients are clearly subject to substantial variability over time, even when

the tax system does not vary. However, there is a pronounced drop in the
estimated coefficients beginning in the second half of 1913. There is even a
clear difference in the estimates for the first and second halves of 1973.
This suggests the importance of the 1973 imputation reform in altering the

relative valuation of dividends and capital gains. The difference in the
average value of t between the 1965—73 and 1973+ tax regimes is 0.51, which

corresponds very closely to the value of 0.51 computed from the weighted
average marginal tax rates in Table 3.

The estimated coefficients did not change substantially, however,

when the capital gains tax was introduced in 1965. This may indicate that
effective marginal capital gains tax rates were actually negligible.
Constantinides (1983) and Stiglltz (1983) have shown that optimal portfolio
strategies can substantially reduce effective capital gains tax rates, so the

For securities dealers and brokers, however, who were unable to fully reclaim
the Advance Corporation Tax on the dividend they received, the tax change
should have had a smaller effect.
26Approximately 6 percent of British equity was held by untaxed
institutions in 1957; by 1980, the fraction had risen to 26 percent.

—44—
Table 14

The Stock Market's Relative Valuation o' Dividends and Capital Gains: 1955—81

Model
Without Fixed Effects

Model
With Fixed Effects

1955
1956
1957

.637

(.1914)

.6914

(.177)

(.198)

.208

.518

.1149

(.181)

(.i6)

.517

.1439

.501

1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963

.393
.537
.361

(.151)
(.182)
(.201)
(.207)

Year

19614

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973

Average Tax
Rate Value

(.1614)

(.171)
.1451
(.155)
.610
(.187)
.1414i
(.207)
—.056
(.213)
.1457
(.199)
.360
(.210)
.105
(.180)
.351(.188)/.589(.2142)
.300
(.155)
.301
(.152)
.308
(.195)
.1499
(.187)
.518
(.155)
.339
(.150)
.519
(.189)
.368(.290)/—.0114(.333)
—.088
(.i66)
—.551
(.192)
—.005
(.171)

—.109

(.1714)

—.072

(.180)

—.190

—.115
—.056
—.093

(.168)
(.137)
(.139)

(.1714)
(.1143)

—.0614

(.1145)

—.036
—.019
—.029
—.023

—.202
—.207
—.271
—.292

—.1142

.378
.276
.050

(.1914)

(.205)

(.1714)
.3014(.186)/.5146(.2140)

.272
.259

(.150)

.2514

.1459

(.190)
(.i8o)
(.151)

.298

(.1145)

.1455

(.180)

(.i148)

.1460

.365(.305)/—.01414(.297)

19714

—.1146

1975
1976

—.6oo
—.031

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

(.160)
(.185)

(.1143)
(.1149)

.515
.502
.1488
.1485
.1485
.14814

.1483

.509
.533/.1427

.392
.381
.378
.373
.359
.3146

.326
.302/—.109
—.032
—.0914

—.156

Average Values:

Regime I (1955—65)
Regime II (1965—73)
Regime III (1973—81)

Notes:

.308

.376

.369

.1415

.368

—.1143

—.095

—.1714

.1499

The coefficients in columns 1 and 3 were estimated from the equation:

= Oi

+

ii

1981

R +

j=l956 jhjtd1tj

+ "it

= , all

The results in Column 1 impose the restriction
i, while those in
column 3 do not impose this restriction. The data in the last column are the
dividend return premia, ((m_ta)/(l_ta) — z) I(i—z) = 1 — 6, calculated from the
weighted average tax rates reported in Table 2. See Poterba and Summers (19814a),
for further description.

—45-.

naive assumptions of constant turnover probabilities used in constructing z in

Table 3 may be substantially incorrect.27

There is also little change in the estimated coefficients before and
after 1970, when the ex—day trading restrictions were introduced. This is

evidence gainst the importance of short—term trading in determining the behavior of share prices around their ex—days, and when coupled with the changes
in valuation around 1973, suggests that views which hold that a weighted

average marginal tax rate affects security market equilibrium are more
accurate descriptions of reality than those which assume that marginal
investors are broker—dealers.

While

the annual ex—day coefficients in Table

are informative

about how taxes may affect

security values, they are not "tests" in any usual
sense. To test the proposition that the estimates of reflected tax rates,
we compare our estimate of

hypothesis that
levels,.
did

=

for each year with (i—o) in Table 3. The

(i_o), all t, was

rejected

However, tests of the hypothesis

=

at standard significance

(m_ta)/(l_Ta),

imposing

z.

=

0,

not reject the null. This again suggests that while our nasures of capi-

tal gains tax rates may be very imprecise indicators of actual tax rates,

underlying variation in dividend tax rates as measured by our crude weighted
averages is reflected in share price movements.

The results reported here suggest the potentially substantial
influence of dividend taxation on the stock market's relative valuation of divi-

dends and capital gains. However, while daily share price movements are likely

2TThe capital gains tax rate series computed by King (1977), which
we report, assumed that shareholders followed a policy of liquidating ten
percent of their equity holdings each year, regardless of their trading gains or
losses. This assumption clearly overstates the liability which would follow

—46--

to

yield the most precise evidence on dividend valuation, they may

be

con-

taminated by unusual return patterns around ex—days or other subtle factors.28 i

taxes play an important role in the valuation of dividend income, then it should
also be possible to detect this phenomenon in a sample of monthly security
returns.

using

Miller and

Scholes

(1982) have argued

that previous monthly studies

American data, for example Gordon and Bradford (1980) and Litzenberger and

Ramaswarx' (1979, 1982), were contaminated by information effects and that their

discovery of a tax effect was therefore spurious. Monthly data are of course
subject to other biases, and they are noisier than the daily series. However,
in Poterba and Summers (198la), we used monthly British data for the period
1955—81

and again found evidence that tax changes induced movements in divi-

dend valuation.29

The results in this section cast doubt on the value of the tax irre—
levance hypothesis in explaining why British firms pay dividends. Although It

Is of course possible that British and American institutions differ in ways
that preclude generalizing from the British experience,

this seems

unlikely.

Miller and Scholes (1978), in their analysis of the taxation of dividends In
the United States, suggested that the interaction between various tax provisions can cause dramatic reductions in the effective marginal tax rate on

capital income. They focussed on several devices in the tax code which might

from an optimal trading strategy-.

2BSome evidence of unusual return patterns around American ex—

days is reported in Black and Scholes (1973) and Eades, Hess and Kim (1981).
Mas (1981) presents corroborative evidence for the United Kingdom.

29Countries besides the United Kingdom In which dividend tax
changes have taken place provide a valuable source of information on the dividend question. Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1983) provide some evidence that the
Canadian tax reform of 1971 affected ex—day price behavior in a manner con-.

-.47—

reduce the effective dividend tax rate:

(1) the potential for dividend income

to raise the limitation on interest income deductability; (ii) the availability of life insurance policies and single premium annuities as essentiallytax—free accumulation vehicles; and (iii) the use of pension funds to allow
assets to earn the before—tax interest rate.3°

While some of the relevant tax features appear in the British tax
code, others do not. Interest payments are not deductible from taxable income
in the United Kingdom, except in special circumstances involving home mortgages and several other minor

cases.

Moreover, there are strict (and quite low)

limits on the amount deductible. The first Miller—Scholes device is therefore
inaccessible to British investors. The life insurance

mechanism, however, may

be more powerful as a tax avoidance device in Britain than in the United

States. Tax subsidies are provided for the payment of insurance premia, and
the proceeds of the policies are generally

exempt from capital gains.3- Tiley

(1978) observes that

"in recent years, these [insurance tax subsidiesi have been
used to promote tax avoidance schemes ... taxpayers took
advantage of the rules concerning relief from premiums to
buy shares or unit trusts with, in effect, the aid of an
exchequer subsidy, or higher rate taxpayers put their assets
sistent with the short—term trading hypothesis, Amoaku—Adu (1983) and Khoury
and Smith (1977) provide opposing evidence, however, showing that share values
and dividend policies responded as predicted by the "weighted average of
investors" model. Further work remains to be done on this question.
30Although in principle all of these devices could generate
substantial tax savings for personal investors, the extent to which they are
actually used in the United States remains controversial.
Feenberg (1981),
for example, showed that investors for whom the interest deductability limitation was binding received only 2.5 percent of total dividend payments in
1977.

vided in

is

found

31A much more complete
Tiley (1978), Chapter

in Chapter 36.

account of life insurance taxation is proA related discussion of pension accumulation

3.

—48—

into

tax

funds where income could accumulate virtually free of

thanks to Itax] concessions for insurance

companies. (p.7l7J"

Finally, with regard to pension funds, the British and American systems are

similar. Corporate Contributions are deductible for corporate tax purposes,
and individual pension contributions are not treated as taxable income.
Pension

funds are untaxed,

When pension income is

and the earnings of pension funds are tax exempt.

received during retirement it is subject to ordinary

income taxation. As in the United States, the issue of
whether marginal
investors are accumulating through these channels is unclear. There may

be

other devices for sheltering income, available in the United Kingdom but

not

in

the United States, which we have failed to mention. These would only

strengthen our

case

showing that the potential for tax free accumulation is

clearly present in Britain.

Before presenting additional evidence to distinguish between the tax
capitalization

hypothesis

and traditional view of dividend taxes, we turn in

the next section to an alternative

xuethodo1or for studying the impact of tax

changes on the market valuation of dividends. This will provide further
information on whether the stock market exhibits a preference for dividends or
capital

gains.

—49—

IV. Asset

Price Changes and Tax Announcements

evidence is only one way of trying to nasure the effect of
tax changes. Another involves the "event study" methodolor which Is often
used to investigate the effects of regulatory reforms, mergers, or other
financial news on corporate valuation. By looking for changes in share
Ex—day

prices

when major tax reforms were announced or when expectations were otherwise
altered, we can derive further tests for the Influence of taxes on asset
valuation.

Using results in Section I, note that the value of a share, V, can
be written as the present value of the after—tax dividends its shareholders
expect to receive:

v0=

).
j=O

_____ 1
)][6DI.
En
(l+i
k0
_Zk

where

is the after tax return required by the marginal investor in period

k and

Is the dividend in period j paid to the owners of all

currently

outstanding shares. It follows immediately from (.i) that ignoring future
equity issues, a permanent change in the dividend tax rate, through its effect

on S, will cause an equal proportional reduction in the value of all firms.
This holds regardless of the time path of their expected future dividends.
However equation (1.i) makes it clear that a temporary change in dividend
taxes will impact differently on different firms.

Temporary changes in divi-

dend taxes will have their greatest impact on firms which are expected to
distribute a large amount of dividend income in the immediate future. In the
extreme case of a firm that was not expected to pay any dividends for the
duration of a tax change, the change would have no effect on market value.

—50—

In practice, the fluidity of tax policy leaves some ambiguity as to
whether a particular policy Is (i) temporary and likely to be reversed, or (ii)

the first step in a program of escalating reform. These two possibilities
have distinctly different implications for the impact of a tax increase on the

share values of different firms. If higher dividend taxes are expected to be
short—lived, then low yielding firms which are valuable primarily because of
dividends projected to be paid in the distant future will experience smaller
share price declines than high yielding firms which derive most of their value

from a high level of current dividends. Alternatively, if the increase in
dividend taxes is viewed as the harbinger of still higher tax rates in the
future, then low yielding firms will decline by more than those with high
yields, as the market expects heavy taxes now, but even heavier taxes during
the time period when these firms finally distribute their profits.

Most of the tax changes during our sample period were clearly temporary. In 1958, when the split—rate corporate profits tax was abolished and
replaced by a single rate tax which was much more favorable towards dividend

payout, support for the measure came from the Conservative Party. Labour was
opposed, and the possibility that the tax change would be reversed when the

opposition gained control of Parliament was recognized clearly. Indeed,
that was what happened. In l961, Labour won a narrow victory and promptly
announced a new plan to raise taxes on capital income by adopting a corporation
income tax system which would effectively "double—tax" dividend payments.

Support for this policy again was split clearly along party lines. When the
Conservatives regained power in 1970, it was not long before plans were

—51—

announced (in the 1971 Budget) for a return to an integrated tax system which
would substantially reduce the tax burden on dividends.

If dividend tax reforms are perceived as temporary and the stock
market equates the value of each share with the present value of its after—tax
dividend stream, then increases in the dividend tax rate should reduce the
value of high payout shares by a larger amount than low—payout shares. This may
be tested by relating the excess return on different firms during budget

announcement months to each firm's typical dividend yield. Evidence that dividend tax increases reduce the value of high—yield shares by xrre than they
reduce low—yield share prices would constitute strong evidence against the "tax
irrelevance" hypothesis.

IV.A Data and Methods
Our study focuses on three events which substantially affected the
outlook for British dividend taxation. They are described below:

pril, 1958 Budget Speech: Chancellor Heathcoat Ainory announced
reforms in the profits tax, abolishing the differential 30% tax on distributed
profits and the 3% tax on undistribtited earnings. Effective 1 April 1958
(retroactively), he introduced a single—rate profits tax of 10 percent. This
reform was not fully anticipated; The Economist (19 April 1958) indicated that
Mr. Amory had shown "political courage" in adopting it.

During April 1958,

the excess return on the market, calculated as the total return on the
Financial Times —

Actuaries

Share Index, minus the Treasury Bill rate, was 1.7

percent. Over the longer February to April period when expectations may have
been changing the excess market return was 7.3 percent.

—52—

November, 1961k Mini—Budget: After Labour's electoral victory in
October, 1961, Chancellor James Callaghan announced sweeping plans for fiscal

reform. These included the switch to a classical system of corporate income
taxation beginning in 1966 and the imposition of a capital gains tax beginning

in April, 1965. The two proposals should have had opposite effects on
dividend—paying firms. Introducing a capital gains tax should have raised the
value of dividend income, helping high payout firms. The switch to a corporation tax system however, and the repeal of the integrated tax system which
had prevailed between 1958 and 19614, imposed a heavier tax burden on high

dividend firms than on high retentions companies. This was reflected in the
large change in 0 calculated in Section II. The general move toward heavier
taxation was recognized as one cause of the stock market's 1•7 percent excess
return during the month of November 19614.

March, 1911 Budget Speech: This was the first Budget speech after the
Conservative

victory of 1970. Chancellor Barber announced plans to end "the

substantial discrimination in favour of retained as opposed to distributed

profits"

by adopting a new system of corporation tax which would impute cor-

porate tax payments to shareholders. The budget also promised substantial
reductions in the marginal tax rates applicable to investment income received by
personal investors, and should therefore have proved highly attractive for firms

with currently high dividend payout. The excess return on the overall market

during March 1971 was 6. percent.
To test for the effects of tax changes on different firms, we generalized the monthly after—tax CAPM used by Gordon and Bradford (1980) and
Poterba and Summers (19814a) to include terms which would capture the

—53—

effects of budget announcements. The equation estimated was:

(14.2) Rjt_iR —

(1_81)Rft

=

"0

+

ckIk1d

+

1s

+

n25dj)I •

+

where d* is the average dividend yield on a security during the
previous twenty—
four months, and 'kit is an indicator variabl which is set equal to one if' the

observation corresponds to a month in the first, second, or third "tax
regime." Tax Regime I is defined to include observations prior to the introit—th

duction of a capital gains tax in 1965. Tax Regime 2 extends from 1965 to
1973, when the imputation system took effect, and Tax Regime 3 is the period

after April, 1973.
possibly

This equation is a modified CAPM which takes

account of

differential valuation of dividends and capital gains, allowing for

changes when major tax reforms occur. Poterba and Summers (19814a) estimate
several models of this type and provide a fuller justification for the specification.

The critical variables for our present study are the last terms in
equation (14.2). 'sit is an indicator variable for the months involving major

tax reform announcements, where s = 14/58, 11/614, or 3/71. The coefficients
n15 and

capture the effects of tax announcements on security returns, with

reflecting differences which can be attributed to average dividend yield.
If a tax reform, say that in 1958, raised the value of high—yield shares, then

we would predict that fl21958 would be positive. The corresponding coefficient for 1971 should also be positive, and it is difficult to predict the
sign of the 19614 announcements because they involved changes in both dividend
and capital gains taxes.

The data set we used for our study is a sample of over 140,000

company—months of security returns, drawn from the London Business School

—54—

Share Price Data Base. A more complete description of this data set may be
found in Poterba and Summers (19814a).

IV.B Results
The results of estimating €uation (14.2) on this monthly data set are
reported in Table 5. We show both the 111 and

coefficients in the table,

and show results from several different definitions of the "event period" during

which information was revealed. For example, the first row of the table

corresponds to a one—month event period. That is, I. is equal to 1 only
during the month of the tax policy announcement.

Since expectations were pro-

bably evolving throughout the period immediately prior to the actual policy
announcement, in particular in election months as in 19614, we also consider

somewhat longer event periods. Two— and four—month event period specifications
are also reported in Table 5. In all cases, we define the event period as

ending in the announcement month. Many previous studies of "events" and their
effects on share prices have suggested that the market quickly adjusts to new
information, so allowing for adjustment in the months after the budget speeches
seemed unnecessary.32

The results in Table 5 provide some support for the view that antici-

pated taxes are reflected in security prices. In 1958, firms with high dividend
yields experienced substantially greater returns during the period around the
budget speech than their low—yield counterparts.

A one percentage point

increase in a firm's dividend yield would have induced a four percent higher

to

32me long

tradition of evidence for rapid market adjustment dates

Fama, Fisher, Jensen, and Roll (1969).

—55—

Table
Tax

Reforms and Share Price Changes

Variable

1958
19614 Announcement
Change in of Capital Gains!
Profits Tax

Duration of
Event Period

5

Constant

.001

—.0214

(.028)

1 Month

Dividend
Yield

Constant

—.017

(.010)

.030

14.3014

(5.352)

—0.019
(.016)

1971
Announcement of

(3.3814)

—0.006
(.007)

2 Months

(.007)
1.1466

(2.002)

—.0170
(.00714)

Dividend
Yield

14.981

1.860

1.14614

(3.815)

(i.814i)

(2.003)

Constant

—.019

—.002

—.008

(.016)

(.005)

(.005)

.188
(1.193)

(1.3814)

14 Months

Dividend
Yield

Predicted
Dividend

14.982

(3.816)

1.0142

+

Yield

+

Effect

Notes: Coefficients are estimated from the equation:

Rjt_Rft_i(R_Rft) =

using

a data set of

0 + kIkitdit 1s + fl25d;I:1 +

innthly share returns

+

compiled from the London Business

School Share Price Data Base. See Poterba and Summers (19814a) for a more
detailed description of this data set and the text for further details on
variable definitions. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

the

—56—

return during the month of April, 1958.

Similarly,

in 1971, the estimated

dividend yield coefficients are positive in all estimated equations. They

suggest that when comparing two firms, one with a dividend yield one point
higher

than the other, the high yield firm would have earned a return about

one and one—half percentage points greater than that
Unfortunately, none of the estimated coefficients is
from zero at the 95

percent

of the low—yield firm.

significantly different

confidence level. This may

in

part reflect the

difficulties of identifying the times when new information was revealed, as
well as the inherent imprecision associated with the use of monthly data.
The 19614 budget speech had

returns

much weaker effects on the differential

between high and low payout firms. The one— and four—month event

have tiny coefficients, and the somewhat larger 2-month variable,
includes both the event month for the budget speech and the previous

variables

which

month, when the election took place, has a larger coefficient
only

slightly

but

a t—statistic

greater than one. This event, as we noted above, had effects on

both the tax treatment of high and low—payout shares. Under the assumption that
capital
should

gains taxes

were paid at very

low effective rates, however, the reform

have reduced the value of high—yield firms. It remains somewhat

surprising that this effect does not leave a stronger

trace in the data.

of the major difficulties in any event study is identifying the
times when information was actually revealed to market participants. To the
One

extent that conditional upon electoral outcomes, budget proposals were easy to

anticipate, the elections of l961 and 1970 may have been the important "events"
for the revaluation of different securities. We
experimented with these events,
as well as

the

actual budget speeches, in our empirical work. and again found

—57—

small revaluation effects, generally in the predicted directions, around election periods.

The weak evidence in this section confirms the conclusion of the preceding section that changes in the tax rules facing typical investors have

important effects on the market valuation of dividends. As discussed at the
end of the last section, this conclusion is probably applicable to the U.S. as

well as Britain. We therefore are led to reject the tax irrelevance view as a
model for analyzing the role of dividend taxes. In the next two sections, we
examine the two remaining views of the effects of dividend taxation.

—58—

V.

Dividend Taxes and Corporate Dividend Policy
The evidence presented in the last two sections suggests that divi-

dend tax changes alter the stock market's relative valuation of dividends and

capital gains. It constitutes a partial refutation of the "tax irrelevance"

view,

which argues that tax avoidance by individuals, coupled with ex—day

trading by brokers and institutions, should eliminate any tax—induced

valuation effects. However, the finding that taxes influence security returns
does not enable us to distinguish between the "tax capitalization" and the
"traditional"

views of dividend taxation. Both assume that dividend taxes are

capitalized into share prices and reflected in market returns. These two
views differ in their predictions about how dividend tax changes will affect
corporate

financial and investment decisions. The tax capitalization view

suggests that neither financial nor real choices will be influenced by a

in dividend taxes, while the traditional view predicts that both the

reduction
payout

reform.

ratio and the level of corporate investment will respond to a tax
In the next two sections, we examine the direct effects of postwar

British dividend tax changes, first on corporate dividend payout and then on
real investment decisions.

The tax capitalization view derived corporate dividend payments as a
residual, the difference between current profits and the firm's investment

demands. Assuming that all

investment

could be financed from retained ear-

nings, we showed in Section I that a permanent dividend

not

tax reduction would

affect the firm's investment decisions. Funds for investment are already

inside the firm and therefore subject to eventual dividend taxation.

While a

—59—

permanent reduction in dividend taxes raises the value of these claims on
resources within the corporate sector, it does not alter the rules for

investing these resources so as to maximize the firm's value. Since dividend
taxation affects neither investment, the capital stock, nor current profitability, It cannot have any effect on D = (1—i

)n

—

I.

The tax irrelevance view

suggests that changes in the investor tax preference ratio should have no

effect on corporate payout decisions. Discriminatory corporate taxes,
however, could alter the level of dividend payments, since they cannot be
laundered by tax—conscious investors.

The traditional view, by comparison, predicts that any permanent
change in the effective marginal dividend tax rate will affect corporate

payout decisions. Dividend policy is chosen by balancing the marginal reduction in the firm's value due to higher investor tax liabilities against the
marginal increase in value due to changes in the rturn, p(D/(l—'r)ll),

required by investors. A dividend tax reduction will lower the cost of
obtaining further reductions in the required return and therefore should
increase the firm's payout ratio.

The effects of a temporary reduction in the dividend tax are

somewhat different. In the tax capitalization view, the cost of capital
depends on the expected change in the equilibrium value of marginal q. Just
before an increase in the dividend tax, firms will anticipate capital losses

from holding corporate capital, and will reduce their investment activity. By
reducing I but leaving fl(K) unchanged, such a change in investment activity
would raise the observed dividend payout ratio of the corporate sector.

—60—

Similarly, immediately prior to a dividend tax reduction, firms would expect
to gain substantially from the upward revaluation of marginal q, and would

therefore invest. This would lead to a reduction in dividend payments prior
to a dividend tax cut.

The traditional view also predicts changes in payout ratios as a

of temporary dividend tax reductions. However, temporary and permanent
changes would cause the same proportionate reduction in dividend payout, since
the first order condition for optimal dividend choice, equation (l.17a),
result

depends only- on current values of the tax parameters.

This conclusion

depends critically upon the assumption that capital 1narketpartic1pants-se
only the current period's dividend yield in choosing the appropriate discount
rate for the firm's earnings.

If instead investors chose p on the basis of the average dividend
yield for a few adjacent periods, then the firm would be able to raise its

value by altering the timing of its dividend payments. For example, if the
discount rate is determined by the value of (ZD)/(E(l—t)ll) during a several—

quarter period, then the firm could raise its dividend payments during the
less heavily taxed period, compensating for this with a reduction in dividend

payout during high—tax periods, and could raise its total value. This would
induce swings in dividend policy around the introduction of temporary dividend
tax changes, as well as when permanent but anticipated dividend taxes were

introduced. The tax irrelevance view predicts dividend re—timing when the
corporate tax rules change, but predicts no effect of personal tax reforms.

V.A Data and Methods
To test the payout predictions of the different views, we examined

—61—

the

aggregate payout behavior of Britain's Industrial and Commercial

Companies. The tests reported in this section employ seasonally unadjusted
data on gross dividend payments and corporate profits. We draw heavily on
Poterba (19Sla), where the data are described in greater detail.

In the

United States, the dividend payout ratio is defined as the ratio of dividend

payments, before personal tax, to corporate profits after corporate tax. In
Britain, this definition is misleading because corporate taxes, hence after—
tax profits, depend upon the firm's payout policy when a non—classical cor-

porate tax system is in effect. The dividend payout concept which we employ
is the ratio of gross dividends paid to the maximum feasible gross dividends

of the firm.33 This definition ensures that movements in the payout ratio
measure changes in the fraction of their dividend paying capacity which firms

are using, and not changes in the corporate tax treatment of dividends. Under
a

tax system like that in the U.S., it

of

is equivalent to the standard measure

the payout ratio.

Explicit

dividend controls were in force for much of the 1970s, and

they substantially reduced the gross dividends paid by the Industrial and

Commercial companies. The presence of dividend controls can contaminate any
investigation of the relationship between dividends, profits, and the tax

code. To avoid these difficulties, we report regression results for two

33mis is one of the dividend payout concepts suggested by
Feldstein (1970).

Evidence in Poterba
reduction

(l981a) suggests as much as a fifty percent

in desired dividends.

—62—

separate time periods. The first, 1955—1972, is prior to the introduction of
dividend controls. The second sample period includes the pre—control period
as well as data for 1980—1983, the period after the dividend controls had been

lifted. In using data for 1980—83

allow for the possibility of structural

change in the payout relation by adding a dummy for the post 1980 period.
The equation that we estimate is:

loD =

(5.1)

+

1lOD

+

31°t + 1og(Y1/y)
+
6°t÷i + 7tlOgO + Ut

21°t_14

+ 85lOO

+

where D denotes gross dividends, Y equals maximum

feasible

dividends, and 0 is

the total tax preference ratio. Lagged dividend and profit terms are included
to allow for flexible adjustment dynamics toward the new steady state. The

estimated equations also include seasonal dummy variables. The equation was
estimated
order

both by

serial

specification

OLS and with a maximum likelihood

correct ion

for second—

correlation; the results were not particularly sensitive to the

of

the disturbance term.

V.B Results
Estimates of equation (5.1) are reported in Table 6.

They clearly

demonstrate the importance of dividend taxes in determining the extent to

which firms utilize their dividend—paying capacity. Equations estimated
without any allowance for short—run adjustments in dividend policy around tax
changes suggest long run dividend payment elasticities with respect to the
total tax preference ratio of between 2.6 and 1.8, depending on the specifica-

tion and time period chosen. There is also evidence that tax policy changes

Motes:

8.

7.

6.

5.

14•

3.

(.095)

.1459
(.313)

(.086)

(.102)

.81414

(.270)

(.068)

—.125
(.0141)

.001

(.072)

—.195
(.087)

(.038)
—.0142

—.0814

.036

(.066)

—.150

(.066)

(.082)

—.0140

(.073)

————

————

Duinnr

Post—1980

——

(.ii)(.ii)

——

—.214 —.147

——

(.io)(.ii)

—.26 _.514

——

(.16)(.15)

——

—.31 —.36

——

(.15)(.15)

——

——

—.39 —.37

p2

p1

.89

.814

.91

.86

.89

.88

.92

.91

17852

15380

10581

11883

7832

9065

All

equations

are estimated using quarterly, seasonally unadjusted data on the dividend payments and maximum
1—14 were estimated for the period
possible gross dividends of the Industrial and Commercial Companies. Equations
The Y
1956:1—1972:3, while those in rows 5—8 also include the post—dividend control period, 1980:1 to 1983:2.
Y
include
terms.
also
lagged
Equations
variable is maximum feasible gross dividends, described in the text.

1983*

(.589)

.321

.372

.501

1.056

1955—

(.1148)

(.087)

(.096)

.5140

(.750)

.1489

1983*

.302

(.095)

1.963

(.558)

—.730
(.2143)

.177

(.098)

.280

(.083)

.609

.6145

(.281)

(.1148)

(.0814)

(.988)

(.729)

—.8147

.1407

.14149

.3149

(.118)

1955—

1955—
1983*

1955—
1983*

1.877

(.109)

(.113)

(.514r)

1972

.055

.265

.390

.14814

(.069)

.092

(.071)

(.1146)

.561

(.205)

.083

.122
(.070)

(.1014)

1955—

1972

(.1405)

.956

(.352)

.689

iog(Y)

Evidence

.390

(.096)

—.792

(.1420)

—.833

1og(O1)
ln.og(e)

British

.1482

(.1149)

.309

(.612)

.811
(.i314)

1955—

(.098)

(.113)

.120

.289

.608

.170

1955—
1972

(.1o14)

(.080)

(.107)

2.

.196

1og(D_4)

.396

log(D_1)

iog(8)

.14114

.398
(.687)

1955—
1972

1.

Constant

qn.

Time

Period

Dividend Payments and Tax Reforms,

Table 6

0

—64—

induce short—run adjustments in dividend payout. An anticipated ten percent
increase in the tax preference ratio, corresponding to roughly a four percent

reduction in the shareholder tax rate on dividends, causes dividends to fall
by eight percent of their planned value in the quarter immediately prior to

the tax reform. Moreover, there Is a somewhat smaller transitory increase in
the level of dividend payments immediately after a tax change is instituted.
Controlling for short—term adjustments in payout policy alters the estimated

steady—state effects of a dividend tax change. The long—run elasticity of
dividend payout with respect to the tax preference ratio declines to between
1.03 and 2.05 in the dividend equations which incorporate changes in the tax
rates.

The dividend equations estimated for the early sample period,
1955—72, yield plausible models of the elasticity of dividends with respect to

profits. They indicate a long—run elasticity of gross dividends with respect
to maximum

this

feasible dividends of between .5

and .8, and

the hypothesis that

elasticity is unity can never be rejected. Less plausible results emerge

from the regression models which include post—1980 data. Estimates of the
long—run maximum dividend elasticity are substantially lover than those for
the earlier sample, and negative estimates are obtained in two of the four

reported equations. The hypothesis that this elasticity is unity still cannot
be rejected, however, in either of the equations which were estimated with an

AR2 error structure. Poterba (198ia) suggests that the low maximum dividend
elasticities are probably due to divergences between accounting profits and

real profits at the end of the sample period. Accounting profits are used in

—65—

the construction of maximum

feasible dividends.

The evidence on dividend payout and tax policy reported above did
not distinguish between changes in the investor tax preference ratio and the
effect of varying corporate tax rates on retained and distributed earnings.
The tax capitalization and traditional view predict that changes in either of

these tax parameters should affect dividend payout, while the "tax
irrelevance" view suggests that only corporate tax changes should affect dividends.

Poterba (l981a) tests the hypothesis that investor tax preference

changes affect dividend payout. Although the effect of corporate tax changes

can be estimated ire precisely than investor tax effects, both types of tax
reforms influence corporate dividend decisions. This provides further evidence against the tax irrelevance hypothesis, as

view,

well as the capitalization

and buttresses the traditional view of dividend taxation.

The British time—series data is not the only source of variation in

dividend tax rates.35 American dividend taxes were substantially lower before
World War II, and particularly before 1936, than in subsequent years. Brittain
(1966) and Poterba and Summers (19814b) document that changes in weighted

average marginal tax rates on dividends in the U.S. have a significant impact

on corporate dividend policies. Brittain (1966) concluded that "rising individual tax rates [between 1920 and 19601 were found to depress dividends.

Most estimates showed [theyl were sufficient to account for the pronounced
downward trend in payout, that which occurred between the late 1920s and the

early postwar period.[p.l96l" This finding provides further

evidence

in

35A number of studies have demonstrated that British tax reforms
have influenced payout policy. These include Feldstein (19T0), King (1971,
197T), and Pane (1975).

—66—

favor of the traditional view of dividend taxes. In Poterba and Summers

(l98lb),

we argue that the failure of dividend payout ratios to rise over the

past 15 years is strong evidence against Miller and Scholes' (1978, 1982) claim
that the U.S. income tax has evolved towards a consumption tax.

—67—

VI. Investment Behavior and Dividend Taxes
The evidence in the last section focused on the direct linkages bet-

ween tax rates and dividend payout. One of the principal mtivations for our
interest iii dividend taxes, however, was their possible impact on corporate

investment decisions. In this section we summarize the results of Poterba and
Summers (1983) on the relationship between "Tobin's q" and the investment beha-

vior of British firms. This allows us to obtain further evidence on the difference between the traditional and the tax capitalization views.

These two views predict different steady state values of the ratio of

the market value of corporate equity divided by its replacement cost. Because
the level of investment activity can be shown to depend upon the difference between the current value of q and Its steady state level, the two views yield different specifications for the investment function.

In Section I, we derived the value of marginal q predicted by the

tax capitalization view. Under a classical corporate tax regime similar to
that prevailing in the United States, q = (1—m)/(l—z).

Managers ask "will

this project raise share values by as much as it reduces the after—tax dividend income of shareholders" and they undertake some investment projects which

do not raise the firm's value by the project's full cost. In equilibrium,
therefore, the market value of the firm will equal (1—m)/(1.-z) times the repla-

cement value of the firm's assets. In contrast, under the traditional view,

the equilibrium value of marginal q is always unity. If marginal and
average q are equai,6 the total value of the firm will therefore equal the
full replacement cost of its capital in place.

6Hayashi (1982) presents the formal conditions for equality between the average and marginal values of q.

—68--

VI.A

Data and

Methods

As argued by Keynes (1936) and Tobin (1969), and justified formally
in the context of an adjustment cost model by Hayashi (1982) and Sutmners
(1981), the level of investment will depend on the deviation of Tobin's q from

its equilibrium value, qe• Thus, it is natural to postulate that:

=

(6.i)

i(.

— qe)

where V/pK is the ratio of the market value of a firm to its replacement
cost, or "'robin's q." Since alternative views about dividend taxes have dif-

fering implications for the level of qe by comparing alternative specifications of qe in (6.1) we can in principle distinguish these views.
Before turning to the empirical estimates, one additional complication

remains. Our discussion so far has ignored debt finance and corporate taxes.
In Poterba and Summers (1983) we show how these considerations influence qe under

the alternative investment models. In particular, we show that the
appropriate investment functions under the two views are:
=

(6.2)

f(Q) f{(.
=

+

u +b

—

+u

b

and
(6.3)

K

=

(l

(v—s)

+

—

where u is the present value of all depreciation allowances and
investment
incentives on a one pound investment, t

is

the corporate tax rate on retained

earnings, b is the fraction of investment financed with debt, and B is the present value of remaining depreciation allowances on existing capital. The only

—69—

difference between the two equations Is that the tax capitalization hypothesis
implies the presence of a term i/8 multiplying the market value of equity,
correcting for the effects of tax capitalization in affecting the firm's
investment decisions.

The investment imde1s which we estimate take the simple form

=O

(6.Ie)

+ i'rc,t +

rc,t—i

+

and
=

(6.5)

O + lTRAD,t

+

2TRAD,t—l

+

Ct

These specifications are derivet and explained in greater detail in Poterba and
Summers (1983), where the

.nterpreted

as a random shock to the cost—of—

adjustment function. The appea of the "q" investment approach is that while
other approaches to estimating :1e investment impact of personal taxes require

us to specify the firm's cost of capital, the "q" formulation does not. Since
the investor's discount rate p enters the cost of capital and is unobservable,
efforts to define the cost of capital are prone to error.
Our first tests of the two views are based on comparisons of the fit
of (6.4) and

(6.).

Because all

firms

may not be on the same margin, the aggre-

gate investment function might be a weighted average of the capitalization and

the traditional investment functions. In order to allow for this possibility
we also specified an investment equation with a weight of a on (6.5) and (i—a)
on (6.4).

This weighted average investment equation takes the form

—70—

ii

(6.6)

i'= o

+

V-B

(i—i)

) +

where L is the lag operator. The traditional view of the dividend tax is
supported y estimates of & near unity. If, however

is close to zero, then

tax capitalization would appear to be the sore appropriate model for investment
decisions.

To estimate these models, we used annual data on the Industrial

and Commercial Companies in Great Britain for the period 1950—1980. Our investment variable, I/K, is the gross investment rate for these companies. The
values of

and TC were constructed using financial market data provided tr

the Bank of England. Tax rates were measured using the weighted average
marginal tax rates which were described in Section II.

VI.B Results
The results of estimating investment models with both sets of Q

variables are shown in Table T. They are based on revised data and
therefore d!ffer (trivially) from earlier findings in Poterba and Summers

(1983). The findings demonstrate the superiority of the Q specification based
on the "traditional view" of dividend taxation. In each regression pair, the
equation fits better than the

specification. In addition, the

models suggest a larger effect of Q on investment activity. These results
favoring the traditional model are buttressed by other specifications reported
in Poterba and Summers (1983).

The most direct test of the two models comes from estimating the

weighting parameter in (6.6). The point estimates for this equation are shown

Traditional

Capitalization

AR2

IV

IV

AR2—IV

AR2—IV

(2b)

(3a)

(3b)

(14a)

Rb)

Traditional

Capitalization

is

details.

0.37

(0.63)

0.98

(0.714)
1.141

(0.68)
0.97
(0.25)

6.146

(0.20)

+

2

+

Ut

= ThAD TC

ndel

i.014

(0.27)

1.16

(0.29)

(0.214)

correspond to the

6.80
(0.30)

(0.142)

1.20

(0.614)
—

1.06 —0.37
(0.20) (0.20)

1.15 —0.143
(0.20) (0.20)

—

—

—

0.62

(0.214)

(0.17)

1.63

—0.50

1.28

6.20

6.58

—

—

1.25 —0.145
(0.18) (0.18)

—

—

2

(0.17)

'

0.51

2

(0.19)

(0.18)

0.90
(0.19)

0.61
(0.18)

(0.37)

0.66
(0.38)

B2(xlO

(0.38)

)

0.96

2

1.28

(0.38)

1.014

1(xl0

6.90
(0.31)

(0.141)

6.89

6.61
(0.17)

6.51
(0.23)

o

398

575

1558

21476

361

1477

11470

2167

SSR14

(x10

)

.

1.83

2.00

0.63

0.514

1.70

1.69

0.146

0.37

D.W.

—

—

—

0.91

0.88

0.65

0.149

R2

to follow a second order AR process. All equations are estimated for the period
standard errors are shown in parentheses. See Poterba and Summers (1983) for further

1

allowed

+

1950—1980, and

where u.

=

estimated equations

(I/K)

The

Capitalization

PR2

(2a)

Notes:

Traditional

OLS

(ib)

Traditional

Capitalization

Dividend
Tax View

OLS

Estimati on
Method

(la)

Eq.

Investment Equations Under the Competing Dividend Tax Views

Table I

—72—

below:

{i.io
(6.7)

= 6.V + (11.28
(.21)

+

l.16L)

—

.10

(i

F

(.I2) (.i2)

+ u + b — 1

I+C
)

t

B2 = .68

SSR = 1ao

The hypothesis that a = 1 cannot be rejected at standard significance levels,
suggesting that we cannot reject the traditional view's investment equation.
The point hypothesis that a

0, corresponding to tax capitalization view, is

however decisively rejected by the investment data. It appears that the bulk
of investment decisions are made by corporations who act as if marginal
investment is financed through new share issues.

This finding confirms the analysis in the preceding section

suggesting that the traditional view of dividend taxes is nst consistent with
the British experience. It does not appear that firms lower their investment
thresholds when they can

finance

investment out

suggested by the tax capitalization hypothesis.

of

retained earnings as

-.73—

VII. Conclusions
Our empirical tests using data on security returns, payout behavior,

and investment decisions all point to a common conclusion. The traditional
view of dividend taxes, which regards them as an additional corporate tax bur-

den, provides the best approximation to their effects. We are led to reject
models of the economic effects of dividend taxes which suggest that dividend
payments have no adverse tax consequences, as well as those which argue that
firms pay dividends because money is "trapped" within the corporate sector.
While these conclusions are based on British data, our comparison of the tax
laws in Britain and the United States suggests that they are likely to be
applicable in the Anierican context as weii.3T

Our results have important implications for tax policy as well as

dividend policy and valuation. They imply that the total tax burden on corporate income includes both corporate taxes arid dividend and capital gains

taxes levied on corporate shareholders. In an economically meaningful sense,

dividends are double—taxed. A reduction in dividend tax rates would increase
dividend payout and corporate investment, and lower firms' cost of capitai.8
A further implication of these results is that estimates of the total

3TOur analysis is corroborated by the work of Long (l9T8) and
Poterba (l98lb) on the valuation of securities issued by the Citizens
Utilities Company. Due to a quirk in the tax law this company was allowed to
issue both shares with taxable and nontaxable dividends. Long (19T8) shows
that the taxable securities sell for more than the nontaxable securities.
Poterba (l98lib) shows using ex—day evidence that marginal investors in taxable
shares appear to be taxed. These facts can only be reconciled in terms of a
dividend preference model, implicitly the traditional view.

8Th1s suggests an important difficulty with many previous studies of investment behavior. Most of the econometric studies proceeding within
the flexible accelerator framework pioneered by Jorgenson (1963) and Hall arid
Jorgenson (196T) has ignored the role of personal tax variables. While this
omission may not be too important for the United States, where tax rates on

—74—

tax burden on corporate capital income which assume that dividend taxes do not
have a marginal impact on retentions—financed investment, such as the calcula-

tions in Auerbach (1983c) and King and Fullerton (l98), significantly

understate the tax burden on corporate income. Estimates such as those
reported by Jorgenson and Sullivan (1983) and Hulten and Wykoff (1983), which

ignore dividend taxation entirely, are similarly flawed. The empirical
question of which dividend tax rate to use in calculating effective corporate

tax rates is difficult to answer with any precision. However, our findings in
Section III suggest that the weighted average approach used by King(1977),
Feldstein and Summers (1979), and Feldstein, Dicks—Mireaux, and Poterba (1983)

may be satisfactory. Taking this approach renders invalid the frequently—
quoted conclusion that the United States no longer taxes corporate investment
income.

Our results also suggest that measures directed at providing dividend
tax relief would reduce the inefficiencies associated with the double taxation

of corporate capital income. These inefficiencies include distortions in the
allocation of capital between corporate and noncorporate uses, distortions in
the choice between present and future consumption, distortions in corporate
financial policy,39 and distortions in the allocation of risk bearing. In considering the merits of dividend tax relief, however, it is necessary to weigh
these efficiency gains against the equity effects and the efficiency costs of

shareholders have evolved slowly over time, it is potentially critical for
modelling investment in Britain or other nations in which radical tax changes
have taken place.
39Estimates of the intersectoral distortions due to capital
income taxation are found in Harberger (1962) and Fullerton, etal. (1981).
For evidence on distortions in Intertemporal choices, see Feldstein (1978) and
Summers (1981).

—75—

alternative revenue sources.

Miller and Scholes (1978) argue that the failure of the business community to strongly support Carter administration proposals calling for dividend

tax relief constitutes evidence that dividend taxes are not burdensome. We
would suggest the alternative hypothesis that this failure is attributable to
the same agency problems which lead shareholders to require dividend payments
in

the first instance. Dividend payments are the shareholders' way of moni-

toring nnagers. When dividend taxes are reduced, shareholders find monitoring
cheaper

and do more of it. The failure of corporate nnagers to lobby for

dividend relief reflects their decision to lobby for their own rather than

their shareholder's interest. An alternative possibility is that managers saw
dividend relief as an alternative to even more attractive forms of corporate

tax

reduction.

Our analysis has abstracted from two important aspects of reality,

clientele

effects and firms' use of debt finance. Neither of these abstrac-

tions accounts for our qualitative conclusions. Evidence presented by Blume,
Crockett, and Friend (19Th) and Lewellen, et. al. (1978) suggests that clien-

tele effects are not large. Clienteles might attenuate the burden of dividend
taxes, but would not eliminate it unless taxpaying investors held only zero

dividend stocks. The data clearly reject this possibility. With respect to
debt finance, it would be straightforward to append to our formulation of the
firm's decision problem either a "Miller model," as in Miller (19T7), or a
debt—capacity model (as in Gordon and Malkiel (1981)) in which bankrupty risk

limited debt—equity ratios. Neither approach would alter our conclusions.

—76—

Nonetheless, it would be valuable to analyze the effects of' dividend taxation in

a richer nodel than the one we have presented here.

Our findings suggest the importance of providing both a theoretical

motivation for, and empirical nasures of, the investors' "dividend preference
function." Theoretical explanations might be further developed along the
lines of the incentive signalling approach to corporate finance. While
models explaining why dividends are paid have been suggested, this work has not
yet reached the point of generating empirically falsifiable predictions about

the effects of varying dividend yields, either across time or across firms, on
required returns.

The nost promising direction for empirical research appears to
involve examining the effects of dividend yield on the required return of

dividend paying firms, during periods when dividends are not paid)0 The
extent to which it is appropriate to control for risk in such a calculation is

unclear, since higher yields may reduce required returns precisely because

they reduce risk. We are currently pursuing research along these lines.

'OElton, Gruber, and Rentzler (1983) report some investigations
along these lines.

—77—

References
Ben Amoaku—Adu (1983). "The Canadian Tax Reform and Its Effects on Stock
Prices." Journal of Finance 38, 1669—76.

Alan Auerbach (1979). "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 93, 13316.
Alan Auerbach (1983a) "Stockholder Tax Rates and Firm Attributes." Journal
of Public Economics 21, 107—121.
Alan Auerbach (1983b). "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of
Capital." Journal of Economic Literature 21, 9O5_1O.

Alan Auerbach (1983c). "Corporate Taxation in the U.S." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1983:2.
Sudipto Bhattacharya (1979). "Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and
the Bird in the Hand Fallacy." Bell Journal of Economics 10, 259—70.
Fischer Black (1976). "The Dividend Puzzle." Journal of Portfolio Management,
.tinter.

Fischer Black and Myron Scholes (1913). "The Behavior of Security Returns
Around Ex—dividend Days." Unpublished manuscript, University of
Chicago.
Fischer Black and Myron Scholes (1972k). "The Effects of Dividend Policy and
ividend Yield on Common Stock Prices and Returns." Journal of
Financial Economics 1, 1—22.

Marshall Blume, Jean Crockett, and Irwin Friend (19Th). "Stockownership in
the United States: Characteristics and Trends." Survey of Current
Business 51w, 16140.

David Bradford (1981). "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax On
Corporate Distributions." Journal of Public Economics 15, 1—22.
Michael Brennan (1970). "Taxes, Market Valuation, and Corporate Financial
Policy." National Tax Journal 23, 1l7_27.

John Brittain (1966). Corporate Dividend Policy (Washington: The Brookings
Institution).

Central Statistical Office (1983). Economic Trends: Annual Supplement, 1983
(London: HMso).
George Constantinides (1983). "Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax."
Econometrica 51, 611—36.

—78—

Corporation Tax Green Paper (1982). Command Paper 8156 (London: HMso).
Kenneth Eades, Patrick Hess and Han Kim (198t). "On Interpreting Security
Returns During the Ex—dividend Period." Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.
Jereiry Edwards (1981). "Does Dividend Policy Matter?" Fiscal Studies 5, 1—17.

Jerenr Edwards and Michael Keen (1981). "Wealth Maximization and the Cost
of Capital." Quarterly Journal of Economics XCIX, 211_211.
Edwin Elton and Martin Gruber (1970). "Marginal Stockholder Tax
Rates and the Clientele Effect." Review of Economics and Statistics
52, 68714.
Edwin Elton, Martin Gruber, and Joel Rentzler (l983b). "A Simple Examination of
the Empirical Relationship Between Dividend Yields and Deviations from the
CAPM." Journal of Banking and Finance 7, 135-.16.

Eugene Fama and H. Babiak (1968). "Dividend Policy: An Empirical Analysis."
Journal of the American Statistical Association 63, 1132—1161.
Eugene Fama, Lawrence Fisher, Michael Jensen, and Richard Roll (1969). "The
Adjustment of Stock Prices to New Information." International Economic
Review 10, 1—21.
George Fane (1975). "The Determination of Quarterly Dividend Payments in the
U.K." In G. A. Renton, (ed.), Modelling the Econonr (London: Heinemann),
5 37—551.

Daniel Feenberg (1981). "Does the Investment Interest Limitation Explain the
Existence of Dividends?" Journal of Financial Economics 9, 265—69.

Martin Feldstein (1970). "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behavior." Review of
Economic Studies 37, 57—72.
Martin Feldstein (1978). "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation."
Journal of Political Econonr 86, 529—51.
Martin Feldstein and Lawrence Summers (1979). "Inflation and the Taxation of
Capital Income in the Corporate Sector." National Tax Journal 32,

1457O.
Martin Feldstein, Louis Dicks—Mireaux, and James Poterba (1983). "The
Effective Tax Rate and the Pretax Rate of Return." Journal of Public
Economics 21, 129—58.
Don Fullerton, A. Thomas King, John Shaven, and John Whalley (1981).
"Corporate Tax Integration in the United States: A General Equilibrium
Approach." American Economic Review 71, 677—91.

—79—

Roger Gordon and David Bradford (1980). "Taxation and the Stock Market
Valuation of Capital Gains and Dividends: Theory and Empirical Results."
Journal of Public Economics 114, 109—36.

Roger Gordon and Burton Malkiel (1981). "Corporation Finance." In Henry J.
Aaron and Joseph A. Pechman, eds., How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior
(Washington: The Brookings Institution).
Jerry Green (1980). "Taxation and the Ex—dividend Day Behavior of Common
Stock Prices." NBER Working Paper No. 1496, Cambridge, Mass.

Robert Hall and Dale Jorgenson (1967). "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior."
American Economic Review 53, 2147_59.

Robert Hamada and Myron Scholes (19814). "Taxes and Corporte Financial
Management." In Edward Altman and Marti Subrahmanyam, eds., Recent Advances
in Corporate Finance (Homewood, IL: Dow—Jones Irwin).

Arnold C. Harberger (1962). "The Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax."
Journal of Political Econortr TO, 215—140.

Funiio Hayashi (1982). "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation." Econometrica 50, 213_214.

Patrick Hess (1982). "The Ex—dividend Day Behavior of Stock Returns: Further
Evidence on Tax Effects." Journal of Finance 37, 14145—56.

House of Commons (1971). ort of the Select Committee on Corporation

,

House of Commons Paper 622 (London: HMso).

Dale Jorgenson and Martin Sullivan (1981). "Inflation and Corporate Capital
Recovery." In Charles Hulten, ed., preciation, Inflation, and the
Taxation of Income from Capital (Washington: Unban Institute FreT.
Avner Kalay (1982). "The Ex—dividend Day Behavior of Stock Prices: A
Re—examination of the Clientele Effect." Journal of Finance 37,1059—70.
Costas Kaplanis. "Ex—dividend Day Equilibrium and Taxes." Unpublished
manuscript, London Business School, 1983.

John Maynard Keynes. The General Theo of Employment, Interest,
London: Macmillan, 1936).

and Mo

Nabil Khoury and Keith Smith (1977). "Dividend Policy and the Capital Gains
Tax in Canada." Journal of Business AdministratiOn 8, 19—32.
A Comment."
Mervyn King (1971). "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behavior —
Review of Economic Studies 38, 377—80.
Mervyn King (19714). "Taxation and the Cost of Capital." Review of
Economic Studies 141, 21—35.

—80—

Mervyn King (1917). Public Policy and the Corporation (London: Chapman
and Hall).

Mervyn King (1983). "Advance Corporation Tax and Incentives: A Note."
Unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics.
Mervyn King and Don Fullerton (i98L'. The Taxation of Income from Captial: A
Compartive Study of the U.S., U.K., Sweden, and West Germany (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
Mervyn King, Michael Naldrett and James Poterba (19814). "The U.K. Tax System."
In Mervyn King and Don Fullerton (eds.), The Taxation of Income from
Capital: A Comparative Study of the U.S., U.K., Sweden and West Germany
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Josef Lakonishok and Theo Vermaelen (1983). "Tax Reform and Ex—dividend
Day Behavior." Journal of Finance 38, 1157—79.
Wilbur Lewellen, Kenneth Stanley, Ronald Lease, and Gary Schlarbaum (1978).
"Some Direct Evidence on the Dividend Clientele Phenomenon." Journal
of Finance 33, 1385—99.

John Lintner (1956). "Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends,
Retained Earnings, and Taxes." American Economic Review 146, 97—113.
Robert Litzenberger and Krishna Ramaswaniy (1979). "The Effect of Personal
Taxes and Dividends on Capital Asset Prices: Theory and Empirical
Evidence." Journal of Financial Economics 7, 163—95.
Robert Litzenberger and Krishna Ramaswamy (1980). "Dividends, Short Selling
Restrictions, Tax—induced Investor Clienteles, and Market Equilibrium."
Journal of Finance 35, 1469—82.
Robert Litzenberger and Krishna Rarnaswamy (1982). "The Effects of Dividends
on Common Stock Prices: Tax Effects or Information Effects?"
Journal of Finance 37, 1429—14143.

John B. Long, Jr. (1978). "The Market Valuation of Cash Dividends: A Case
to Consider."
Journal of Financial Economics 6, 235—614.
Ignacio Mas (19814). "Anomalous Share Price Movements Around Ex—Dividend Days:
The British Evidence," unpublished S.B. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technolor, Cambridge, MA.

Cohn Mayer (1982). "The Structure of the Corporation Tax in the U.K."
Fiscal Studies 3, 121—142.

Charles McClure (1977). Must Corporate Income Be Taxed Twice? (Washington:
Brookings Institution).

—81—

Merton Miller (19T7). "Debt and Taxes." Journal of Finance 32 261—75.
Merton Miller and Frarico Modigliani (1961). "Dividend Policy, Growth, and the
Valuation of Shares." Journal of Business 314, 1411—33.

Merton Miller and Kevin Rock (1982). "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric Infor—
mation." Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.

Merton Miller and Myron Scholes (1978). "Dividends and Taxes." Journal of
Financial Economics 6, 333614.
Merton Miller and Myron Scholes (1982). "Dividends and Taxes: Some Empirical
Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 90, 1182—142.
James Poterba (l9814a). "Public Policy and Corporate Dividend Behavior: The
Postwar British Experience." MIT Working Paper, Cambridge, MA. 19814.
James Poterba (19814b). "The Citizens Utilities Case: A Further Dividend Puzzle." MIT
Working Paper No. 339, Cambridge, MA. 19814.

James Poterba and Lawrence Summers (1983). "Dividend Taxes, Corporate
Investment, and Q." Journal of Public Economics 22, 135—61.
James Poterba and Lawrence Summers (l9814a). "New Evidence that Taxes Affect the
Valuation of Dividends." NBER Working Paper No. 1288, Cambridge, MA.
James Poterba and Lawrence Summers (19814b). "Testing Alternative Models of
Dividend Taxation: Time Series Evidence." Work in progress, Cambridge,
MA.

Stephen Ross (1911). "The Determination of Financial Structure: An Incentive—
Bell Journal of Economics 8, 23—140.
Signalling Approach."
Joseph Stiglitz (1980). "The Inefficiency of Stock Market Equilibrium." Unpub—
lished manuscript, Princeton University.

Joseph Stiglitz (1983). "Some Aspects of the Taxation of Capital Gains."
Journal of Public Economics, 21, 257—914.
Lawrence Summers (1981). "Taxation and Capital Accumulation in a Life Cycle
Growth Model." American Economic Review 71, 533—1414.

John Tiley (1978). Revenue Law (Londori Butterworths).
James Tobin (1969). "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory."
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 1, 15—29.

</ref_section>

