                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LABOR MARKET STATUS AND TRANSITIONS DURING THE PRE-RETIREMENT YEARS:
             LEARNING FROM INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES

                                           Arie Kapteyn
                                          James P. Smith
                                          Arthur van Soest
                                           James Banks

                                        Working Paper 13536
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13536


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We are grateful to Tania Andreyeva for research assistance, to Michael Hurd for comments, and to
the National Institutes on Aging (Grant# P01-AG022481-01) and the Social Security Administration,
through the Michigan Retirement Research Center, for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Arie Kapteyn, James P. Smith, Arthur van Soest, and James Banks. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Status and Transitions during the Pre-Retirement Years: Learning from International
Differences
Arie Kapteyn, James P. Smith, Arthur van Soest, and James Banks
NBER Working Paper No. 13536
October 2007
JEL No. C81,I12,J28

                                           ABSTRACT

Many western industrialized countries face strong budgetary pressures due to the aging of the baby
boom generations and the general trends toward earlier ages of retirement. We use the American PSID
and the European Community Household Panel (ECHP) to explain differences in prevalence and dynamics
of self-reported work disability and labor force status. To that end we specify a two-equation dynamic
panel data model describing the dynamics of labor force status and self-reported work disability. When
we apply the U.S. parameters to the equations for the thirteen European countries we consider, the
result is generally that work disability is lower and employment is higher. Furthermore, measures of
employment protection across the different countries suggest that increased employment protection
reduces reentry into the labor force and hence is a major factor explaining employment differences
in the pre-retirement years.


Arie Kapteyn                                      Arthur van Soest
RAND Corporation                                  RAND
1700 Main Street                                  The RAND Corporation
P.O. Box 2138                                     1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                       Santa Monica, CA 90406
kapteyn@rand.org                                  vansoest@rand.org

James P. Smith                                    James Banks
Labor and Pop Studies Program                     Institute for Fiscal Studies
The RAND Corporation                              7 Ridgemount
1776 Main Street                                  London, WC1 7AE U.K.
Santa Monica, CA 90406                            j.banks@ifs.org.uk
smith@rand.org
1. Introduction
       Increasing labor force participation among older workers is an important issue on
the scientific and policy agenda in the U.S. and other industrialized countries. Major
categories of individuals who are out of the labor force at later ages consist of persons
drawing disability benefits, unemployment benefits, and early retirement benefits. Cross-
country differences in the prevalence of early retirement are clearly related to differences
in financial incentives (Gruber and Wise, 2003, Börsch-Supan, 2007). The fraction of
workers on disability insurance is vastly different across countries with similar levels of
economic development and comparable access to modern medical technology and
treatment.
       Health is also a major determinant of economic inactivity, and those who have a
health problem that limits them in their daily activities or in the amount or kind of work
they can do (a “work disability”) are much less likely to work for pay than others
(Stapleton and Burkhauser, 2003). In view of the aging of the work force in developed
countries, reducing work disability among the working population and particularly
among older workers may have a major impact on the sustainability of social security and
health care systems, among other things. Institutional differences in eligibility rules,
workplace accommodation of older or sick workers, or generosity of benefits, contribute
to explaining the differences in disability rolls (cf., e.g., Bound and Burkhauser, 1999,
Autor and Duggan, 2003, and Börsch-Supan, 2007). Recent survey data show, however,
that significant differences between countries are also found in self-reports of work
limiting disabilities and general health (Banks et al. 2007).
       In this paper we use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and
the European Community Household Panel (ECHP) to study the labor force dynamics in
the U.S. and in thirteen European countries. To focus on labor market dynamics in the
pre-retirement years and because these dynamics are likely to differ by gender, we
concentrate on the age group between 40 and 65 and consider males and females
separately. We also investigate the dynamics of work disability (i.e. the extent to which
work disability varies over time and its reversibility) and how this varies across countries.
One of the questions we address is whether we can explain the prevalence of self-




                                              3
reported work disability as a function of individual characteristics, including general
health.
           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the details of the
data that are used are described. Section 3 discusses some pertinent characteristics of
institutions in Europe and the U.S. that relate especially to the incentives and institutions
of work disability programs. Section 4 presents the model that is used to describe labor
force dynamics in the various countries. The model is estimated for each country
separately. Section 5 presents the estimation results. In Section 6, we summarize the
implications of these results by showing simulations, where we assign U.S. parameter
values to the models for the European countries. The implied differences in outcomes can
be seen as a counterfactual simulation of the impact U.S. policies and institutions would
have when implemented in European countries. Section 7 concludes.


2. Data
           Our data come from two sources: the European Community Household Panel
(ECHP) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Both data sets have reasonably
comparable measures of labor force activity and self-assessed work disability for the
countries that will be included in our analysis. We discuss some issues related to the
comparability of measurement of these key concepts in section 5 below.
           The ECHP is an annual longitudinal survey of households in the EU.1 Data were
collected by national statistical agencies under the supervision and coordination of
Eurostat (the statistical office of the EU). Table A1, taken from Eurostat (2003, p.15),
gives an overview of the waves of ECHP in all fifteen countries that participated in the
ECHP project.
           The ECHP started in 1994 and was terminated in 2001. The first wave covered
some 60,500 households and some 130,000 adults aged 16 and above from all countries
except Austria, Finland and Sweden. Austria and Finland were added in the second and
third waves. As of the fourth wave, the original ECHP survey was terminated in
Germany, Luxembourg and the UK. Comparable data for these countries were obtained
from existing national panels. For the UK this was the British Household Panel Survey

1
    See Nicoletti and Peracchi (2002) and Peracchi (2002) for more information on ECHP.


                                                     4
(BHPS), for Germany the Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) and for Luxembourg the
PSELL (Panel socio-économique Liewen zu Lëtzebuerg). For these countries we will use
the existing national panels rather than the few waves of the ECHP. As of the 4th wave,
data for Sweden were obtained from the Swedish Living Conditions Survey. Since this is
not a panel, we will exclude Sweden from our analysis. We will also not use the
Luxembourg data, since it provides no information on self-reported disability.
        The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) has gathered almost 30 years of
extensive economic and demographic data on a nationally representative sample of
approximately 5000 (original) families and 35,000 individuals who live in these families.
Details on labor market activity and family income and its components have been
gathered in each wave since the inception of PSID in 1968. The PSID has been
collecting information on self-reported general health status (the standard five-point scale
from excellent to poor) since 1984 and has always collected good information on work-
related disabilities. To provide comparability in the time period with the EHCP, our
analysis will use the PSID waves between 1995 and 2003. It should be noted that after
the 1999 wave the PSID is no longer annual, but bi-annual.


3. Institutions

    There exists great variation in labor market institutions across OECD countries;
regulations with respect to disability insurance are certainly no exception. To get a very
broad overview for a majority of countries in our sample, Figure 1 reports a crude
measure of the generosity of disability benefits – the fraction of GDP accounted for by
public expenditures on disability benefits. Considerable variation across OECD countries
is readily apparent, with France and Italy spending less than 1% of GDP and three
countries – Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands – spending more than twice that level.
Using this metric, the U.S. ranks lower than any of the OECD countries listed in Figure 1.
The variation spending levels can of course be due to variation in benefit levels or
variation in eligibility, or some combination of both.
        Looking more deeply into international variation than the simple generosity
measure presented above, various dimensions can be distinguished. The main ones are
the loss of earnings capacity required to qualify for benefits and the way in which such


                                             5
loss of earnings capacity is assessed, eligibility requirements based on work or
contribution history, and benefit levels in relation to loss of earnings capacity. Table A2
provides an overview of the main features of disability insurance systems in the countries
we study in this paper.



                      Figure 1: Public Expenditure on disability benefits

           US

       France

          Italy

     Germany

      Portugal

      Belgium

        Spain

           UK

       Austria

   Switzerland

      Sweden

     Denmark

  Netherlands

                  0          0.5         1            1.5             2        2.5            3
                                             Per cent of GDP (1999)

Source: OECD (2003b), Chapter 2.

       Table A2 illustrates the complexity of these disability programs across countries.
For example, while many countries have a basic five years minimum period of eligibility
(for example, Germany, Austria, Italy, Portugal), basic eligibility is as low as six months
in Belgium and one year in France while one is not fully covered unless one has worked
for ten years in the United States. Similarly, while the loss of normal earnings capacity is
sufficient to qualify for eligibility in Spain, one must have a loss of two-thirds of earnings
capacity in France, Belgium, and Portugal.



                                                6
         Not surprisingly, the variation in DI systems identified in Table A2 is correlated
with differences in prevalence of DI receipt across countries and in the disability status of
individuals receiving DI. Börsch-Supan (2007) showed that in a cross-sectional context
variation in incentives and institutional rules across a series of European countries and
the United States can account for differences across these countries in the fractions of
individuals on work disability programs. In contrast, variation in demographic attributes
and health across these countries did little to explain these differences.
         In this paper, we do not attempt to analyze being on the disability rolls but instead
aim at explaining the cross-sectional and dynamic variation across countries in self-
assessed work disability and work. Table 1 shows for 2001 the relation between what is
probably the best single measure of the scope of a country’s disability program, the
fraction of disability benefits as a fraction of GDP, and the fraction of men who self-
report that they have a work disability.2 There appears to be almost no correlation
between these two measures.
Table 1: Expenditures on Disability Insurance and Self-reported male work
disability, 2001
              DI expenditure as a % of               Self-reported male work disability, 40-65,
              GDP                                    2001 (%)
Germany                        1.6                                             40.3
Denmark                        2.7                                             22.0
Netherlands                     4                                              24.5
Belgium                        2.2                                             14.3
France                         1.7                                             20.5
UK                             2.2                                             13.1
Ireland                        1.3                                             15.7
Italy                           2                                               8.0
Greece                         1.6                                             13.3
Spain                          2.3                                             15.5
Portugal                       2.4                                             22.9
Austria                        2.3                                             17.8
Finland                        3.1                                             29.0
U.S.                           1.1                                             19.3
Source: DI expenditures: “Social Safety Nets in the OECD countries”, Worldbank, Social
Safety Net Primer Notes, (25), 2006.; Self-reported male disability: ECHP and PSID data
used in this paper; unbalanced panels, weighted.

2
 The exact question on work disability in ECHP is: “Are you hampered in your daily activities by any
physical or mental health problem, illness or disability?” In the PSID, it is: “Do you have any physical or
nervous condition that limits the type of work or the amount of work you can do?”

                                                      7
Although the incentives and institutions across countries appear to have a great deal to do
with the fraction of workers who are on disability programs, these incentives and
institutions appear to be only weakly related to the fraction of men who claim that they
are work disabled.
        Table A3, taken from a recent OECD study, provides information on some
characteristics of DI recipients for most of the countries we are considering in this paper.
The first column shows that a substantial fraction of the people on DI declare that they
have no work disability. This fraction varies a lot across countries and is particularly
large in Sweden (48.9%) and the U.S. (46.7%). Either people are granted DI benefits
while not acknowledging disability status, or those who recover from their disability are
not able to find a job and instead stay on DI, or some combination of both. The third
column of Table A3 shows indeed that exit rates from DI are extremely low. The UK and
the Netherlands seem to be the exceptions in this respect, but this might have to do with
reforms in the disability insurance system in these countries.
        The second column of Table A3 shows the other side of the coin – many people
who report to have a (moderate or severe) work disability receive neither earnings nor DI
or other benefits. Again, variation across countries is substantial. In Sweden, almost
everyone with a work disability has earnings from work or receives benefits, but in Spain
and Italy, 28 or 29% receive neither of the two. The U.S. has an intermediate position in
this respect.
        Column 4 shows that the expected negative relation between disability and the
chances of being employed holds in all countries: the relative employment rate is always
less than one. Still, there are substantial differences across countries. In Spain, someone
with a work disability is 0.41 times as likely to do paid work as someone without a work
disability, compared to 0.79 in Switzerland. Again, the U.S. is somewhere in the middle
with 0.58. Column 5 shows that there is an earnings differential between workers with
and without a work disability, but in most countries, it is not very large. Here the U.S.




                                              8
and (surprisingly) Sweden are the exceptions – with workers with a disability earning
almost 30% less than workers without disability.3
         On the other hand, for those with a work disability, working seems to be an
effective way of increasing income, as is borne out by column 6. This is particularly true
in the U.S., where the disabled who work have an average income that is 2.84 times as
high as the average income of disabled who do not work. In Europe, the differences are
smaller, but even in Sweden and Denmark, the countries with the lowest income
differentials between working and non-working disabled persons, the difference is still 37
or 38%. These cross-country differences seem to be in line with the generosity of
disability insurance systems (as indicated by Figure 1, for example).



4. The Model

         In this section, we outline our model of the interrelated dynamics of self-reported
work disability and labor force status (work versus no work). The equation for disability
of individual i in time period t is specified as:
                   Dit* = X it' β D + γ DD ' Di ,t −1 + γ WDWi ,t −1 + α iD + ε itD
                                                                                      (1)
                   Dit = 1[D*it > 0]

         Here Dit indicates the presence of self-reported work disability; 0 means no
disability and 1 means disability. Lagged labor force status is denoted by an indicator
variable Wi ,t −1 = 1 if the respondent worked in the previous period and Wi ,t −1 = 0

otherwise. The error terms ε itD are assumed to be independent standard normal; α iD is an

individual effect, normally distributed with variance σ α2 . The ε itD and α iD are assumed

mutually independent and independent of the vector of explanatory variables X it .

         Thus there are two direct sources of persistence in the disability equation: the
lagged dependent variable Di ,t −1 and the unobserved heterogeneity term α iD . We allow for

a lagged effect of work force status on work disability, but not for a contemporaneous
effect. That is, we are effectively assuming no contemporaneous ‘justification bias’ in

3
  A complete analysis of this effect would need to account additionally for differential selection into the
labor market across countries.


                                                               9
self-reported disability (justification bias would imply that people say they have a work
disability to justify their non-work status).
        The second equation explains whether respondents do paid work or not. Labor
force status Wit is explained by a Probit equation as follows:

                Wit* = X it' β W + γ DW Di ,t −1 + γ WW Wi ,t −1 + δ dW Di ,t + α iW + ε itW
                                                                                                     (2)
                Wit = 1[Wit* > 0]
        Thus we allow for both a contemporaneous and a lagged effect of work disability
on labor force status. The assumptions about individual effects and error terms are the
same as before. We do not allow for correlation between the error terms in the two
equations, but we do allow for correlated individual effects. Also here, there are two
direct sources of persistence, lagged labor force status Wi ,t −1 and the individual effect α iW .

        The variance-covariance matrix of the individual effects is unrestricted. For
estimation purposes we parameterize it as follows. Let ui = (uiD , uiW ) ~ N 2 (0, I ) . Then we

specify the vector of individual effects α i = (α iD , α iW ) as α = Λu , with

                        ⎛ λDD           0 ⎞
                      Λ=⎜ W                ⎟,                                                  (3)
                        ⎝ λD           λWW ⎠
a lower triangular matrix. The parameter estimates summarized in the next section
include the estimates of the entries in Λ .
        To account for the initial conditions problem, we follow Heckman (1981), Hyslop
(1999), and Vella and Verbeek (1999) and specify separate equations for wave 1. These
equations have the same exogenous regressors and contemporaneous dependent variables
on the right hand side as the dynamic equations presented above, but do not include the
lagged dependent variables. No restrictions are imposed on the coefficients or their
relation to the coefficients in the dynamic equations. These coefficients are estimated
jointly with the parameters in the dynamic equations and can be seen as nuisance
parameters.
        In the initial condition equations, we include arbitrary linear combinations of the
individual effects in the two dynamic equations. This is the same as including an arbitrary
linear combination of the two entries in ui . The estimated coefficients of these linear
combinations can be seen as nuisance parameters.

                                                           10
         The above equations must be slightly adapted for the PSID data. In the PSID, the
frequency of interviewing was reduced from once a year to once every two years starting
in 1997.4 As a result, for the more recent years a lagged variable in the PSID model refers
to a value two years ago. Hence in the model for the PSID data we include separate
coefficients for the lagged variables for the case that the previous wave is one year ago
and the case that the previous wave is two years ago.5



5. Results

         Our focus in this research is on the dynamics of disability and labor force activity
during the pre-retirement years. These labor market dynamics are likely to be very
different than those that characterize the period of labor market entry when people are
first entering the labor market. Therefore, we estimate our models on samples of people
who are ages forty and over. Separate models are estimated for men and women given
that the dynamics of labor force behavior are potentially very different.
         A problem that requires special attention in an exercise like this is the
international comparability of variable definitions. For example, if schools are organized
in very different ways in different countries (as they are), it would be very difficult to
know what it would mean to make comparisons across countries that ‘assume’ that the
schooling levels of workers are the same.
         For that reason we have only used a very limited set of covariates: age dummies
for the age groups 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64; year dummies; marital status
(married or not, where married includes cohabitation) and two health dummies.
         International comparability of self reported health is a very difficult problem in
itself. Because of this, we have adopted the following simple approach: In the U.S. and
European data respectively we find the weighted frequency distributions for ages 40-65
(balanced panel) in the top panel of Table 2. Based on this we collapse the five categories
into three; combining the first two and the last two, essentially ignoring the wording



4
 To be precise, we use PSID waves 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1999, 2001 and 2003.
5
 To be precise, for the years 1995, 1996, 1997, only the one year lags are included; for the years 1999,
2001, and 2003, only the two year lags are included.


                                                     11
differences. This leads to the distribution of self-reported health in the bottom panel of
Table 2.


Table 2. Self-reported health in the PSID and the ECHP data
                                  Original Classification
                    U.S.                                             E.U.
Excellent               21.3%                   Very good                16.2%
Very good               26.6%                   Good                     43.4%
Good                    29.5%                   Fair                     29.8%
Fair                    10.1%                   Bad                      8.6%
Poor                    2.5%                    Very bad                 2.0%
                                 Combined Classification
                    U.S.                                             E.U.
Excellent                        57.8                  Excellent                 59.6
Good                             29.5                    Good                    29.8
Fair                             12.7                    Fair                    10.6


The health distribution is now similar in the U.S. and the European countries. In the
analysis section below, we discuss what the implications for work disability and labor
market participation would be if health were ‘the same’ in all countries.
       Table A4 summarizes for men and women separately some of the key dynamic
parameters (relating disability and work) estimated from our empirical models. While
there are differences between our estimates for men and women, these tend to be
concentrated in the ‘off-diagonal’ terms – the effects of disability on work status or vice
versa. In most countries (but not all), the effects of lagged disability on current disability
is similar for men and women within each country. To the extent that the effect of lagged
disability on current disability measures the pure transitions of work related health
between the waves, the similarity between men and women may not be that surprising. In
most countries, the effects of lagged employment on current employment are higher for
men than for women. The traditionally more transitory nature of employment for women
would imply a smaller estimated impact of lagged employment.


                                              12
           With the exception of Belgium and Finland, the estimated effects of disability on
employment are somewhat larger (in absolute value) for men than for women. Disability
programs whose generosity depends on a past series of contributions would imply greater
generosity for men compared to women and this is what we find. Finally, the effects of
lagged employment on disability may reflect in part the health effects of work. More
likely this is picking up the unobserved effects of health, which is very incompletely
captured in this data. Better health increases the likelihood of work and makes disability
less likely.
           Both disability and work status are highly persistent, and significantly so, across
all countries. Current disability is negatively associated with current work status in most
countries, and the relationship is particularly strong in the U.S. (and for women in
Belgium). The evidence for lagged disability affecting current work status over and
above the contemporaneous effect is weaker. There is evidence of lagged employment
status affecting current work disability however.
           As one would probably expect, the parameter estimates for the effects of lagged
work status on current work status tend to be relatively low in the U.S., reflecting a
higher turnover than in the European countries (both from working to not working and
from not working to working). At the low end of the European scale in this respect are
the UK and Spain with the other European countries demonstrating somewhat larger
effects.



           6. Discussion


           To gain a better understanding of the differences between the countries, we carry
out four simulations. The first simulation simply generates values of work and self-
reported disability over the sample period in each country, using the estimated models.
The second simulation replaces the country specific parameter estimates for the disability
equation by the corresponding U.S. coefficients, but retains the own country work
parameters. Conversely, the third simulation replaces the country specific parameter
estimates of the work equation by U.S. coefficients, but retains the own country disability
equation. Finally, the fourth simulation replaces the country specific parameters in both


                                                13
equations by U.S. coefficients. In all simulations the initial conditions are generated
according to the country specific estimates.
       The figures in Appendix B present time paths of two variables: the percentage of
individuals with a work disability and the percentage of individuals working. For each of
these variables we produce four values, according to the four scenarios sketched above.
       Let us first concentrate on work disability. The yellow and light blue lines
represent the scenarios where the U.S. disability parameters are used (the yellow line) or
where both the disability parameters and the work parameters come from the U.S. (the
light blue line). The graphs suggest that the initial conditions only have an effect during
the first couple of years of the simulations. The path of disability moves away from its
initial position very quickly.
        In countries where self-reported disability tends to be low, moving to U.S.
parameters will lead to an increase in self-reported work disability. This is the case for
female disability in Belgium, U.K., and the Southern European countries, and for
disability among malesin the UK, Italy and Spain. In some other cases the simulations
with U.S. parameters do not lead to very different time paths of disability, like for
Belgian, Greek, and Portuguese males. In a number of countries, adopting U.S.
parameters leads to a dramatic fall in disability. These cases include males and females in
Germany and Finland, and females in Denmark and the Netherlands.
       Another noteworthy aspect of the graphs is that the light blue and yellow lines
tend to be on top of each other for most countries. This suggests that the feedback from
work to disability is quantitatively similar to that in the U.S. (since the yellow line uses
country specific work parameters this should generate deviations from the all U.S. light
blue line if work had an appreciably different effect on disability in Europe compared to
the U.S.). Cases where the feedback from work to disability appears to make a difference
include females in The Netherlands, Belgium, Ireland, Italy, Greece, Spain and Austria.
For males the difference in feedback from work to disability seems to be essentially
immaterial, with the possible exception of Belgium. Inspecting the second column of
Table A4, suggests that the cases with the biggest differences between the yellow and
light blue lines are indeed the cases where the estimated values of γ WD , the effect of
lagged work on disability, deviate most from the U.S. estimate.


                                               14
        Now consider the bottom part of the graphs, i.e. the simulation of employment
under the different scenarios. The simulations with all U.S. coefficients lead to final
values that are quite similar across countries: from 0.66 (Portugal) to 0.75 (Belgium,
Ireland) for women, and from 0.76 (Germany) to 0.86 (several countries) for men. The
main sources of differences are initial conditions and demographic and health differences.
A second observation is that the simulation with all U.S. coefficients leads to the highest
employment rate in almost all countries, although often it makes only a negligible
difference whether European or US coefficients are used for the work disability equation.
Exceptions are Italy and the UK where replacing EU disability coefficients by US
coefficients leads to higher work disability and thus lowers employment. As a
consequence, the highest employment rate is attained with US work and EU disability
coefficients.
        This argument, however, does not always work: to further isolate the effect of
labor market institutions from the effect of disability, it is of interest to consider the
difference between the yellow line (only disability parameters from the U.S.) and the
light blue line (all parameters from the U.S.) in more countries. It is instructive to take
The Netherlands as an example. When looking at females, we note that the simulation
with U.S. disability coefficients but Dutch work coefficients yields essentially the same
employment rate, despite the fact that disability is much lower with U.S. disability
coefficients. Table A4 tells us immediately why this is so. The parameter γ DW is close to
zero for Dutch females. We also note however that the light blue line (all U.S.
parameters) is about 25 percentage points higher than the yellow line. This suggests that
independent of the disability status of Dutch women, American institutions would
generate a much higher employment rate. The story for Dutch males is qualitatively
similar, but since the employment rate is already high, adopting U.S. coefficients can
only have a limited effect. With this example in mind we observe that in all countries,
with the possible exception of Denmark, the U.K. and Ireland, labor market institutions,
rather than disability, cause the employment rate to be low relative to the U.S.
        One can further investigate this by looking at the pink lines (EU disability
parameters, but U.S. work parameters). The relevant comparison now is between the pink
line and the dark blue line (all E.U. parameters). Once again we find that labor market


                                               15
institutions explain the differences in employment rates, rather than differences in
disability.
        A different way to obtain insight into the different dynamics across the various
countries is to consider transition matrices. These are given in Table A5 (for disability)
and Table A6 (for work). These key dynamics relate to the transitions between work and
non-work and disability and non-disability. Each can be summarized by two off- diagonal
transitions. For work, the two transitions are the transition from work to non-work and
the transition from non-work to work. Similarly for disability the off-diagonal transitions
are from not disabled to disabled and from disabled to not disabled. Since our interest
concerns how all these transition patterns vary across our set of countries, Tables A7 (for
disability) and A8 (for work) summarize the key parameters by organizing them by the
magnitude of the transitions with the country names attached. Finally, since the U.S. will
be the benchmark for all countries in our simulations we list the U.S. parameter at the
bottom of each list.
        Consider first the disability transitions. We observe considerable variation in the
inflow rates into disability (the transition from being not disabled in one period to being
disabled the next period). For men these rates vary from 18% in Germany to 4% in the
U.S., U.K., and Italy. For women the rates vary from 21% in Germany to 5% in Ireland,
Italy, and Belgium. The U.S. is near the bottom with 6%. On the other hand outflow
rates out of disability (the transition from being disabled in one period and not disabled in
the next period) vary less, at least in relative terms. For men the rates vary from 42% in
Italy to 23% in Germany and Denmark, while for women the rates vary from 49% in Italy
to 22% in Germany.
        There are a number of salient patterns to these disability transitions. First, while
the levels differ between men and women, the country rankings are remarkably similar by
gender suggesting that the variation across countries is at least partly due to institutional
variation affecting men and women in a similar way. To illustrate, Germany ranks
highest on the transition into disability for both sexes while Italy ranks highest in the
transition from work disability into non-work disability. Second, for almost all the
countries listed there exists considerable churning between work and non-work disability
indicating that work disability is far from a permanent condition even at these older ages



                                              16
(cf. Kapteyn, Smith and Van Soest, 2007). Consequently, cross-sectional analysis of
work disability status will not be able to capture some of the main features of work
disabilities during the pre-retirement years. Third, compared to the European countries,
the U.S. ranks very low on the transition into work disability while it ranks in the middle
of the pack in the transitions out of work disability.
Work disability will tend to be high when the transition into work disability is high while
the transition out of work disability is low. Germany, Denmark, and Finland would be the
best prototypes of such behavior. On the other hand, other countries have a relatively low
transition into disability matched with a relatively high transition out of disability. Italy,
Greece, and Spain would be good illustrations of that behavior and in those countries the
steady state levels of work disability will be low.
        Consider next the ranking of the transitions between work and non-work for
countries listed in Table A8. First, we note that the variation in transitions from work to
non-work varies less across countries than the transitions from non-work to work. Thus
most of the variation across countries in labor market dynamics relates to whether
persons who are out of the labor force are likely to transit back into the labor force. To
illustrate, for men, transition rates from non-work to work vary from 31% in the U.K. to
as low as 3% in Austria and Belgium. Indeed the countries where moving back into the
labor force appears to be least likely, are very similar for men and women alike. These
countries would include Italy, France, Belgium, and Austria.
        In contrast, the U.S. has a relatively high rate of transition back into the labor
force for both sexes compared to all countries. It is in comparisons between the U.S. and
Italy, France, Belgium, and Austria, that the effects on employment are quite dramatic.
For example, the chart for Austria in Appendix B shows a very low employment rate
towards the end of the observation period. For women, among the European countries the
U.K. has the highest inflow into employment (16%), while Belgium has the lowest inflow
(3%). The chart for Belgium in Appendix B confirms that female employment in
Belgium is very low in comparison with other countries.
        In sharp contrast, Table A8 shows much less variation in transitions from work to
non-work especially for men. The full range of values for men in Table A8 is only from
0.03 (Denmark) to 0.08 (Germany) with the U.S. at a value of 0.07. In fact, eight of the



                                              17
thirteen European countries in Table A8 for men lie within two percentage points of the
U.S. transition value from work to not work. Thus, the source of the labor market
dynamic differences amongst these countries appears not to lie in the ease or difficulty of
the transition from work to not-work. Instead, it is the relative rigidity of some European
countries in discouraging re-entry into the labor force that appears to be the major issue.
        This is further illustrated by Table A9. The last four columns of Table A9 contain
the same transition rates as Table A8, but in addition the first two columns contain
measures of employment protection and replacement rates at retirement. The employment
protection measure is taken from OECD (2004) and is the sum of three main components
reflecting respectively (1) difficulty of dismissal, (2) procedural inconveniences an
employer faces in the dismissal process, (3) severance pay provisions (OECD, 2004, p.
65). The measure presented here is “version 2, late 1990s” (see Table 2.A2.4 in OECD,
2004). The replacement rate shown in the table is the replacement rate of a worker with
average earnings in a country, as calculated in OECD (2005). The countries in Table A9
have been ranked according to the employment protection measure. Somewhat
remarkably it is particularly the transitions from non-work to work that are affected by
the employment protection index: for both women and men, more employment protection
implies a smaller transition rate back into employment. A similar finding is reported in
OECD (2004). On the other hand the protective effect seems to be limited; transition
rates out of employment do not correlate significantly with the employment protection
measure.
        In view of the age range we are considering, a measure of a retirement
replacement rate has been included, since one would expect that some workers who are
temporarily out of the labor force will transit into retirement rather than back into
employment if that alternative is sufficiently attractive. Table A9 indeed shows the
expected negative correlation. However, when regressing the transition rates on both the
employment protection measure and the replacement rate measure we find the former to
be significant, but not the latter.


7. Conclusion




                                             18
       In this paper, we have investigated the dynamics of labor force and work
disability behavior among individuals between 40 and 65 in several Western European
countries and the United States. We estimated the dynamics of labor force and disability
behavior separately for men and women using high quality panel data in 13 European
countries and the United States. We find substantial differences in labor force dynamics
between the countries. Adopting U.S. parameters (i.e. U.S. institutions and norms) often
leads to considerable reductions in self-reported disability. Although this has some effect
on employment rates, most of the action is in the labor market institutions themselves,
where adopting U.S. coefficients may generate substantially higher employment rates.
Comparison of transition rates with aggregate measures of employment protection
suggests that these play a major role in generating the observed differences across
countries.


References


Autor, D. and M. Duggan (2003), “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
   Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1),157-206.
Banks, J., A. Kapteyn, J.P. Smith, and A. van Soest (2007), “Work Disability is a Pain in
   the *****, Especially in England, The Netherlands, and the United States,” in: David
   Cutler and David Wise (eds.), Health in Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences
   of Declining Disability Among the Elderly.
Borsch-Supan, A. (2007), “Work Disability, Health, and Incentive Effects,” Paper
   presented at NBER Economics of Aging Conference, Carefree Arizona
Bound, J. and R. Burkhauser (1999), “Economic Analysis of Transfer Programs Targeted
   on People with Disabilities,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of
   Labor Economics, Vol. 3C, pp. 3417-3528.
Eurostat (2003), ECHP UDB Description of variables Data Dictionary, Codebook and
   Differences between Countries and Waves; European Commission, Brussels.
Gruber, J. and D. Wise (eds.) (2003), Social Security Programs and Retirement around
   the World: Micro Estimation, University of Chicago Press: Chicago




                                            19
Heckman, J.J. (1981), “The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial
   Conditions in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process,” in C.F.
   Manski and D.L. McFadden (eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with
   Econometric Applications, London: MIT Press, pp. 179-195.
Hyslop, D.R. (1999), “State Dependence, Serial Correlation and Heterogeneity in Inter-
   Temporal Labor Force Participation of Married Women,” Econometrica, 67, 1255-
   1294.
Kapteyn, A., J.P. Smith and A. van Soest (2007), “Dynamics of Pain and Work
   Disability,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.
Nicoletti, C., and F. Peracchi (2002), “Aging in Europe: What Can We Learn from the
   Europanel?” in T. Boeri, A. Börsch-Supan, A. Brugiavini, R. Disney, A. Kapteyn and
   F. Peracchi (eds.), Pensions: More Information, Less Ideology, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
OECD (2003a), OECD Employment Outlook 2003: Towards more and better jobs,
   OECD, Paris.
OECD (2003b), Transforming Disability into Ability: Policies to Promote Work and
   Income Security for the Disabled, OECD, Paris.
OECD (2004), OECD Employment Outlook 2004: Employment Protection Regulation
   and Labour Market Performance, OECD, Paris
OECD (2005), Pensions at a Glance; Public Policies across OECD countries, OECD,
   Paris.
Peracchi, F. (2002), “The European Community Household Panel: A Review,” Empirical
   Economics, 27, 63-90.
Stapleton, D.C. and R.V. Burkhauser (eds.) (2003), The Decline in Employment of
   People with Disabilities: A Policy Puzzle, Kalamazoo MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
   Employment Research.
Vella, F. and M. Verbeek (1999), “Two-step Estimation of Panel Data Models with
   Censored Endogenous Variables and Selection Bias,” Journal of Econometrics, 90,
   239-263.




                                           20
Appendix A: Tables




       21
Table A1. Overview of ECHP waves




                                   22
          Table A2. Selected characteristics of disability pension policies across countries

                             Qualifiying conditions                                               Benefits
                                           Minimum period of
           Loss of earning capacity                                                        Permanent disability
                                               contributions

                                          60 months +1 month for each
              >= 50% compared to                                              60% of assessment base (=average earnings in
                                         month from age 50) in the last 10
Austria       person with the same                                            the best 16 years, up to an annual maximum of
                                          years (plus 2 months for each
                   education                                                                      €3,013)
                                               month from age 50)

                                                                              65% of lost earnings (s.t. ceiling) for an insured
                                                                              w/ dependents; 40% if no dependents; 50% if
                                            6 months, incl. 120 days of
Belgium    2/3 in the usual occupation                                         no dependents but living w/ others with no
                                               actual/credited work
                                                                                income. Payable >1 year disability (1st year-
                                                                                             sickness benefit)
                                        Disability pension & supplement
           Reduced working capacity &                                      13,895 kroner monthly for single, 11,810 kroner
                                      (both income-tested) payable age 18-
Denmark        inability to assure                                             if not living alone; disability supplement
                                        64 w/ >=3 years' residence from
                  subsistence                                                      (income test): 6,000 kroner a year
                                                      age 15
                                                                              Universal dis.- Income tested €11.21 to €496.38
                                            Universal disability pension
             60% if earnings-related                                           a month; earnings-related disability: 1.5% of
Finland                                    (income-tested) - oermanent
               disability pension                                              wage for each year of service up to disability
                                            incapacity for suitable work
                                                                                                   onset
                                                                                  50% of average earnings in the best paid
                                           12 months insurance before         10 years if incapable of any professional activity,
            2/3 of earning capacity in
France                                     disability onset and 800 hrs         up to a maximum of €1,238 a month. Partial
           any occupation under age 60
                                          employment in lats 12 months          disability 30% of average earnings in best ys,
                                                                                           min pension €241/month

            Full reduction (can't work
                                                                               Total of individual earnings points (individual
            >3 hours/day in any form
                                           5 years of contributions and       annual earnings divided by the average earnings
            of employment) or partial
Germany                                     36 months of compulsory              of all contributors multiplied by the entry
              reduction (can't work
                                          contributions in the last 5 years       factor) multiplied by pension factor and
            >6 hours/day in any form
                                                                                               pension value.
                 of employment)

                                                                               For an assessed degree of disability of 80% or
                                         max 4,500 days of contributions
                                                                              more (severe), 100% of the pension is paid; for
                                         (1,500 days if the insured began
Greece        at least 80% disabled                                              an assessed degree of disability of 67% to
                                         working after 1993); 300 days if
                                                                              79.9% (ordinary), 75% of the pension paid; min
                                                 younger than 21
                                                                                         pension €392.16/month.




                                                           23
                     invalidity pension -                                                    invalidity pension: €140.30 a week; €167.30 a
                  permanent incapacity for    260 weeks of paid contributions                 week if aged 65 or older; disability allowance
   Ireland        work; disability allowance with 48 weeks paid or credited in              (means-tested): up to €134.80 a week, + €89.40
                 (means-tested): aged 16-66,         the last tax year.                     a week for a qualified adult and €16.80 for each
                 physically/mentally disabled                                                               dependent child

                                                    5 years of contributions, including 3
                                                                                              Pension based on a progressive percentage
                     Total and permanent             in the 5 years before the claim. No
                                                                                               (0.9% to 2%) of salary multiplied by the
     Italy         inability to perform any           other forms of income, including
                                                                                              number of years of contributions, up to a
                              work.                 earnings from self-employment and
                                                                                                          maximum of 40
                                                           unemployment benefits

                                                                               Up to 70% of earnings for loss of earning
               at least 80% of earning   Partial pension: The loss of 15% to
                                                                              capacity of at least 80%; 14% to 50.75% of
 Netherlands   capacity in the current       80% of earning capacity for
                                                                             earnings for a loss of earning capacity of 15%
             occupation for full pension          employed workers
                                                                                      to 80%. €167.70 a day max

                                                     5 years of contributions (120 days     2% of average adjusted lifetime salary for each
   Portugal         2/3 of earning capacity
                                                              of registered pay)                        year of contributions

                                                     1/4 of period from age 20 to the Permanent total disability, pension 100% of the
                                                       onset of disability, with at least  benefit base ( min €411.76). For permanent
                   Loss of normal earning
    Spain                                           5 years of contributions and at least occupational disability, award 55% of benefit
                          capacity
                                                    1/5 of the required contributions in base, plus 20% if aged 55+ & not employed
                                                              the last 10 years                           (min €411.76).
                                                         Earnings-related sickness            94,320 kronor for an insured person with
                Work capacity reduced by at
   Sweden                                              compensation independent of          40 years of residence and without an earnings-
                    least one quarter
                                                            insurance periods                                related benefit
                                                      contributions in all years from
                                                        age 21. Special pension for            9,146 francs a year plus a variable amount
 Switzerland         at least 40% disabled          nationals not meeting required min        calculated by multiplying annual income by
                                                     contribution period for disability                13/600 if income <37080
                                                               base pension

                     Long-term incapacity                                                    Long-term incapacity benefit £72.15 a week,
                   benefit & disability living 3 years before the claim, age before           plus £43.15 a week for a dependent adult.
     UK
                 allowance (noncontributory,                    65                           Allowance £57.20, £38.30, or £15.15 a week
                       no means test)                                                                    according to needs

                      Disability pension:
                                                                                   pension based on the average covered earnings
                   Incapable of permanent       Quarter of coverage for each year
                                                                                    since 1950 (or age 21, if later) and indexed for
                  substantial gainful activity; since age 21 up to the year of the
                                                                                   past wage inflation, up to the onset of disability,
                    Disability supplemental         onset of disability, up to a
     US                                                                                 excluding up to 5 years with the lowest
                   income benefit (means-          maximum of 40 quarters of
                                                                                                       earnings.
                   tested): disabled & blind coverage, 20 quarters of coverage in
                                                                                         max monthly pension $2,036 (certain
                     persons age <65 low                the 10-year period
                                                                                                      conditions)
                            income

Source: SSA, Social Security Programs Throughout the World: Europe, 2004
 http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2004-2005/europe/


                                                                       24
                                     Table A3. Disability benefits in OECD countries: Men, Late 1990s

                                                                              Relative        Relative      Relative average
                                         % of disabled
                     % of disability                                      employment rate income from       personal income
                                       persons ages 20-64 Annual rates of
                    benefit recipients                                       of disabled      work of         of disabled
                                          with neither     outflow from
                     declaring that                                        persons age 20- disabled over    persons working
                                       income from work     disability
                      they are not                                           64 vs. non-    non-disabled     over disabled
                                        nor income from      benefits
                        disabled                                          disabled ages 20-   persons         persons not
                                             benefits
                                                                                  64          working           working

Austria                    27,7               14,2               1,04              0,60              0,97         1,96
Germany                    n/a                11,9               1,25              0,67              0,92         1,79
Sweden                     48,9                1,1               n/a               0,69              0,70         1,37
Netherlands                30,6               19,5               3,34              0,60              0,87         1,45
Spain                      18,3               28,0               0,57              0,41              0,86         2,07
Italy                      43,9               28,8               n/a               0,60              0,94         1,94
Portugal                   28,6               20,9               0,97              0,59              n/a          1,81
France                     33,3               11,7               n/a               0,72              n/a          1,83
Denmark                    26,2                6,3               n/a               0,61              0,88         1,38
UK                         43,3                9,1               5,64              0,53              0,84         1,61
US                         46,7               18,8               1,16              0,58              0,71         2,84
Switzerland                29,8               14,2               n/a               0,79              0,98         n/a
Belgium                    43,4               16,2               n/a               0,54              0,90         1,91

n/a - data not available

Source: OECD (2003a, Chapter 3, Tables 3.7 and 3.8)
These tables are summaries of more detailed information in OECD (2003b).
The underlying data sources are ECHP 1996 or 1997 for the European countries and SIPP for the U.S.




                                                                  25
Table A4. Work disability and employment dynamics: Key parameter estimates

                                    Disability Equation            Work Equation
                                   Lagged Lagged         Lagged Lagged          Current
                                   Disability Employment Disability Employment Disability
                                       γ DD        γ WD        γ DW        γ WW         δ DW
            Germany     Men          0.725       -0.422      -0.432       1.973       -0.200
                        Women        0.572       -0.244      -0.285       1.356       -0.143
            Denmark Men              1.011       -0.763      -0.587       1.841       -0.575
                        Women        0.780       -0.743      -0.559       1.826       -0.497
            Netherlands Men          0.842       -0.789      -0.236       2.007       -0.762
                        Women        0.854        0.041      -0.068       1.516       -0.095
            Belgium     Men          1.225        0.231      -0.193       3.105       -0.211
                        Women        0.983       -1.344      -0.500       2.452       -1.221
            France      Men          0.814       -0.348      -0.234       2.541       -0.306
                        Women        0.875       -0.446      -0.184       2.495       -0.139
            UK          Men          1.153       -0.249      -0.037       1.541       -0.157
                        Women        0.835       -0.244      -0.075       1.418        0.037
            Ireland     Men          0.948       -0.728      -0.197       2.034       -0.670
                        Women        1.133        -0.03      -0.073       1.723       -0.532
            Italy       Men          1.023       -0.315      -0.198       2.093       -0.403
                        Women        0.683        0.011       0.012       1.725       -0.076
            Greece      Men          0.935       -0.255       0.165       2.063       -0.411
                        Women        0.931       -0.122      -0.021       1.510       -0.161
            Spain       Men          0.738       -0.665      -0.650       1.701       -0.541
                        Women        0.749       -0.147      -0.239       1.175       -0.416
            Portugal    Men          1.021       -0.104       0.127       2.316       -0.459
                        Women        0.958       -0.097      -0.108       1.920       -0.110
            Austria     Men          0.758       -0.437      -0.375       2.863       -0.444
                        Women        0.936       -0.266      -0.413       2.213       -0.199
            Finland     Men          0.977       -0.348      -0.284       1.765       -0.284
                        Women        0.978       -0.038      -0.363       1.403       -0.524
            U.S.        Men          1.064       -0.643      -0.308       1.643       -0.995
                        Women        0.841       -0.558      -0.202       1.447       -0.778

Notes to table A4:
Results for the U.S. are coefficients on one-year lagged variables although two-year lags are also included
to control for the varying periodicity of PSID data. All specifications also include year dummies, controls
for education, age group, marital status, self-reported general health status, and (in the U.S. case)
ethnicity. Equations for the initial conditions use the same variable.




                                                    26
                   Table A5. Transition Probabilities
                         for Disability Status
                                Actual
                              Men                         Women
               Not Disabled         Disabled     Not Disabled     Disabled
Germany
Not Disabled      0.82               0.18               0.79        0.21
Disabled          0.23               0.77               0.22        0.78
Prevalence
Equilibrium

Denmark
Not Disabled      0.82               0.12               0.88        0.12
Disabled          0.23               0.77               0.28        0.72

Netherlands
Not Disabled      0.92               0.08               0.89        0.11
Disabled          0.29               0.71               0.26        0.74

Belgium
Not Disabled      0.95               0.05               0.95        0.05
Disabled          0.34               0.66               0.29        0.71

France
Not Disabled      0.91               0.09               0.90        0.10
Disabled          0.31               0.69               0.30        0.70

UK
Not Disabled      0.96               0.04               0.93        0.07
Disabled          0.26               0.74               0.31        0.69

Ireland
Not Disabled      0.93               0.07               0.95        0.05
Disabled          0.31               0.69               0.34        0.65

Italy
Not Disabled      0.96               0.04               0.95        0.05
Disabled          0.42               0.58               0.49        0.51

Greece
Not Disabled      0.94               0.06               0.93        0.07
Disabled          0.37               0.63               0.37        0.63

Spain
Not Disabled      0.93               0.07               0.91        0.09
Disabled          0.37               0.63               0.40        0.60

Portugal
Not Disabled      0.92               0.08               0.90        0.10
Disabled          0.28               0.72               0.27        0.74



                                      27
Austria
Not Disabled    0.91   0.09   0.91   0.09
Disabled        0.35   0.65   0.36   0.64

Finland
Not Disabled    0.88   0.12   0.87   0.13
Disabled        0.25   0.75   0.26   0.74

United States
Not Disabled    0.96   0.04   0.94   0.06
Disabled        0.26   0.74   0.29   0.71




                       28
                   Table A6. Transition Probabilities
                        for Labor Force Status
                                Actual
                              Men                          Women
               Doesn't work         Works      Doesn't work      Works
Germany
Doesn't work      0.89              0.11                0.91             0.09
Works             0.08              0.92                0.10             0.90

Denmark
Doesn't work      0.84              0.16                0.86             0.14
Works             0.03              0.97                0.06             0.94

Netherlands
Doesn't work      0.86              0.14                0.92             0.08
Works             0.04              0.96                0.09             0.91

Belgium
Doesn't work      0.97              0.03                0.97             0.03
Works             0.04              0.96                0.07             0.93

France
Doesn't work      0.92              0.08                0.94             0.05
Works             0.05              0.95                0.06             0.93

UK
Doesn't work      0.69              0.31                0.84             0.16
Works             0.06              0.94                0.10             0.90

Ireland
Doesn't work      0.87              0.13                0.93             0.07
Works             0.04              0.96                0.11             0.89

Italy
Doesn't work      0.91              0.09                0.97             0.03
Works             0.07              0.93                0.10             0.90

Greece
Doesn't work      0.88              0.12                0.94             0.07
Works             0.05              0.95                0.15             0.85

Spain
Doesn't work      0.85              0.15                0.94             0.06
Works             0.07              0.93                0.14             0.86

Portugal
Doesn't work      0.89              0.12                0.92             0.08
Works             0.04              0.96                0.09             0.91




                                     29
Austria
Doesn't work    0.97        0.03    0.96     0.04
Works           0.07        0.93    0.09     0.91

Finland
Doesn't work    0.87        0.13    0.87     0.13
Works           0.06        0.94    0.07     0.93

United States
Doesn't work    0.80        0.20    0.74   0.2603
Works           0.07        0.93   0.037     0.97




                       30
                                      Table A7.

              Ordering of Transitions in Disability States by Country

A. Not Disabled to Disabled
           Men                                    Women
Transition    Countries                  Transition  Countries
   .18        Germany                       .21      Germany
   .12        Denmark, Finland              .13      Finland
   .09        France, Austria               .12      Denmark
   .08        Netherlands, Portugal         .11      Netherlands
   .07        Ireland, Spain                .10      France, Portugal
   .06        Greece                        .09      Austria, Spain
   .05        Belgium                       .07      Greece, UK
   .04        Italy, UK                     .05      Belgium, Ireland, Italy
              U.S. = .04                              U.S. = .06

B. Disabled to Not Disabled
           Men                                    Women
Transition    Countries                  Transition  Countries
   .42        Italy                         .49      Italy
   .37        Greece, Spain                 .40      Spain
   .35        Austria                       .37      Greece
   .34        Belgium                       .36      Austria
   .31        France, Ireland               .34      Ireland
   .29        Netherlands                   .31      UK
   .28        Portugal                      .30      France
   .26        UK                            .29      Belgium
   .25        Finland                       .28      Denmark
   .23        Germany, Denmark              .27      Portugal
                                            .26      Netherlands, Finland
                                            .22      Germany
              U.S. = .26                              U.S. = .29




                                         31
                                      Table A8

                     Ordering of Work Transitions by Country

A. Work to Not Work
           Men                                   Women
Transition    Countries                 Transition  Countries
   .08        Germany                      .15      Greece
   .07        Italy, Spain, Austria        .14      Spain
   .06        UK, Finland                  .11      Ireland
   .05        France, Greece               .10      Germany, UK, Italy
   .04        Netherlands, Belgium         .09      Netherlands, Portugal, Austria
              Ireland, Portugal            .07      Belgium, Finland
   .03        Denmark                      .06      Denmark, France
              U.S. = .07                             U.S. = .04

B. Not Work to Work
           Men                                   Women
Transition  Countries                   Transition  Countries
   .31      UK
   .16      Denmark                           .16    UK
   .15      Spain                             .14    Denmark
   .14      Netherlands                       .13    Finland
   .13      Ireland, Finland                  .09    Germany
   .12      Greece, Portugal                  .08    Portugal, Netherlands
   .11      Germany                           .07    Ireland, Greece
   .09      Italy                             .06    Spain
   .08      France                            .05    France
   .03      Belgium, Austria                  .04    Austria
                                              .03    Belgium, Italy
              U.S. = .20                             U.S. = .26




                                         32
Table A9: Transition rates, employment protection, and retirement replacement
rates
                                                             Men                   Women
                    OECD                                       not
                    employment         replacement   work to   work      work to      not work
                    protection         rate at       not
                    measure            median        work      to work   not work     to work
 Portugal                   3.7             79.8       0.04       0.12     0.09          0.08
 Greece                     3.5             99.9       0.05      0.12      0.15          0.07
 Italy                      3.1             88.8       0.07       0.09      0.1          0.03
 Spain                       3              88.3       0.07       0.15     0.14          0.06
 France                     2.8             68.8       0.05       0.08     0.06          0.05
 Germany                    2.6             71.8       0.08       0.11      0.1          0.09
 Belgium                    2.5             63.1       0.04       0.03     0.07          0.03
 Austria                    2.4             93.2       0.07       0.03     0.09          0.04
 Netherlands                2.3             84.1       0.04      0.14      0.09          0.08
 Finland                    2.2             78.8       0.06       0.13     0.07          0.13
 Denmark                    1.8             54.1       0.03       0.16     0.06          0.14
 Ireland                    1.2             36.6       0.04       0.13     0.11          0.07
 UK                          1              47.6       0.06       0.31      0.1          0.16
 U.S.                       0.7              51        0.07        0.2     0.04          0.26
 correlation with                           0.81      -0.02      -0.57     0.45          -0.7
 OECD
 measure*                                 [.001]      [.96]      [.03]     [.10]        [.005]
 correlation with                                     0.28      -0.46      0.46          -0.5
 replacement rate*                                    [.32]     [.09]      [.10]         [.07]
      * Significance level in square
                 brackets
Explanation: See text




                                              33
Appendix B: Simulated Time Paths of Mild and Severe Disability and of Labor
                           Force Status




                                34
                                                                   Work disability, females Germany                                                                                              Work disability, Males Germany

                             0.6                                                                                                                                    0.6



                             0.5                                                                                                                                    0.5




                                                                                                                                             Proportion disabled
                             0.4                                                                                                                                    0.4
Proportion disabled




                             0.3                                                                                                                                    0.3



                             0.2                                                                                                                                    0.2



                             0.1                                                                                                                                    0.1



                              0                                                                                                                                      0
                                          1994          1995             1996           1997            1998          1999            2000                                   1994         1995            1996         1997          1998        1999          2000

                                                     all parameters EU     dis EU, work US      work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                              all parameters EU        dis EU, work US      work EU, dis US     all parameters US


                                                                    Work, females Germany                                                                                                              Work, males Germany

                                   0.9                                                                                                                               0.9

                              0.85                                                                                                                                  0.85

                                   0.8                                                                                                                               0.8

                              0.75                                                                                                                                  0.75
        Proportion working




                                                                                                                                               Proportion working
                                   0.7                                                                                                                               0.7

                              0.65                                                                                                                                  0.65

                                   0.6                                                                                                                               0.6

                              0.55                                                                                                                                  0.55

                                   0.5                                                                                                                               0.5

                              0.45                                                                                                                                  0.45

                                   0.4                                                                                                                               0.4
                                             1994          1995           1996           1997            1998         1999            2000                                     1994        1995            1996         1997         1998        1999          2000

                                         all parameters EU        dis EU, work US            work EU, dis US         all parameters US                                     all parameters EU         dis EU, work US        work EU, dis US      all parameters US




                                                                                                                                                                   35
                                                 Work disability, females Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                          Work disability, males Denmark
                      0.35

                                                                                                                                              0.35
                       0.3
                                                                                                                                               0.3




                                                                                                                 P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                      0.25
                                                                                                                                              0.25
Proportion disabble




                       0.2                                                                                                                     0.2

                      0.15                                                                                                                    0.15

                                                                                                                                               0.1
                       0.1
                                                                                                                                              0.05
                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                0
                        0                                                                                                                            1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001
                                1994       1995       1996       1997     1998       1999      2000       2001

                             all parameters EU      dis EU, work US     work EU, dis US     all parameters US
                                                                                                                                                            all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                     Work, females Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                 Work, males Denmark
                      0.95

                                                                                                                                              0.95
                       0.9
                                                                                                                                               0.9




                                                                                                                 P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                      0.85
                                                                                                                                              0.85
Proportion working




                       0.8                                                                                                                     0.8

                      0.75                                                                                                                    0.75

                                                                                                                                               0.7
                       0.7
                                                                                                                                              0.65
                      0.65
                                                                                                                                               0.6
                       0.6                                                                                                                           1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001
                                1994       1995       1996       1997     1998       1999      2000       2001

                             all parameters EU      dis EU, work US     work EU, dis US     all parameters US
                                                                                                                                                            all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                    36
                                                       Work disability, females Netherlands                                                                                         Work disability, males Netherlands

                             0.35                                                                                                                         0.35

                              0.3                                                                                                                          0.3
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                             P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                             0.25                                                                                                                         0.25

                              0.2                                                                                                                          0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                         0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                          0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                         0.05

                               0                                                                                                                            0
                                    1994        1995           1996       1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU       dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                               Work, females Netherlands                                                                                                    Work, males Netherlands


                              0.9                                                                                                                          0.9
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                             P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                              0.8                                                                                                                          0.8

                              0.7                                                                                                                          0.7

                              0.6                                                                                                                          0.6

                              0.5                                                                                                                          0.5

                              0.4                                                                                                                          0.4
                                    1994        1995           1996       1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU       dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                               37
                                                         Work disability, females Belgium                                                                                             Work disability, males Belgium

                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25

                              0.2                                                                                                                         0.2
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                             0.15                                                                                                                        0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                         0.1


                             0.05                                                                                                                        0.05

                               0                                                                                                                           0
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                Work, females Belgium                                                                                                        Work, males Belgium


                             0.95                                                                                                                        0.95
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.85                                                                                                                        0.85

                             0.75                                                                                                                        0.75

                             0.65                                                                                                                        0.65

                             0.55                                                                                                                        0.55

                             0.45                                                                                                                        0.45

                             0.35                                                                                                                        0.35
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                              38
                                                         Work disability, females France                                                                                              Work disability, males France

                              0.3                                                                                                                         0.3

                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                              0.2                                                                                                                         0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                        0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                         0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                        0.05

                               0                                                                                                                           0
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                 Work, females France                                                                                                         Work, males France

                                1                                                                                                                           1
                             0.95                                                                                                                        0.95
                              0.9                                                                                                                         0.9
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.85                                                                                                                        0.85
                              0.8                                                                                                                         0.8
                             0.75                                                                                                                        0.75
                              0.7                                                                                                                         0.7
                             0.65                                                                                                                        0.65
                              0.6                                                                                                                         0.6
                             0.55                                                                                                                        0.55
                              0.5                                                                                                                         0.5
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                              39
                                                               Work disability, females UK                                                                                                  Work disability, males UK

                              0.3                                                                                                                          0.3

                             0.25                                                                                                                         0.25
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                             P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                              0.2                                                                                                                          0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                         0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                          0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                         0.05

                               0                                                                                                                            0
                                    1994        1995           1996        1997      1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996       1997      1998         1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU       dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US      work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                      Work, females UK                                                                                                             Work, males UK

                                1                                                                                                                            1
                             0.95                                                                                                                         0.95
                              0.9                                                                                                                          0.9
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                             P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.85                                                                                                                         0.85
                              0.8                                                                                                                          0.8
                             0.75                                                                                                                         0.75
                              0.7                                                                                                                          0.7
                             0.65                                                                                                                         0.65
                              0.6                                                                                                                          0.6
                             0.55                                                                                                                         0.55
                              0.5                                                                                                                          0.5
                                    1994        1995           1996        1997      1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996       1997      1998         1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU       dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US      work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                               40
                                                          Work disability, females Ireland                                                                                             Work disability, males Ireland

                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25

                              0.2                                                                                                                         0.2




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n d isab led
P ro p o rto n d isab led




                             0.15                                                                                                                        0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                         0.1


                             0.05                                                                                                                        0.05

                               0                                                                                                                           0
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                 Work, females Ireland                                                                                                        Work, males Ireland

                             0.95                                                                                                                        0.95

                             0.85                                                                                                                        0.85
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.75                                                                                                                        0.75

                             0.65                                                                                                                        0.65

                             0.55                                                                                                                        0.55

                             0.45                                                                                                                        0.45

                             0.35                                                                                                                        0.35

                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                              41
                                                           Work disability, females Italy                                                                                                  Work disability, males Italy

                             0.35                                                                                                                        0.35

                              0.3                                                                                                                         0.3
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25

                              0.2                                                                                                                         0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                        0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                         0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                        0.05

                               0                                                                                                                           0
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996        1997      1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU       dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                  Work, females Italy                                                                                                             Work, males Italy

                                                                                                                                                         0.95
                             0.95
                                                                                                                                                         0.85
                             0.85
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                                                                                                                                                         0.75
                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                         0.65
                             0.65
                             0.55                                                                                                                        0.55

                             0.45                                                                                                                        0.45

                             0.35                                                                                                                        0.35

                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996        1997      1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU       dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                              42
                                                          Work disability, females Greece                                                                                                  Work disability, males Greece

                              0.3                                                                                                                             0.3

                             0.25                                                                                                                            0.25
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                                P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                              0.2                                                                                                                             0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                            0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                             0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                            0.05

                               0                                                                                                                               0
                                    1994         1995          1996          1997       1998        1999     2000        2001                                       1994         1995          1996          1997       1998        1999     2000        2001

                                           all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                 Work, females Greece                                                                                                             Work, males Greece

                              1                                                                                                                               1

                             0.9                                                                                                                             0.9
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                                P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.8                                                                                                                             0.8

                             0.7                                                                                                                             0.7

                             0.6                                                                                                                             0.6

                             0.5                                                                                                                             0.5

                             0.4                                                                                                                             0.4

                             0.3                                                                                                                             0.3
                                    1994        1995           1996          1997       1998       1999      2000        2001                                       1994        1995           1996          1997       1998       1999      2000        2001

                                           all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                                  43
                                                          Work disability, females Spain                                                                                               Work disability, males Spain

                             0.35                                                                                                                        0.35

                              0.3                                                                                                                         0.3
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25

                              0.2                                                                                                                         0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                        0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                         0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                        0.05

                               0                                                                                                                           0
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                 Work, females Spain                                                                                                          Work, males Spain

                                                                                                                                                         0.95
                             0.95
                                                                                                                                                         0.85
                             0.85
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                            P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                                                                                                                                                         0.75
                             0.75
                                                                                                                                                         0.65
                             0.65
                             0.55                                                                                                                        0.55

                             0.45                                                                                                                        0.45

                             0.35                                                                                                                        0.35

                             0.25                                                                                                                        0.25
                                    1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001                                       1994        1995           1996      1997       1998       1999     2000         2001

                                           all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU      dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                              44
                                                         Work disability, females Portugal                                                                                                Work disability, males Portugal

                              0.4                                                                                                                             0.4
                             0.35                                                                                                                            0.35
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                                P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                              0.3                                                                                                                             0.3
                             0.25                                                                                                                            0.25
                              0.2                                                                                                                             0.2
                             0.15                                                                                                                            0.15
                              0.1                                                                                                                             0.1
                             0.05                                                                                                                            0.05
                               0                                                                                                                               0
                                    1994         1995          1996          1997       1998        1999     2000        2001                                       1994         1995          1996          1997       1998        1999     2000        2001

                                           all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                                Work, females Portugal                                                                                                           Work, males Portugal

                              1                                                                                                                               1

                             0.9                                                                                                                             0.9
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                                P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.8                                                                                                                             0.8

                             0.7                                                                                                                             0.7

                             0.6                                                                                                                             0.6

                             0.5                                                                                                                             0.5

                             0.4                                                                                                                             0.4
                                    1994        1995           1996          1997       1998       1999      2000        2001                                       1994        1995           1996          1997       1998       1999      2000        2001

                                           all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU          dis EU, work US    work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                                  45
                                                          Work disability, females Austria                                                                                            Work disability, males Austria

                              0.3                                                                                                                        0.3

                             0.25                                                                                                                       0.25
P ro p o rtio n d isab led




                                                                                                                           P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                              0.2                                                                                                                        0.2

                             0.15                                                                                                                       0.15

                              0.1                                                                                                                        0.1

                             0.05                                                                                                                       0.05

                               0                                                                                                                          0
                                    1994           1995         1996         1997         1998        1999          2000                                       1994           1995         1996         1997         1998        1999          2000

                                           all parameters EU    dis EU, work US     work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU    dis EU, work US     work EU, dis US   all parameters US


                                                               Work, females Austria                                                                                                      Work, males Austria

                              1                                                                                                                          1

                             0.9                                                                                                                        0.9
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                           P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                             0.8                                                                                                                        0.8

                             0.7                                                                                                                        0.7

                             0.6                                                                                                                        0.6

                             0.5                                                                                                                        0.5

                             0.4                                                                                                                        0.4

                             0.3                                                                                                                        0.3
                                    1994           1995         1996         1997         1998        1999         2000                                        1994           1995        1996          1997         1998        1999         2000

                                           all parameters EU    dis EU, work US     work EU, dis US   all parameters US                                               all parameters EU    dis EU, work US     work EU, dis US   all parameters US




                                                                                                                                             46
                                                       Work disability, females Finland                                                                                        Work disability, males Finland

                                0.4                                                                                                                    0.4
                               0.35                                                                                                                   0.35
P ro p o rtio n d isab ility




                                                                                                                         P ro p o rtio n d isab led
                                0.3                                                                                                                    0.3
                               0.25                                                                                                                   0.25
                                0.2                                                                                                                    0.2
                               0.15                                                                                                                   0.15
                                0.1                                                                                                                    0.1
                               0.05                                                                                                                   0.05
                                 0                                                                                                                      0
                                      1994           1995          1996         1997              1998           1999                                        1994           1995         1996          1997             1998           1999

                                         all parameters EU    dis EU, work US   work EU, dis US      all parameters US                                          all parameters EU   dis EU, work US   work EU, dis US      all parameters US


                                                             Work, females Finland                                                                                                  Work, males Finland

                                 1                                                                                                                     0.9
                               0.95
                                                                                                                                                      0.85
P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g




                                                                                                                         P ro p o rtio n w o rkin g
                                0.9
                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                               0.85
                                0.8                                                                                                                   0.75
                               0.75
                                                                                                                                                       0.7
                                0.7
                                                                                                                                                      0.65
                               0.65
                                0.6                                                                                                                    0.6
                                      1994           1995          1996         1997              1998           1999                                        1994           1995         1996          1997             1998           1999

                                         all parameters EU    dis EU, work US   work EU, dis US      all parameters US                                          all parameters EU   dis EU, work US   work EU, dis US      all parameters US




                                                                                                                                           47
