                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             EXPORT DYNAMICS IN COLOMBIA:
                                 FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE

                                           Jonathan Eaton
                                           Marcela Eslava
                                           Maurice Kugler
                                            James Tybout

                                        Working Paper 13531
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13531


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We gratefully acknowledge Banco de la República de Colombia for its support to this project, both
financially and in terms of data access. We also thank Pietro Bonaldi, Monica Hernández, and Miguel
Rueda for excellent research assistance, as well as Enrique Montes for expert data advice. Finally we
are grateful to Costas Arkolakis, Sascha Becker, Gene Grossman, Ricardo Hausmann, Elhanan Helpman,
Dalia Marin, Marc Melitz and participants in the CEPR conference on "Globalization and the Organization
of Firms", as well as members of the Board of Governors of Banco de la República de Colombia, for
valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jonathan Eaton, Marcela Eslava, Maurice Kugler , and James Tybout. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Export Dynamics in Colombia: Firm-Level Evidence
Jonathan Eaton, Marcela Eslava, Maurice Kugler , and James Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 13531
October 2007
JEL No. F10

                                               ABSTRACT

Using transactions-level customs data from Colombia, we study firm-specific export patterns over
the period 1996-2005. Our data allow us to track firms' entry and exit into and out of individual destination
markets, as well as their revenues from selling there. We find that, in a typical year, nearly half of
all Colombian exporters were not exporters in the previous year. These new exporters tend to be extremely
small in terms of their overall contribution to export revenues, and most do not continue exporting
in the following year. Hence export sales are dominated by a small number of very large and stable
exporters. Nonetheless, out of each cohort of new exporters, a fraction of firms go on to expand their
foreign sales very rapidly, and over the period of less than a decade, these successful new exporters
account for almost half of total export expansion. Finally, we find that new exporters begin in a single
foreign market and, if they survive, gradually expand into additional destinations. The geographic
expansion paths they follow, and their likelihood of survival as exporters, depend on their initial destination
market.


Jonathan Eaton                                         Maurice Kugler
Department of Economics                                Center for International Development
New York University                                    Kennedy School of Government
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                            Harvard University
New York, NY 10012                                     Cambridge MA 02138
and NBER                                               Maurice_Kugler@ksg.harvard.edu
jonathan.eaton@nyu.edu
                                                       James Tybout
Marcela Eslava                                         Department of Economics
Universidad de Los Andes                               Penn State University
Carrera 1 Este No 18 A -70. Bloque C                   517 Kern Graduate Building
Bogota, Colombia                                       University Park, PA 16802
meslava@uniandes.edu.co                                and NBER
                                                       jtybout@psu.edu
1     Introduction

Research in international trade, both theoretical and quantitative, is increasingly focussed

on the role of …rm heterogeneity in shaping trade ‡ows. One strand of the literature shows

how …rm-speci…c productivity shocks a¤ect the mix of exporting …rms and their foreign sales

volumes (e.g., Clerides, Lach, and Tybout, 1998; Bernard and Jensen, 1999; Melitz, 2003;

Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum, 2003; Das, Roberts, and Tybout, 2007; Bernard, Jensen,

Reading, and Schott, 2007). These studies provide insight into why some producers export and

others do not, and the role of market entry costs in shaping export dynamics. Another strand

of the literature documents and interprets the relationship between …rms’productivity levels

and the collection of foreign markets that they serve (Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz, 2004 and

2007). These papers …nd that most exporting …rms sell to only one foreign market, with the

frequency of …rms’selling to multiple markets declining with the number of destinations. At

the same time, …rms selling to only a small number of markets tend to sell to the most popular

ones. Less popular markets are served by …rms that export very widely. These patterns are

consistent with the notion that …rms with relatively low marginal costs can pro…tably exploit

relatively more foreign markets.

    While both strands of the literature have furthered our understanding of the relationships

between productivity distributions and trade ‡ows, the necessary data have not been available

to study both export dynamics and destination-speci…c ‡ows for the same set of producers.

Also, although several papers have examined the relationship between individual producer

decisions and aggregate export trajectories, they have done so only for selected manufacturing

industries (Roberts and Tybout, 1997b; Das, Roberts, and Tybout, 2007). This study exploits
comprehensive transactions-level trade data from Colombia to generate a new set of stylized

facts on both issues.

   Our analysis proceeds in several steps. After reviewing patterns of aggregate exports across

destination countries and over time, we decompose export growth into two parts: changes in

sales volume among incumbent exporters (“the intensive margin”) and changes in the set

of exporting …rms (“the extensive margin”). Next, we track the behavior of “cohorts” of

exporters from their …rst year in foreign markets onward. Finally, we characterize …rms’

transition paths as they change the set of export markets that they serve.

   Several key patterns emerge. First, in any one year, almost all export expansion or con-

traction comes from changes in sales by …rms that have been exporting for at least one year.

This dominance of existing …rms is despite the fact that one-third to one-half of all exporters

are new entrants in a typical year. These new …rms by and large do not add much to export

growth simply because (i) the majority do not last more than a year and (ii) their sales are

very small. Second, however, the new exporters who do survive their …rst year grow especially

rapidly for several years thereafter, and together account for about half of the total expansion

in merchandise trade over the course of a decade. An explanation for this pattern is that ex-

porters and importers frequently experiment with small scale transactions, and while most of

these experiments fail, those that prove mutually pro…table quickly lead to larger shipments.

Third, as exporters add or drop markets, they appear to follow certain geographic patterns.

For example, those that begin by exporting to Latin American destinations are more likely

to add markets than those that begin by exporting to the United States. This pattern may

partly re‡ect the nature of the goods being shipped, but it may also mean that certain markets



                                               2
are well-suited to serve as “testing grounds”for new exporters who wish to learn about their

foreign market potential.




2         Data

Our data set includes all export transactions by Colombian …rms between 1996 and 2005.

Each transaction is recorded separately, and we aggregate transactions by a given …rm to

obtain total exports by that …rm in each year. A transaction record includes the …rm’s tax

ID (which serves as a time-invariant identi…er), a product code, the value of the transaction

in US dollars, and the country of destination. Because we use the same data that are used

for o¢ cial statistics, the merchandise exports in our data set aggregate to within one percent

of total merchandise exports reported by the Colombian Bureau of Statistics (Departamento

Administrativo Nacional de Estadística or DANE).1

        Before turning to the …rm-level data themselves, we set the stage by reviewing the aggre-

gate movements in Colombian exports over the period we are considering. Figure 1 depicts

annual Colombian merchandise exports from 1996 through 2005 (in current US dollars) to

external markets. It also breaks out exports to several signi…cant destinations: (i) the United

States, (ii) the European Union, and (iii) Venezuela and Ecuador, Colombia’s contiguous

neighbors with active cross-border trade.2 Note that the …rst seven years exhibit alternating
    1
        The deviation is due to mistakes in the records of tax identi…ers. Since following …rms over time is

central to our analysis, our database includes only records of transactions in which the tax identi…er has the

appropriate format. Not satisfying this requirement is a clear indication that the …rm is not correctly identi…ed

in the record.
    2
        Colombia also shares borders with Brazil, Panama, and Peru, but the borders lie mostly in unpopulated



                                                       3
periods of modest growth and decline, with drops in 1998, 2001, and 2002. Growth picks up

again in 2003 and then accelerates in the most recent two years. These patterns are re‡ected

closely in exports to the United States, Colombia’s largest destination in terms of overall value.

Colombia’s exports to the European Union, on the other hand, experience a much longer and

more pronounced decline over the years 1999 through 2002, recovering to their 1997 level only

at the end of the period.3 Colombian exports to its neighbors have grown overall but have

been much more volatile than exports to other destinations, with sharp declines in 1999, 2002,

and 2003. These overall patterns should be kept in mind as we turn to the …rm level activity

underlying them.




3         Total Exports and the Number of Firms: The Cross

          Section

With our …rm-level data we can decompose aggregate exports into (i) the number of …rms

selling and (ii) average sales per …rm. Denoting by Xn (t) aggregate Colombian exports to

market n in year t; by Nn (t) the number of …rms selling there, and by xn (t) average sales per

…rm we can write the identity:


                                      ln Xn (t) = ln Nn (t) + ln xn (t):
jungle areas, so that cross-border trade is much less intense. Moreover, most economic activity in Colombia

takes place in the valleys between the various Andean mountain ranges and on the Caribbean coast. These

areas are contiguous with Venezuela and Ecuador, but not with the other neighbors.
    3
        European integration and the emergence of former Soviet states as new sources of imports probably

contributed to the sluggish growth of European demand for Colombian goods.




                                                      4
Figure 2 provides a quick sense of the contribution of the two terms on the right to the term

on the left by plotting Nn (t) against Xn (t): Each data point represents a speci…c destination

in a speci…c year. The relationship is clearly upward sloping, indicating that the extensive

margin (more …rms) plays an important role.

   A regression of ln Nn (t) against ln Xn (t) provides a measure of the average contribution

of entry to changes in the value of exports. The implied margin is :54, meaning that, in

comparing two destination-years, a doubling of export volume re‡ects just over 50 percent

more …rms. An implication, of course, is that sales per …rm rise by slightly less than 50

percent.

   A similar exercise is conducted by Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2004), who relate the

total number of French exporters to the market size (rather than total exports as we use

here) of the destination for a 1986 cross-section. They …nd a margin of entry of just under

two-thirds. To the extent that total exports of a particular country are proportional to market

size (as implied by the standard gravity formulation) the result then implies that the number

of French exporters should rise with total French exports with the same elasticity. The lower

elasticity we …nd for Colombia seems to be related to the fact that many destinations are

served by just a few, frequently just one or two, Colombian …rms. Note in Figure 2 that the

relationship between the two margins becomes much tighter for destinations served by 10 or

more …rms. In the case of France, no market is served by fewer than sixty French exporters.

   Note also in Figure 2 that many of the destinations with only one Colombian exporter

purchased rather large volumes, suggesting that larger, probably more established, exporters

tend to be those that explore new destinations. On the other hand, the destinations that



                                              5
attract the most Colombian exporters tend to purchase relatively little per exporter. These

destinations may present Colombian exporters with relatively low entry-cost barriers and/or

a diversi…ed collection of potential buyers. Either characteristic would make them attractive

to new exporters who wish to try out foreign markets on a small scale. We will return to

consider these possibilities further below.




4    Decomposing Growth: Continuing Firms, Entry, and

     Exit

Having seen the importance of the extensive margin in explaining cross-sectional variation,

we now ask how much it contributes to changes over time. We …rst look at how growth in

exports re‡ects the contributions of continuing …rms, entrants, and exiters using the identity:

           XnCO (t) XnCO (t 1)
                                                                                                                   (1)
         [XnCO (t 1) + XnCO (t)] =2
         0 X                                       10          X                                              1
                      [xn (j; t 1) + xn (j; t)] =2                           [xn (j; t)     xn (j; t   1)]
         B                                         CB                                                        C
         B j2CNnt 1;t                              CB       j2CNnt     1;t
                                                                                                             C
       = B                                         CB        X                                               C
         @ [XnCO (t 1) + XnCO (t)] =2 A @                               [xn (j; t         1) + xn (j; t)] =2 A
                                                        j2CNnt 1;t
                                                X
                                                           [xn (j; t)         xn (t       1)]
                   N ENnt 1;t xn (t
                                 1)           j2ENnt 1;t
           +                              +
               [XnCO (t 1) + XnCO (t)] =2    [XnCO (t 1) + XnCO (t)] =2
                                               X
                                                       [xn (j; t 1) xn (t 1)]
                        t 1;t
                   N EXn xn (t 1)           j2EXnt 1;t
                                                                              :
               [XnCO (t 1) + XnCO (t)] =2      [XnCO (t 1) + XnCO (t)] =2

Here XnCO (t) denotes total Colombian exports to destination n in year t and xn (j; t) is exports

by …rm j to destination n in period t: The terms CNnt            1;t
                                                                       ; ENnt      1;t
                                                                                         ; and EXnt    1;t
                                                                                                             represent,

respectively, the set of …rms that exported to n in t       1 and t; that exported in t but not t                    1;

                                                6
and that exported in t          1 and not t: We refer to these sets of …rms as pairwise continuing,

pairwise entering, and pairwise exiting. N ENnt                1;t
                                                                     and N EXnt   1;t
                                                                                        represent the number of

…rms in the ENnt       1;t
                             and EXnt   1;t
                                              sets, respectively. The term xn (t           1) represents average

exports of a …rm to destination n in period t                1:4

       The left-hand side of equation (1) measures the growth in exports between t                      1 and t.

The expression on the …rst line of the right-hand side represents the contribution to growth

of pairwise continuing …rms, de…ned here as those that exported in both periods. It equals

the share of continuing …rms’exports over the two years times the growth in their sales.

       The second and third lines measure the contributions of entry and exit, respectively, to

export growth. The contribution of entry is expressed as the sum of two terms: (i) the growth

in exports implied by the increase in the number of exporters if new …rms had the same average

sales as those of the average …rm in period t                1; and (ii) the di¤erence between exports of

entrants and those of the average …rm in t              1. The …rst term is thus gross percentage entry

in terms of numbers of …rms and the sum of the …rst and second is the total contribution of

entry to growth. Similarly, the contribution of exit is expressed as the sum of the contraction

that would have occurred if each exiting …rm had been as large as the average t                      1 exporter,

and a term that corrects for the fact that exiting …rms are relatively small.
   4
       Note that we follow the convention of treating growth as the change between two dates divided by the

average level in the two dates rather than the change divided by the level in the earlier date. Bene…ts are that

(i) x percent growth followed by    x percent growth returns us to the same level and (ii) values close to zero

in the …rst year have a less extreme e¤ect on the growth rate.




                                                         7
4.1        Aggregate Growth

Table 1 presents the results of applying equation (1) to decompose aggregate export growth,

year by year. Cross-year averages of the growth components are presented in the last row.

Also, to highlight the cumulative e¤ects of entry and exit, the next-to-last row presents a

cross-decade application of the decomposition. This latter set of …gures treats all exporters

observed in 2005 but not in 1996 as entering …rms, all exporters observed in 1996 but not

2005 as exiting …rms, and exporters observed in both years as continuers.5

       The calculations in this table pool all the destinations. The main line for each component

represents the contribution to growth itself by the corresponding term and the expression

in parentheses below is the percentage contribution to the total change. Similarly, Figure 3

shows year-to-year export growth disaggregated into the three basic components of equation

(1) for all destinations. In addition to the contributions of continuing …rms, entry, and exit,

it also shows the net e¤ect of entry and exit.

       Table 1 and Figure 3 indicate that continuing …rms drive most of the year to year ‡uc-

tuations, although much less so after 2001. Note, for instance, that in Figure 3 the lines for

total growth and growth by continuers are almost identical up to 2001. For later years, total

growth takes o¤, re‡ecting an increase in net entry. Looking at the cross-decade decomposi-

tion, however, net entry contributed to over a quarter of the growth in exports (26%, or 17.4

percentage points of growth, calculated from the next-to-last line in Table 1).

       Breaking the net entry e¤ect for a typical year into its individual components, one …nds that
   5
       The bottom row of the table reports annual averages. Unlike the other rows the overall growth rate in the

…rst column does not relate exactly to the remaining components according to the identity above since some

of the individual terms enter nonadditively.


                                                        8
if entrants had exported as much per …rm as pairwise continuers, they would have generated

about 46 percentage points of total annual export growth, on average (last line of table 1).

But since their exports per …rm were smaller the net export growth from gross entry averaged

only 3.2 percentage points. Some algebra shows that behind these …gures is an average size

of entrants, relative to those of …rms selling the previous year, equal to 1                                     (42:2=45:4) = :066

or 6.6 percent.6 Similarly, exiting …rms would have reduced exports by 43.6 percentage points

per year if they had exported as much per …rm as a typical …rm the previous year. But

since their exports per …rm were smaller by factor of 5.5 percent, gross exit implied only 2.3

percentage points of export contraction.

       The cross-decade version of the decomposition (next-to-last line of table 1) shows that the

cumulative e¤ects of entry and exit were nonetheless substantial. Gross entry contributed 47

percent (31.3 percentage points) of total growth, and would have implied 61.5 percentage

points of growth if entrants exported as much as the average …rm at the beginning of the

period. (A calculation like the one above indicates that by the end of this period these …rms

exported about half as much as the average …rm at the beginning.) Similarly, the gross exit

of …rms would have implied a contraction of exports of 53.9 percentage points if those …rms

exported as much as the average …rm of the beginning of the period. However, the average

sales of exiting …rms were about 25 percent of the beginning of period average, implying a net

contraction of exports due to gross exit of 13.9 percentage points.
   6
       The average size of entrants relative to incumbents is

                     X
                                 x(j;t)
                                                                            X
                                              x(t   1) N EN t   1;t
                                                                      +                  (x(j; t)   x(t   1))
                  j2EN t   1;t

                    N EN t       1;t                                      j2EN t   1;t                                (5)
                                          =                                                                     =1+
                     x(t         1)                        x(t        1) N EN t          1;t                          (4)

where in the last equality (4) and (5) refer to numbers of columns in Table 1.


                                                                      9
   In sum, 8% of the average year-to-year growth in exports is explained by year-to-year net

entry. This number is small despite vigorous turnover among exporters because …rms that

have just begun to export or are about to stop exporting typically sell relatively little. On

the other hand, as we further discuss in section 5 below, …rms that enter foreign markets and

survive more than a year are typically able to expand rapidly. Thus, net entry over the course

of the sample period accounts for one quarter of the cumulative total export expansion, while

gross entry explains about half of total growth. Below, we further explore and emphasize the

importance of gross entry for long run export growth.



4.2    Individual Destinations

Figure 4 shows annual averages of this decomposition for the ten most popular destination

markets (on a transaction basis, see the notes to the …gure for greater detail on the classi-

…cation of destinations). Note that exports to some countries, particularly the Dominican

Republic, grew phenomenally while, as discussed above, exports to the European Union lan-

guished. Furthermore, with the exception of Panama, where there was little growth but much

entry, high growth appears to be associated with more exporter turnover, as well as more net

entry. And, with the exception of Europe, continuing …rms explain a large part of the vari-

ation in growth rates across destinations. Thus, although markets are heterogeneous, some

general patterns explain the behavior of exports to most destinations. In particular, while net

entry contributes positively to export growth, pairwise continuers explain most of it.




                                              10
4.3       Di¤erences in Size: Gibrat’s Law Fails

Gibrat’s Law holds that the growth rate of a …rm is independent of its size. To what extent does

Colombian export growth obey the law? To address this issue we next decompose the growth

rate of continuing …rms into quintile-speci…c components. More precisely, we decompose the

contribution of continuing exporters in equation (1) as:
           X
                  [xn (j; t) xn (j; t 1)]
            j2CNnt   1;t
             X
                         [xn (j; t     1) + xn (j; t)] =2
          j2CNnt   1;t

               0         X                                             10         X                                             1
                                     [xn (j; t    1) + xn (j; t)] =2                            [xn (j; t)     xn (j; t   1)]
          X5 B                                                      CB                                                          C
              B j2CN (q)tn 1;t                                      CB       j2CN (q)tn   1;t
                                                                                                                                C
      =       B    X                                                CB          X                                               C
          q=1
              @              [xn (j; t           1) + xn (j; t)] =2 A @                      [xn (j; t       1) + xn (j; t)] =2 A
                     j2CNnt 1;t                                             j2CN (q)tn 1;t

where CN (q)tn        1;t
                            denotes the set of …rms that sold in both period t                           1 and period t that

were in the qth quintile according to their sales in market n in period t                                      1 (with the t        1

quintile de…ned regardless of whether …rms went on to sell in period t or not). The …rst term

in parentheses is the share of quintile q in total sales (obviously declining in q). The second

is the growth rate of sales by that quintile.

      Table 2 presents the quintile-speci…c growth rates that correspond to the right-hand side

component in the product above. Quintile 1 includes those …rms whose exports in year t                                              1

fell above the 80th percentile in that year, quintile 2 includes …rms between the 60th and

80th percentile, and so on. For comparison purposes, Table 2 also reports quintile-speci…c

growth rates inclusive of those …rms that exited in the following year, and quintile-speci…c

mean exports. Panel A does the analysis for total exports year by year while Panel B presents

annual averages taken over individual destinations.7 Panel C presents the decompositions for
  7
      In order to calculate quintiles we limited ourselves to destinations with at least …ve exporters.


                                                               11
the ten most popular destinations.

       All three panels of table 3 imply a major departure from Gibrat’s Law: Sales growth

is systematically higher among …rms in the low-sales quintiles, even when exit is taken into

account. Remarkable is the huge growth in sales of continuing …rms in the …fth quintile. This

quintile is always the fastest growing. Nevertheless, because …rms in this quintile initially sell

so little, their contribution to overall growth is trivial. Sales of …rms in the …rst quintile for

each destination grow by less than the overall growth rates of continuing …rms. Even among

these larger exporters, taking into account exit substantially lowers overall growth.

       One explanation for this di¤erential growth across quintiles is that …rms face increasing

resistance to foreign market penetration as their exports grow. Sustaining growth may be

di¢ cult because exporters encounter capacity constraints, because their foreign demand elas-

ticities fall as they expand, or because the return per dollar expenditure on advertising drops

as their market penetration increases (as in Arkolakis, 2006).

       Alternatively, it may be that new exporters go through a learning period during which

their buyers try them out on a very limited scale (Rauch and Watson, 2003). Buyers may be

learning about sellers’business practices and products, while sellers learn about the reliability

of their potential partners and the scope for future sales. Once this exploration process has

played out, …rms either terminate their exporting relationship or experience a surge in orders.8

       Panel C of Table 2 allows us to investigate the distribution of sales across the di¤erent

destinations. We observe higher growth for …rms in the low-sales quintiles, compared with the

high-growth ones, for all destinations. However, there are some interesting di¤erences across
   8
       This process is analogous to models of passive learning where, at the start of operations, there is resolution

upon entry of ex ante uncertainty about pro…tability (see e.g., Jovanovic, 1982).



                                                          12
markets. The small growth of total exports to the EU relative to other destinations is only

replicated by the …rst quintile. Moreover, while the EU exhibits no important di¤erences with

respect to the US in quintiles 2 through 4, in the …fth quintile exports to the EU actually

show much larger growth than those to the US.

   Figure 5 plots (on a log scale) the ratio of each quintile’s sales relative to the sales of the

third quintile. For exports to the United States and Europe, sales by the …rst quintile are

remarkably larger than those by the third quintile, much more so than for other destinations.

This result contrasts with Eaton et al. (2004), who …nd remarkable similarity in the sales

distributions of French exporters across destinations.

   We also explore how …rms move from one quintile to another. Table 3 reports year-to-year

transitions across quintiles, de…ned in terms of …rms’total sales (across all destinations). Each

element of the matrix reports the probability that a …rm in the quintile corresponding to the

column in year t    1 transits into the quintile corresponding to the row in year t; with entry

from not exporting and exit from exporting added possibilities. We de…ne the population of

…rms as those that exported at least once during the 1996-2005 sample period. (There are,

of course, many more …rms selling in Colombia that never exported over our sample period

while, at the same time, many of the …rms in our population did not exist in all sample years.)

Only …rms in the top two quintiles face more than half a chance of staying in their quintile

or higher. Only those in the top three quintiles face more than half a chance of surviving. At

the same time, of those …rms that didn’t export in period t     1 but did export in period t; one

in three start in the …fth percentile, but a surprising one in six start in the second percentile.

   Table 4 ‡eshes out the potential link between size on entry and longevity of the …rm in



                                               13
exporting. The bottom row reports the fraction of entrants in each quintile in year of entry.

A third of entrants start in the smallest (…fth quintile) while 4 percent begin in the top one.

The elements in the matrix report the probability that a …rm that entered in the quintile in

the column transits into the quintile in the row the following year. Only sellers in the top

quintile face a higher probability of continuing than of exiting. Hence initial …rst year sales

are an excellent indicator of survival. Nevertheless, about 10 percent of …rms that enter in

the …fth quintile transit into quintiles with more sales by the following year.



4.4    Interaction Across Markets

Table 5 provides a similar decomposition as Table 1 for the 10 most popular destinations.

Going beyond Table 1, however, it distinguishes continuing exporters, entrants, and exiters

according to their participation in other markets in the same year (t) or previous year (t   1).

Speci…cally, for continuing …rms, we separate …rms that sell only in market n from those that

sell in other markets as well in year t. We separate …rms that enter market n into “old”

entrants, who exported to some other country in t        1; and “new” entrants who exported

nowhere in t    1. Similarly, we classify …rms that exit from exporting to n into …rms that

continue exporting in t to some other destination, and those that drop exporting altogether.

See the Table notes for the precise de…nitions. Since we report averages across years the

…gures don’t obey exactly the identity equivalent to (1).

   Among continuing …rms, those selling in multiple markets represent a much larger share

of total sales, especially in less popular markets. This pattern is consistent with Eaton et

al.’s (2007) model, in which …rms with low marginal costs or highly appealing products reach



                                              14
more export markets, and sell relatively large volumes in those markets where less e¢ cient

exporters are also present. There does not appear to be any systematic di¤erence between the

growth of sales of …rms selling to multiple markets and just that particular market; in some

markets the former grow much rapidly, while in others the opposite is the case.

      New entrants are particularly important, relative to entrants that were already selling

in other markets, in those countries that represent the largest shares of exports: the US,

the EU, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama.9 For other destinations, such as the Dominican

Republic, this pattern is reversed. Because they tend to export much more, however, entry

by experienced exporters tends to contribute much more to growth in all destinations.

      It is also the case that, for popular destinations, …rms that cease exporting altogether

are more numerous than …rms that exit that market but continue exporting elsewhere, while

the opposite is true for the average destination. Taken together, these patterns suggest that

countries are attractive as proving grounds for new exporters either if they o¤er a relatively

large and diversi…ed consumer base (the US and the EU), or they are relatively easy to access

(Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama). Other destinations seem to be visited mostly by …rms

that export elsewhere.



4.5       Numbers, Revenues, and Size

We saw in the growth decompositions that large numbers of …rms enter or exit each desti-

nation market every year. We now examine these entering and exiting …rms in more detail,

distinguishing those that are present for only one year from those that remain for longer pe-

riods. Table 6 reports, for each year in our sample that is not an endpoint, data on …rms
  9
      Jointly, these countries capture over 70 percent of Colombian merchandise exports.


                                                      15
that: (i) enter exporting, (ii) continue exporting, (iii) exit from exporting, and (iv) export for

just one year. Entry and exit are de…ned di¤erently from above, where we were just referring

to pairwise entry and exit (i.e., entry and exit de…ned over t               1 and t). With the pairwise

de…nitions above, a …rm that exports only in year t is considered as entering in that year and

exiting in the following year, and it is not treated di¤erently from other …rms that export for

longer periods. Here we di¤erentiate single-year exporters from …rms that start exporting and

keep doing so for at least an additional year, and from …rms that exit after having exported

for at least two consecutive years. More speci…cally, entrants in year t are now …rms that not

only: (i) did not export in t         1 and (ii) exported in t; but (iii) must export in t + 1 as well.

Exiters in t must (i) export in t         1; (ii) export in t, and (iii) not export in t + 1. Continuers

must not only (i) export in t           1 and (ii) export in t; as above, but (iii) export in t + 1 as

well. The remaining …rms, those that exported in t but not in t                 1 or t + 1 are what we call

“single year”exporters. As mentioned, they would have been included with both entering and

exiting …rms in our pairwise de…nitions above.

       The top panel of Table 6, looking across exporters to any destination, presents the numbers

of such …rms for each year. The middle panel presents the total value of their exports while the

bottom panel reports mean exports per …rm, which is the ratio of the corresponding number

in the middle panel to the corresponding number on the top panel.

       Starting with the counts, Table 6 con…rms that single year exporters are very common.10

It further shows that the total number of exporting …rms varies over the period substantially,

dropping from 10,517 in 1996 to a trough of 6,765 …rms in 1999 (a year of deep recession),
  10
       This high exit rate among …rst-year exporters is consistent with Besedes’s (2006) …ndings using 10-digit

product level data on U.S. exports.



                                                       16
rising back to 11,720 by the end of the period. This volatility was due to single year exporters

and, to a lesser extent, exiting …rms. The number of entering and continuing …rms exhibits

smaller ‡uctuations around trend growth. The second panel shows, as was suggested by Table

1, that continuing …rms provide the bulk of exports for all the years.

   As shown in the third panel, continuing …rms export the most per …rm by a huge amount.

Note that exports per continuing …rm have not grown, but have ‡uctuated around US$ 3

million. The growth in total exports of continuing …rms, and therefore most aggregate growth,

has been overwhelmingly at the extensive margin of continuing …rms although, as documented

earlier, net entry contributed several percentage points to growth during 2003-2005. Both the

number of continuing exporter …rms and the total amount they exported rose about 50 percent

over the period, while exports per continuing …rm remained stable.

   Entering and exiting …rms have been similar in size to each other, small, and volatile

year to year. Single year exporters have been much smaller still. Several interpretations are

available for the fact that so many …rms are jumping into and out of foreign markets, earning

little revenue while they are in. One is that sunk entry costs are quite modest for a large

fraction of producers. Given that other studies have found signi…cant entry costs for many

…rms (Roberts and Tybout, 1997a; Das et al., 2007), this interpretation further suggests that

the costs of “testing the waters” may be substantially less than the cost of locking in major

exporting contracts. Such a two-tiered entry cost structure is implied by Rauch and Watson’s

(2003) model of international matching between buyers and sellers. An alternative (and not

necessarily competing) interpretation is that …rms undergo serially-correlated productivity or

product quality shocks. Those that experience a sequence of very favorable draws …nd that



                                              17
exporting is very pro…table, and they persistently do so on a large scale. In contrast, those

with draws just su¢ cient to induce them to export do so on a small scale, and frequently

experience shocks negative enough to bump them out of foreign markets altogether. This is

the mechanism used by Das et al. (2007) to explain patterns of exporter turnover and sales

heterogeneity.11

       Table 7 presents the results for individual destinations, averaging across the ten most

popular. While the numbers are scaled down the overall picture is very similar.




5        Analysis by Cohort

From Table 1 we saw that entering …rms made only a very small contribution to export growth

in the year of entry, although gross entry explained almost half of growth over the full eight

year period. To examine the connection between the small year-to-year e¤ect and the large

long-term e¤ect we investigate the role that entrants play as their cohort ages, as surviving

members acquire experience in foreign markets.12 In doing so, we come closer to characterizing

the “life cycle”of an exporting episode, getting a better sense of what would happen to export

sales if new …rms faced higher barriers to initiating foreign operations.
  11
       Another dimension underlying the pattern of export entry which may be of relevance, and is left for future

research, is whether the …rm is linked with a multinational corporation that may have partially sunk some of

the costs associated with distribution and product placement associated with penetration of new markest. The

evidence in Kugler (2006) shows that in other important dimensions such as productivity, scale, skill intensity

and capital intensity, multinational a¢ liate manufacturing plants display higher averages than domestically

owned ones.
  12
       Brooks (2006) performs a similar analysis using Colombian plant-level data.




                                                        18
       Table 8 presents data on the activity of …rms that enter in a particular year t over the

remaining years of our sample. A …rm is assigned to cohort t if the …rst report of an export

transaction by that …rm over our whole period of study occurs in year t. We don’t know

what …rms did before 1996 but, for comparison purposes, we report …rms present in 1996 as

if they belonged to a “1996” cohort. Hence …gures for this “cohort” should be interpreted

very di¤erently, as they combine …rms starting to export in 1996 and survivors from previous

cohorts.

       In parallel with Tables 6 and 7 the top panel reports the number of …rms, the middle panel

the total exports of these …rms, and the bottom panel the consequent average exports per

…rm. Note …rst that the survival rate among …rst-year exporters is typically around one-third,

and in some cases is much lower. Thus an enormous “weeding out” occurs in the year of

entry.13

       Interestingly, however, the survival rate typically rises substantially after the …rst year to

.8 or .9, except in the last year in the sample, when it is much lower across all cohorts. Thus

…rms that make it through the …rst year are much more likely to survive to the end of the

period. This …nding is consistent with learning on both sides of the market, as discussed

above.

       Turning to total sales, those of …rms that were present in 1996 remain quite stable at about

US$ 10 billion until the last two years, when they grew substantially, in parallel with total

exports. At the end of the period their exports still accounted for 76 percent of total foreign

sales. On the other hand, post-1996 entrants gain market share relative to the 1996 cohort in

most years, and account for 47 percent of the expansion in total exports between 1996 and
  13
       This result was of course implied by the large number of one-year exporters discussed above.


                                                       19
2005, as was also seen in Table 1.14 Di¤erent cohorts grow at di¤erent rates, however. Some

(such as the 1998 cohort) are slow to blossom, while others (such as the 2000 cohort) establish

themselves quickly.

      In terms of exports per …rm, size jumps substantially after the …rst year. Hence, even

though many …rms drop out after the …rst year, total exports by the cohort do not fall

accordingly. As of 2005, …rms that exported in 1996 remained over four times larger than

those in any entering cohort. But older cohorts are not always larger than younger ones. The

2000 cohort has the most exports per …rm among entering …rms.

      Table 9 reports results of a similar exercise for the ten most popular destinations; results

for the average destination (among the ten most popular ones) are reported. The overall

patterns are similar although, across these individual destinations, the 2001 rather than the

2000 cohort stands out as the most successful among entrants, while the 1998 cohort looks

closer to average. Also, post-1996 entrants play a more important role in the most popular

destinations, accounting for 70 percent of the export expansion by 2005.

      To summarize, in the aggregate or within individual markets, …rms that exported in the

…rst sample year (1996) remain more numerous 10 years later than any but the most recent

cohort. These long-time exporters continue to be the largest, both in total export sales and

in exports per …rm. Nonetheless, post-1996 entrants account for roughly half of the total

expansion in exports over the sample period. Although each wave of entering …rms exhibits

very high attrition rates within a year of their appearance, those new exporters that survive

this initial shakedown are very likely to thrive. Cohorts di¤er in their performance over the

years, with leapfrogging in size occurring. The heterogeneity in export growth conditional on
 14
      They account for 100 percent of the expansion between 1996 and 2003.


                                                    20
survival suggests that, among …rms attaining the threshold pro…tability of operating in a new

destination, there is a wide variety in export performance thereafter.15




6        Cross-Market Dynamics

We now use transition matrices to characterize cross-market patterns of entry and exit in more

detail. Table 10 breaks our sample into …rms that sell to di¤erent numbers of destination

markets: none, one, two, three to …ve, and so on, and then documents year-to-year transition

frequencies between the categories. Again, we de…ne the population of …rms to be those that

exported at least once during the 1996-2005 sample period. The bottom row of Table 10

reports the fraction of …rms in each cell at the beginning of the period. Note that the modal

number of destination markets is zero, with the frequency of …rms selling to multiple markets

declining in the number of markets.16

       The main part of Table 10 reports the frequency with which …rms assigned to the column

categories in year t 1 transited to the various row categories in year t. The columns thus sum

to 100. As expected, non-exporters almost always enter a single market when they initiate

foreign sales, and when …rms add or subtract markets, they are more likely to do so gradually

than in large clumps. This pattern is consistent with the model developed in Eaton et al.

(2007), augmented to allow for serially correlated productivity shocks.

       While transition matrices are typically diagonal dominant, note that …rms selling to one

destination are more likely to drop out of exporting than to continue exporting. Here again,
  15
       Irarrazabal and Opromolla (2006) provide a dynamic model of entry into export markets, based on Luttmer

(2006), that captures some of these elements qualitatively.
  16
       This result parallels what Eaton et al. (2004) found in a cross-section of French …rms.


                                                        21
we are picking up the high failure rates among …rst-year exporters. A similar, albeit more

muted, pattern appears among …rms selling to two destinations. A member of this group is

more likely to drop down to one, or to drop out of exporting altogether, than to continue

selling to two or more. Only …rms selling to three or more destinations are more likely to

stay where they are or move up. The most stable …rm types are the non-exporters and those

selling to 10 or more destinations.

   Applying the transition matrix over and over again to an arbitrary initial allocation of …rms

across the cells gives the ergodic distribution implied by the transition matrix. Doing so 1000

times (by which point the distribution of cells had converged) yields an ergodic distribution

very close to the initial one given in the bottom row.

   We can also look at transitions across various groups of destinations. We …rst assign

destinations to three groups: the United States, neighbors (Venezuela and Ecuador), and

others. We then look at the various combinations of these groups. We create cells of these

di¤erent combinations and, as above, include a cell for not exporting in year t   1, conditional

on exporting in some year of our sample period. Table 11 reports the groups and the transitions

between them.

   The bottom row of Table 11 reports the initial frequency of …rms in the di¤erent cells.

No destinations is most common, followed by “others,” “neighbors,” and the United States.

Notable is the lack of overlap between …rms selling to the United States and …rms selling to

neighbors. The transition matrix is highlighted to show transitions between cells involving

the same number and di¤erent number of destination categories.

   The fact that the numbers in any row are quite di¤erent across columns implies that a



                                              22
…rm’s probabilities of moving into di¤erent markets depend upon its current market position.

For example …rms in the “neighbors”group are much more likely to move into “neighbors and

others”than …rms in the “others”market are. More generally, the “neighbors”cell o¤ers the

greatest promise of launching into a larger number of destination groups (with frequency .1,

compared with .08 for others and the United States). On the other hand, the …rst row indicates

that …rms are most likely to drop out of exporting from the US cell, followed closely by the

“others”cell. A non-trivial fraction of …rms selling to more than one destination also drop out

from exporting by the following period. The cell containing neighbors and the United States is

the least stable, o¤ering the greatest chance of launching into the cell with all three groups but

also the greatest chance of dropping down to zero or one destination. This path dependence

may re‡ect di¤erences in the types of products that are exported to di¤erent destinations,

destination-speci…c threshold costs for exporters breaking into new markets (which create

incentives to stay put), or some combination of both factors.

    The “others” category in Table 11 pools some very heterogeneous countries. To give a

more detailed picture of trade with countries in this residual group, Table 12 breaks countries

falling under this “others” heading into two subgroups: (i) non-neighbor Latin American

countries and (ii) the EU and the rest of the world (ROW). (OECD countries dominate the

second category.) We had seen in Table 11 that the “neighbors”category showed the greatest

probability of diversifying into more markets; Table 12 shows that this expansion occurs

mainly by entering other countries in Latin America. Moreover, while it is as likely that in

t   1 that a …rm exports solely to the neighbors category as it is that it exports to other

destinations in Latin America, the two categories di¤er in that the “neighbors”column shows



                                               23
higher probability of both continuing exporting and diversifying into new markets. Firms that

sell only to other Latin American destinations in t 1 stop exporting in t with probability 0.64,

compared to 0.56 for …rms that export only to the neighboring destinations. Also, moving to

the rows of “Neighbors, LA”or “Neighbors, USA, LA”occurs with probability 0.07 for …rms

that start selling only to neighbors, compared to 0.04 for those that start in the “LA” only

column.

    Once a …rm exports to both neighbors and other Latin American destinations, it enjoys

a 24 percent chance to expand further to reach an OECD destination while …rms that sell

only to neighbors or only to other countries Latin America are very unlikely to do so. Thus,

while neither neighbors nor Latin America stand alone as “stepping stones,”jointly they often

constitute the …rst two rungs to climb in the ascent to reach either the US and other OECD

countries.

    A similar exercise (not reported) was conducted separating the EU rather than Latin

America from others. The results show that very few Colombian …rms sell to the EU, and

that it is an unlikely destination for an initiate. At the same time, the few …rms that sell only

to the EU are less likely to increase their groups of destinations and are most likely, among

single group exporters, to drop out of exporting. These patterns trace at least partly to the

fact that the EU has remained a stagnant market from the perspective of Colombian …rms.




7     Summary

Each year, large numbers of new Colombian exporters appear in foreign markets. Most drop

out by the following year, but a small fraction survive and grow very rapidly. Thus, while


                                               24
the entering cohort in any given year makes a trivial contribution to total export sales, its

contribution over a longer period is signi…cant. Indeed, over the course of a decade almost

half of the total growth in Colombian merchandise exports was attributable to …rms that

were not initially exporters. One interpretation of this pattern is that new exporters and

their potential buyers undergo a period of learning about one another. As the uncertainty is

resolved, exporters either expand their sales substantially or abandon the particular market.

   While aggregate export levels are primarily accounted for by big established …rms, there

is an apparently important role of experimentation and selection. As explained above, entry

is important to export growth. In fact, the panel data shed light on the life-cycle of exporters

by showing that new exporters upon survival of the …rst year are crucial to growth. While

other studies have found signi…cant entry costs into export markets by individual …rms, our

…nding of substantial short-lived entry suggests that the costs of shipping small volumes to

new destinations are relatively small for many …rms. Those costs may be viewed as part of

the larger cost of establishing lucrative long-term export contracts. This two-tiered entry cost

structure is consistent with learning in export markets by both buyers and sellers.

   There appear to be dominant geographic expansion and contraction paths that …rms fol-

low as they add or subtract foreign destinations. Neighboring markets appear to act as

stepping stones for other Latin American markets. Once …rms have successfully penetrated

both neighboring and other Latin American destinations, they are more likely to reach larger

OECD markets (including the US and EU), but not vice versa. These patterns may well re‡ect

demand mix e¤ects, or market sizes and distances, as formalized in Eaton et al. (2007). But

they may also re‡ect learning processes at work and regional di¤erences in the mix of products



                                              25
demanded. That is, success in smaller markets may provide a signal that the expected payo¤

of testing the waters in larger markets exceeds the sunk costs.




                                             26
                                     References

Arkolakis, Konstantinos (2007) “Market Access Costs and the New Consumers Margin in

    International Trade,”University of Minnesota, Department of Economics, Working Pa-

    per.


Bernard, Andrew and J. Bradford Jensen (1999) “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,

    E¤ect, or Both?”Journal of International Economics , 47: 1-25.


Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, Samuel Kortum and Jonathan Eaton (2003) “Plants

    and Productivity in International Trade,”American Economic Review 93(4), 1268-1290


Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, J. Stephen J. Reading, and Peter K. Schott (1999)

    “Firms in International Trade,”forthcoming, Journal of Economic Perspectives.


Besedes, Tibor. 2006. “A Search Cost Perspective on Duration of Trade,” working Paper,

    Louisiana State University.


Brooks, Eileen (2006) “Why don’t …rms export more? Product Quality and Colombian

    Plants”Journal of Development Economics, 80: 160-178.


Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach and James Tybout (1998) “Is Learning-by-Exporting Impor-

    tant? Micro-dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico and Morocco,”Quarterly Jour-

    nal of Economics, pp. 903-947.


Das, Mita, Mark Roberts and James Tybout (2007) “Market Entry Costs, Producer Hetero-

    geneity and Export Dynamics,”Econometrica 75(3), pp. 837-874.

                                         27
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2004) “Dissecting Trade: Firms,

    Industries, and Export Destinations,”American Economic Review Papers and Proceed-

    ings, 94: 150-154.


Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2007) “An Anatomy of Inter-

    national Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” Working Paper, New York University,

    Department of Economics.


Eslava, Marcela, John Haltiwanger, Adriana Kugler, and Maurice Kugler (2004) “The Ef-

    fects of Structural Reforms on Productivity and Pro…tability Enhancing Reallocation:

    Evidence from Colombia,”Journal of Development Economics, 75: 333-371.


Irarrazabal, Alfonso A. and Luca David Opromolla (2006) “Hysteresis in Export Markets,”

    New York University, Working Paper.


Kugler, Maurice (2006) “Spillovers from foreign direct investment: within or between indus-

    tries?”Journal of Development Economics, 80(2): 444-477.


Jovanovic, Boyan (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, 50: 649-

    670.


Luttmer, Erzo (2006) “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,”forthcoming,

    Quarterly Journal of Economics.


Melitz, Marc (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

    Industry Productivity,”Econometrica 71, 1695-1725.




                                           28
Rauch, James and Joel Watson (2003) “Starting Small in an Unfamiliar Environment,”

    International Journal of Industrial Organization 21: 1021-1042.


Roberts, Mark and James Tybout (1997a) “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empir-

    ical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,”American Economic Review 87(4), pp. 545-563.


Roberts, Mark and James Tybout (1997b) What Makes Exports Boom? Directions in De-

    velopment Monograph Series, The World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                           29
                                              Table 1. Contribution of pairwise entry and exit to the growth of total exports between t-1 and t
                   Left hand side                                                                                               Right hand side
                                                         Contribution of pairwise continuers                                    Contribution of pairwise gross entry                      Contribution of pairwise gross exit
                Growth of exports          Continuers’ share in t-                  Growth of exports by                     Added number of      Exports of entering firms          Dropped number of     Exports of exiting firms
                                                      1 exports                                 continuers                        firms            relative to the average                 firms            relative to the average
                           (1)                              (2)                                       (3)                          (4)                        (5)                           (6)                        (7)
                X CO (t )  X CO (t  1)   t  1, t
                                                     x ( j , t  1)  x ( j , t )    x( j,t )  x( j, t 1)                                                                               NEXt 1, t * x(t 1)                 x( j, t  1)  x (t  1)
                                                                  2                jCN t 1, t                             NEN t 1, t * x (t  1)       x( j, t )  x (t  1)   
                X (t  1)  X CO (t ) j CN                                                     x( j, t  1)  x( j, t )    X (t  1)  X CO (t )
                                                                                                                                                       jEN  t 1, t
                                                                                                                                                                                             X CO (t 1)  X CO (t)       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              jEX t 1, t

                                                                                     
  Year (t)     ( CO                      )   X CO (t  1)  X CO (t )                                                      ( CO                     ) X CO (t  1)  X CO (t )           (                            )             X CO (t  1)  X CO (t )
                            2              (                                )                              2                                                                                                                    (                            )
                                                                                  jCN t 1, t                                        2               (                          )                     2                                       2
                                                             2                                                                                                     2
                          8.1%                               95.9%                                  10.1%                          55.2%                               -51.9%                     -55.7%                                     50.8%
   1997
                        (100%)                                                   (119%)                                                             (41%)                                                         ( -60%)
                         -5.9%                              95.9%                                  -6.8%                           36.8%                               -32.3%                     -64.0%                                     60.2%
   1998
                        (100%)                                                   (110%)                                                            ( -75%)                                                        (65%)
                          6.0%                              97.4%                                   6.5%                           35.9%                               -33.5%                     -47.7%                                     44.9%
   1999
                        (100%)                                                   (105%)                                                             (41%)                                                         ( -46%)
                         12.6%                              98.3%                                  12.3%                           46.3%                               -44.4%                     -34.3%                                     32.7%
   2000
                        (100%)                                                    (96%)                                                             (16%)                                                         ( -12%)
                         -6.4%                              98.1%                                  -6.9%                           52.8%                               -50.7%                     -36.6%                                     34.9%
   2001
                        (100%)                                                   (106%)                                                            ( -33%)                                                        (27%)
                         -3.3%                              98.4%                                  -2.9%                           42.6%                               -41.3%                     -39.6%                                     37.7%
   2002
                        (100%)                                                    (84%)                                                            ( -41%)                                                        (57%)
                          9.8%                              98.1%                                   8.9%                           46.9%                               -44.5%                     -36.4%                                     35.1%
   2003
                        (100%)                                                    (89%)                                                             (24%)                                                         ( -14%)
                         24.1%                              97.2%                                  22.6%                           45.3%                               -41.4%                     -34.6%                                     32.8%
   2004
                        (100%)                                                    (91%)                                                             (16%)                                                         ( -7%)
                         23.5%                              95.8%                                  19.8%                           46.6%                               -40.1%                     -43.6%                                     41.6%
   2005
                        (100%)                                                    (81%)                                                             (28%)                                                         ( -8%)
  t=2005                 66.2%                              77.4%                                  63.0%                           61.5%                               -30.2%                     -53.9%                                     40.0%
 t-1=1996               (100%)                                                    (74%)                                                             (47%)                                                         ( -21%)
  Annual                  7.6%                              97.2%                                   7.1%                           45.4%                               -42.2%                     -43.6%                                     41.2%
  Average               (100%)                                                    (90%)                                                             (42%)                                                         ( -32%)

Notes: this table reports the annual growth rate of total exports decomposed into the contribution of pairwise continuing, entering, and exiting firms. Pairwise continuing firms in t are those that
exported in t-1 and t. Pairwise entering firms in t are those that exported in t but not in t-1. Pairwise exiting firms in t are those that did export in t-1 but not in t. The contribution of pairwise
continuers is the product of columns (2) and (3). Percentage contribution of each term to growth of total exports reported in parenthesis.
                                             Table 2 Export growth by quintiles of value of exports in year t- 1, continuing and exiting firms

                                                                                                                 Panel A: Total exports
                                Quintile 1                               Quintile 2                                     Quintile 3                               Quintile 4                              Quintile 5
                               Exports       Mean Total                  Exports       Mean Total                  Exports          Mean Total                Exports         Mean Total                Exports       Mean Total
                    Exports                                 Exports                                     Exports                                    Exports                                   Exports
                               Growth          exports                   Growth          exports                   Growth             exports                 Growth            exports                 Growth          exports
                    Growth                                  Growth                                      Growth                                     Growth                                    Growth
                              Continuing-    between t-1                Continuing-    between t-1                Continuing-       between t-1              Continuing-      between t-1              Continuing-    between t-1
                   Continuing                              Continuing                                  Continuing                                 Continuing                                Continuing
                                Exiting      and t (US$                   Exiting      and t (US$                   Exiting         and t (US$                 Exiting        and t (US$                 Exiting      and t (US$
                     Firms                                   Firms                                       Firms                                      Firms                                     Firms
                                 Firms        Million)                     Firms        Million)                     Firms           Million)                   Firms          Million)                   Firms        Million)
     1997            8.9%        5.0%          10883         31.1%       -15.4%           155             60.4%          -4.3%            44       121.7%         48.7%           15        244.2%      167.4%            4
     1998            -7.4%      -10.2%         10977         21.4%       -21.8%           181             47.9%         -23.4%            45       113.9%         27.4%           15        167.8%       72.7%            4
     1999            5.7%        3.8%          10955         16.4%       -11.4%           210             40.8%         -12.2%            48       171.7%        108.1%           14        218.6%      138.9%            3
     2000           10.9%        9.9%          12061         47.4%        29.9%           217             93.4%          58.8%            49       137.3%         85.6%           14        325.4%      261.7%            3
     2001           -10.4%      -11.7%         12414         34.4%        18.6%           229            152.1%         119.1%            51       140.5%         92.4%           15        8052.0%     7990.9%           3
     2002            -3.7%       -5.0%         11815         20.6%         1.4%           220             36.0%          -3.8%            51       137.6%         77.8%           14        344.8%      268.9%            3
     2003            7.3%        6.4%          12254         56.0%        38.1%           199             84.8%          44.5%            46       147.4%         93.3%           13        1320.2%     1252.9%           3
     2004           20.9%       19.6%          14664         55.0%        37.9%           206             75.0%          37.7%            45       426.6%        370.7%           12        382.9%      311.9%            2
     2005           17.1%       15.6%          18668         61.0%        35.0%           234            160.7%         108.2%            45       131.7%         57.6%           11        8004.7%     7916.9%           2
t=2005, t-1=1996    66.7%       48.0%          10883        201.8%       124.8%           155            193.3%         106.1%            44       400.1%        312.9%           15        1155.3%     1065.4%           4
 Annual Average      5.5%        3.7%          12743         38.1%        12.5%           206             83.5%          36.1%            47       169.8%        106.8%           14        2117.8%     2042.5%           3

                                                                                      Panel B: Mean for destinations with 5 or more firms exporting every year
                                Quintile 1                               Quintile 2                                   Quintile 3                                 Quintile 4                              Quintile 5

                               Exports       Mean Total                  Exports       Mean Total                  Exports          Mean Total                Exports         Mean Total                Exports       Mean Total
                    Exports                                 Exports                                     Exports                                    Exports                                   Exports
                               Growth          exports                   Growth          exports                   Growth             exports                 Growth            exports                 Growth          exports
                    Growth                                  Growth                                      Growth                                     Growth                                    Growth
                              Continuing-    between t-1                Continuing-    between t-1                Continuing-       between t-1              Continuing-      between t-1              Continuing-    between t-1
                   Continuing                              Continuing                                  Continuing                                 Continuing                                Continuing
                                Exiting      and t (US$                   Exiting      and t (US$                   Exiting         and t (US$                 Exiting        and t (US$                 Exiting      and t (US$
                     Firms                                   Firms                                       Firms                                      Firms                                     Firms
                                 Firms        Million)                     Firms        Million)                     Firms           Million)                   Firms          Million)                   Firms        Million)

                      (1)         (2)            (3)          (1)           (2)            (3)             (1)            (2)             (3)         (1)          (2)            (3)          (1)         (2)            (3)
     1997            8.2%       -16.1%         137.5         24.5%        -20.9%           4.0            43.7%         -13.4%            1.2      124.6%         59.1%          0.42       164.6%       90.5%           0.11
     1998            -8.9%      -37.6%         138.7          9.7%        -38.3%           4.4            63.3%          2.5%             1.2       98.3%         27.4%          0.42       182.8%      109.8%           0.10
     1999           -14.1%      -32.3%         137.9         16.4%        -19.2%           4.9            44.9%          -5.9%            1.3      100.0%         38.8%          0.41       207.4%      143.0%           0.10
     2000            -0.2%      -16.5%         152.2         25.0%        -12.7%           4.9            38.8%          -4.9%            1.3      101.0%         48.8%          0.43       558.4%      494.7%           0.10
     2001            -4.5%      -24.1%         157.1         27.8%         -7.0%           5.2            53.4%         13.9%             1.4       65.0%          6.4%          0.45       231.6%      166.7%           0.10
     2002            -1.1%      -20.7%         149.3          8.0%        -24.7%           5.1            36.7%          -6.8%            1.4       49.5%        -12.7%          0.45       167.6%       99.8%           0.10
     2003            5.7%        -7.0%         155.0         20.7%         -5.1%           4.7            74.5%         37.2%             1.3       79.3%         27.7%          0.43       225.3%      164.1%           0.10
     2004            9.3%        -9.8%         185.8         36.2%         5.7%            5.1            71.1%         29.3%             1.4       97.9%         43.4%          0.44       175.3%      109.8%           0.10
     2005            6.5%       -11.6%         236.8         43.6%        11.0%            6.0            82.3%         36.2%             1.6       85.9%         23.8%          0.46       1095.8%     1024.8%          0.10
t=2005, t-1=1996    27.3%       -31.5%         137.5         97.0%        18.7%            4.0           120.5%         36.9%             1.2      234.6%        147.6%          0.42       509.7%      419.4%           0.11
 Annual Average      0.1%       -19.5%         161.1         23.6%        -12.3%           4.9            56.5%          9.8%             1.4       89.1%         29.2%          0.43       334.3%      267.0%           0.10
                                          Table 2 Export growth by quintiles of value of exports in year t- 1, continuing and exiting firms (continued)

                                                                                                                                 Panel C: Ten most popular destinations. Annual Average 1997-2005
                                           Quintile 1                                        Quintile 2                                                      Quintile 3                                                 Quintile 4                                   Quintile 5

                                       Exports           Mean Total                    Exports                              Mean Total                     Exports                           Mean Total                Exports       Mean Total                  Exports           Mean Total
                            Exports                                         Exports                                                             Exports                                                     Exports                                   Exports
                                       Growth              exports                     Growth                                 exports                      Growth                              exports                 Growth          exports                   Growth              exports
                            Growth                                          Growth                                                              Growth                                                      Growth                                    Growth
                                      Continuing-        between t-1                  Continuing-                           between t-1                   Continuing-                        between t-1              Continuing-    between t-1                Continuing-        between t-1
                           Continuing                                      Continuing                                                          Continuing                                                  Continuing                                Continuing
                                        Exiting          and t (US$                     Exiting                             and t (US$                      Exiting                          and t (US$                 Exiting      and t (US$                   Exiting          and t (US$
                             Firms                                           Firms                                                               Firms                                                       Firms                                     Firms
                                         Firms            Million)                       Firms                               Million)                        Firms                            Million)                   Firms        Million)                     Firms            Million)

                               (1)            (2)            (3)                 (1)               (2)                             (3)             (1)                   (2)                     (3)          (1)         (2)            (3)             (1)            (2)            (3)
 United States                5.8%          4.5%           5397.2               36.9%          12.0%                              86.0           68.4%                18.9%                     16.8        126.5%       59.7%           4.5          839.9%         762.2%            0.9
 European Union              -1.5%          -3.8%          2105.1               32.1%           4.2%                              23.4           60.8%                12.0%                      6.1        148.7%       84.8%           1.7          3193.3%        3117.4%           0.3
 Venezuela                    3.8%          -2.1%          1122.9               47.4%          25.3%                              69.3           72.3%                33.7%                     19.2        160.5%      107.8%           6.0          376.5%         313.2%            1.5
 Ecuador                      8.3%          3.2%            625.0               28.6%           7.6%                              35.9           58.7%                22.2%                     11.0        185.4%      135.0%           4.0          233.1%         170.4%            1.1
 Peru                        -2.3%          -8.2%           403.9               34.7%          12.3%                              18.9           37.2%                -3.1%                      5.2        112.0%       59.9%           1.6          567.0%         502.6%            0.4
 Mexico                       8.7%          1.7%            246.9               42.7%          18.8%                              20.6           95.8%                59.1%                      5.8        134.6%       81.6%           1.7          475.0%         413.3%            0.3
 Puerto Rico                  7.4%          -1.8%           189.4               25.4%           4.5%                               7.6           34.2%                -1.8%                      2.8         67.7%       14.9%           1.1          215.1%         149.5%            0.3
 Panama                       0.8%         -12.5%           165.5               24.1%          -2.1%                              10.9           59.4%                19.2%                      3.8         97.8%       43.2%           1.4          227.4%         160.2%            0.4
 Costa Rica                   0.3%          -4.8%           137.0               27.7%           6.9%                               9.3           61.4%                26.0%                      3.2        104.6%       55.9%           1.2          347.6%         283.9%            0.3
 Dominican Republic          18.4%         13.1%            176.2               28.2%           4.5%                               8.3           67.9%                31.6%                      2.9         79.0%       29.4%           1.1          158.5%          95.1%            0.3



Notes: This table reports the average annual growth rate of exports by continuing and exiting firms, discriminated by quintiles of firm exports in t-1. Panel A shows this figure for total exports, while Panel B and C shows the same figure by destinations,
the former reporting average across destinations with 5 or more firms exporting and the latter reporting annual average for the ten most popular destinations. Pairwise continuing firms and pairwise exiting firms are defined as in Table 1 for panel A; for
panels B and C applies the same definition by destination. For each quintile q, column (1) in panel A reports the annual average of         ( x( j, t )  x( j, t  1)) , where CNt-1,t(q) is the set of pairwise continuing firms that belonged to quintile q of the
                                                                                                                                                                       jCN nt 1, t ( q )

                                                                                                                                                                             X (q, t  1)  X (q, t )
                                                                                                                                                                                        2

distribution of firm sales in t-1. Column (2) in Panel A reports the annual average of
                                                                                                         ( x( j, t )  x( j, t  1)) , where CN         t-1,t
                                                                                                                                                                 (q), EXt-1,t(q) is the set of all pairwise continuing and pairwise exiting firms that belonged to quintile q of the distribution
                                                                                          jCN t 1, t ( q ), EX t 1, t ( q )

                                                                                                    X ( q, t  1)  X ( q, t )
                                                                                                                2
of firm sales in t-1. Column (3) reports the annual average of X (q, t  1)  X ( q, t ) , the average value of exports to destination n by firms belonging to quintile q of the distribution of firm sales to destination n between t-1 and t. In panels B and C all
                                                                            2
statistics are calculated at the destination level, and quintiles defined in terms of the distribution of firm sales to destination n in t-1. The ten most popular destinations are characterized as described in Figure 4.
                            Table 3 Transition matrix for the quintile of exports to which a firm belongs
                           Conditional Probability of transiting from quintile of exports x in t-1 to quintile y in t

                                                                            Initial quintile (x)
                                                 1            2            3                4           5               None
                                   1           0.77         0.12         0.02             0.01        0.00              0.00
      Final quintile (y)




                                   2           0.11         0.39         0.15             0.05        0.02              0.02
                                   3           0.02         0.12         0.20             0.11        0.04              0.03
                                   4           0.01         0.04         0.09             0.13        0.08              0.03
                                   5           0.00         0.02         0.04             0.06        0.10              0.04
                                  None         0.10         0.31         0.50             0.64        0.76              0.88
    P(start exporting in
                                               0.04         0.04         0.04            0.04         0.04              0.80
         quintile x)

Notes: this table reports number of firms which transited from quintile of exports x in t-1 to quintile y in t, divided by the number
of firms in quintile x in t-1. Sample consists of all firms that reported at least one year exporting
Table 4 Transition matrix between t-1 and subsequent year for the quintile of exports to which a
                               firm in entry cohort t-1 belongs
Conditional Probability of a firm in entry cohort t-1 transiting from exporting in quintile of exports x
                                        in t-1 to quintile y in t

                                                                    Quintile in t-1 (x)
                                           1                 2              3                  4                5
                                 1       0.46              0.10           0.02               0.00             0.00
            Quintile in t (y)




                                 2       0.11              0.20           0.10               0.04             0.01
                                 3       0.03              0.09           0.12               0.08             0.03
                                 4       0.01              0.03           0.06               0.09             0.06
                                 5       0.01              0.02           0.03               0.05             0.08
                                None     0.38              0.56           0.67               0.74             0.82
       P(firm in entry cohort t-
         1 start exporting in            0.04              0.12             0.22             0.28             0.34
             quintile x )


      Notes: this table reports number of firms in entry cohort t-1 which transited from quintile of exports x in t-1 to
      quintile y in t, divided by the number of firms in entry cohort t-1 and in quintile x in t-1. Sample consists of all
      firms in entry cohort t-1 for t-1=1997,…,2004 A firm belongs to entry cohort t-1 if it exported in t-1 but did not
      previous years.
                   Table 5 Contribution of pairwise entry and exit to the growth of total exports between t-1 and t, by destination. Firms classified
                                                                   according to where else they sell

                                                                             Ten most popular destinations. Annual average 1997-2005.

                            Left hand side                                                                                    Right hand side
                                                        Contribution of pairwise continuers                            Contribution of gross pairwise entry                     Contribution of gross pairwise exit
                                                                               Multiple market                                                                            Exiting-dying in every Exiting-continuing in
                                                 Single-market continuer                                           New-Entrant firms            Old-Entrant firms
                                                                                  continuer                                                                                       market             some other market
                              Growth of
                               exports                                                                                          Exports                     Exports                       Exports                      Exports
                                                                                                                 Added                         Added                       Added                      Added
                                                 Share in t-1    Growth of       Share in t-1    Growth of                     relative to                 relative to                   relative to                   relative
     Destination                                                                                                number of                     number                      number of                  number of
                                                   exports        exports          exports        exports                          the                         the                           the                        to the
                                                                                                                  firms                       of firms                      firms                      firms
                                                                                                                                average                     average                       average                      average
                                  (1)                 (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)            (9)            (10)          (11)        (12)             (13)
   United States                 7.9%                7.6%            6.0%          89.8%            7.0%          37.5%         -35.1%         11.2%        -10.4%          -34.1%         32.7%       -9.5%             9.0%
  European Union                 1.5%                1.0%            7.0%          95.2%           -0.6%          29.5%         -27.0%         18.9%        -16.7%          -29.0%         26.8%      -16.5%            15.9%
    Venezuela                   10.5%                5.6%            1.9%          85.7%           10.3%          24.8%         -17.3%         11.8%         -9.7%          -25.1%         20.0%      -12.7%            10.1%
     Ecuador                    12.7%                3.2%           17.1%          89.5%           13.0%          22.9%         -18.8%         13.5%        -10.1%          -23.8%         19.6%      -12.0%             9.3%
       Peru                      1.7%                0.6%           18.5%          91.8%            0.6%          17.1%         -14.7%         21.6%        -15.9%          -19.9%         17.2%      -19.5%            14.9%
      Mexico                    21.2%                0.6%           37.3%          86.9%           17.2%          20.6%         -17.3%         27.2%        -14.9%          -17.1%         13.7%      -19.2%            13.3%
    Puerto Rico                 11.4%                1.7%           14.9%          86.8%           11.4%          20.8%         -18.4%         22.5%        -12.4%          -19.0%         17.0%      -19.0%            10.2%
      Panama                     6.2%                2.0%           -1.1%          82.1%            5.6%          26.4%         -20.8%         19.2%         -8.2%          -24.2%         18.8%      -17.1%             7.3%
    Costa Rica                   8.3%                1.1%           -2.3%          90.1%            5.4%          21.9%         -18.5%         21.3%        -14.1%          -18.9%         16.2%      -17.5%            13.0%
    Dominican
                                25.4%                0.5%           9.5%           89.8%           23.2%          15.3%          -12.8%        25.0%         -15.8%         -13.7%         12.0%         -20.1%         14.1%
     Republic

Notes: this table decomposes the contribution of pairwise continuing, exiting, and entering firms to exports growth in a given destination, classifying firms according to whether they sell to other destinations in t or t-1.
A pairwise continuing firm in t is one that exported to market n in t-1 and t. It is defined as single-market continuer if it exported to a single market in t-1 and t and as multiple-market continuer if it exported to multiple
markets in t-1 or t. A pairwise entering firm in t is one that exported to market n in t but not in t-1. It is defined as new-entrant if it did not export in year t-1 to other markets, and as old-entrant otherwise. A pairwise
exiting firm in t is one that exported to market n in t-1 but did not export to n in t. It is defined as exiting-dying in every market if it does not export to any market in t and as exiting-continuing in some other market if it
continues to export to at least one other market in t. The ten most popular destinations are characterized as described in Figure 4. For other relevant definitions see Table 1.
            Table 6. Entering, exiting, continuing and single-year exporters, 1996-2005
                                                       Number of firms
   Year             Entering                  Continuing            Exiting                      Single-year                  Total
   1996                -                           -                    -                             -                       10517
   1997              1002                        2957                1457                           5047                      10463
   1998              1073                        2841                1118                           2665                      7697
   1999              1101                        3191                 723                           1750                      6765
   2000              1358                        3569                 723                           1987                      7637
   2001              1420                        3975                 952                           2490                      8837
   2002              1310                        4304                1091                           2397                      9102
   2003              1519                        4609                1005                           2966                      10099
   2004              1326                        4412                1716                           3880                      11334
   2005                -                           -                    -                             -                       11720
                                             Total Value of exports (US$ Millions)
   Year             Entering                  Continuing            Exiting                      Single-year                  Total
   1996                -                           -                    -                             -                       10651
   1997               189                       10933                 249                           181                       11552
   1998               338                       10244                 149                           160                       10890
   1999               204                       11177                 116                            71                       11569
   2000               165                       12735                 140                            77                       13118
   2001               187                       11887                 148                            82                       12305
   2002               104                       11629                 105                            63                       11901
   2003               230                       12638                 191                            69                       13127
   2004               480                       15876                 272                           104                       16731
   2005                -                           -                    -                             -                       21190
                                              Exports per firm (US$ Thousands)
   Year             Entering                  Continuing            Exiting                      Single-year                  Total
   1996                 -                          -                    -                             -                       1013
   1997               188                        3697                 171                            36                       1104
   1998               315                        3606                 133                            60                       1415
   1999               186                        3503                 160                            41                       1710
   2000               122                        3568                 194                            39                       1718
   2001               132                        2990                 155                            33                       1392
   2002                79                        2702                  96                            26                       1307
   2003               152                        2742                 190                            23                       1300
   2004               362                        3598                 158                            27                       1476
   2005                 -                          -                    -                             -                       1808

Notes: this table reports numbers of continuing, exiting, entering, and single year exporting firms, as well as value of exports in
each category, using three year definitions of entry and exit. Continuing firms in t are those that exported in t-1, t and t+1. Entering
firms in t are those that did not export in t-1, and did export in t and t+1. Exiting firms in t are those that exported in t-1 and t, but
not in t+1. Single-year exporters in t are those that exported in t, but not in t-1 nor in t+1
  Table 7 Entering, exiting, continuing and single-year exporters to individual destinations,
                                          1996-2005
                                      Mean for the ten most popular destinations

                                                      Number of firms
   Year              Entering                 Continuing            Exiting                        Single-year                 Total
   1996                 -                          -                   -                                -                      1446
   1997                175                        506                185                              570                      1436
   1998                181                        520                161                              353                      1215
   1999                200                        562                139                              265                      1165
   2000                253                        621                141                              321                      1335
   2001                273                        697                177                              389                      1536
   2002                248                        750                220                              398                      1616
   2003                277                        801                197                              455                      1730
   2004                270                        808                271                              574                      1922
   2005                 -                          -                   -                                -                      1953
                                               Value of exports (US$ Millions)
   Year              Entering                 Continuing            Exiting                        Single-year                 Total
   1996                 -                          -                   -                                -                       896
   1997                22                         887                 25                               21                       956
   1998                40                         840                 19                               20                       919
   1999                31                         920                 24                               14                       990
   2000                24                        1065                 18                               12                      1119
   2001                47                         977                 19                               14                      1058
   2002                23                         953                 21                               13                      1009
   2003                43                        1025                 19                               13                      1100
   2004                49                        1294                 38                               17                      1397
   2005                 -                          -                   -                                -                      1748
                                              Exports per firm (US$ Thousands)
   Year              Entering                 Continuing            Exiting                        Single-year                 Total
   1996                  -                         -                   -                                -                      620
   1997                125                       1753                137                               38                      666
   1998                219                       1616                120                               55                      756
   1999                157                       1639                171                               53                      849
   2000                 93                       1716                128                               38                      838
   2001                174                       1402                105                               37                      688
   2002                 91                       1270                 97                               32                      625
   2003                155                       1280                 94                               29                      636
   2004                181                       1602                141                               29                      727
   2005                  -                         -                   -                                -                      895

Notes: this table reports numbers of continuing, exiting, entering, and single year exporting firms in a given destination, as well as
value of exports in each category, using three year definitions of entry and exit. For a given destination n, continuing firms in t are
those that exported to market n in t-1, t and t+1. Entering firms in t are those that did not export to market n in t-1, and exported to
market n in t and t+1. Exiting firms in t are those that exported to market n in t-1 and t, but not in t+1. Single-year exporters in t are
those that exported to market n in t, but not in t-1 nor in t+1. The average for the ten most popular destinations is reported. The ten
most popular markets are characterized as in Figure 4.
                             Table 8. Firms by initial export year cohorts, 1996-2005

                                                       Number of firms
                                              First year of report between 1996 and 2005
 Year       1996      1997     1998     1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005                             Total Number of firms
 1996      10517        0        0         0         0       0        0      0      0     0                   10517
 1997       4414      6049       0         0         0       0        0      0      0     0                   10463
 1998       3306      1002     3389        0         0       0        0      0      0     0                    7697
 1999       2718       617      938     2492         0       0        0      0      0     0                    6765
 2000       2539       552      761      938 2847            0        0      0      0     0                    7637
 2001       2418       523      700      735 1113 3348                0      0      0     0                    8837
 2002       2260       484      632      621       833 1156 3116             0      0     0                    9102
 2003       2200       465      578      553       697     903 1048 3655            0     0                   10099
 2004       2089       435      528      519       637     759      859 1131 4377         0                   11334
 2005       2051       420      362      407       505     568      578    769 1000 5060                      11720
                                               Value of exports (US$ Millions)
                                              First year of report between 1996 and 2005
 Year       1996      1997     1998     1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005                             Total Value of exports
 1996      10651        0        0         0         0       0        0      0      0     0                   10651
 1997      11182       369       0         0         0       0        0      0      0     0                   11552
 1998      10053       361      477        0         0       0        0      0      0     0                   10890
 1999      10514       421      392      241         0       0        0      0      0     0                   11569
 2000      11723       475      335      377       207       0        0      0      0     0                   13118
 2001      10373       483      296      395       525     233        0      0      0     0                   12305
 2002      10049       422      286      362       406     240      136      0      0     0                   11901
 2003      10651       490      358      381       546     228      222    251      0     0                   13127
 2004      13547       442      409      342       600     366      269    329    427     0                   16731
 2005      16207       725      451      588       891     435      295    349    585    665                  21190
                                             Exports per firm (US$ Thousands)
                                              First year of report between 1996 and 2005
 Year      1996       1997     1998     1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005                             Total Exports per firm
 1996      1013          0       0         0         0       0        0      0      0     0                    1013
 1997      2533         61       0         0         0       0        0      0      0     0                    1104
 1998      3041        360      141        0         0       0        0      0      0     0                    1415
 1999      3868        683      418       97         0       0        0      0      0     0                    1710
 2000      4617        861      440      402        73       0        0      0      0     0                    1718
 2001      4290        923      423      537       471      70        0      0      0     0                    1392
 2002      4446        872      452      584       487     208       44      0      0     0                    1307
 2003      4841       1053      620      689       783     252      212     69      0     0                    1300
 2004      6485       1016      776      658       942     482      313    291     98     0                    1476
 2005      7902       1725     1247     1444 1764 766               510    454    585    131                   1808

Notes: this table classifies firms exporting each year according to the first year in which they reported exporting in our sample
period (1996-2005) . Total number of firms and value of exports represented by these firms are reported for each entry cohort.
                     Table 9 Firms by initial export year cohorts to individual destinations, 1996-2005

                                                   Mean for the ten most popular destinations

                                                             Number of firms
                                                        First year exporting to destination n
  Year       1996      1997       1998      1999     2000       2001     2002     2003      2004            2005      Total Number of firms
  1996       1446         0          0         0        0          0        0        0         0              0               1446
  1997        691       745          0         0        0          0        0        0         0              0               1436
  1998        559       175        481         0        0          0        0        0         0              0               1215
  1999        484       127        159       395        0          0        0        0         0              0               1165
  2000        454       114        127       162      479          0        0        0         0              0               1335
  2001        432       106        118       131      198        552        0        0         0              0               1536
  2002        410        97        101       113      153        216      526        0         0              0               1616
  2003        391        92         88        97      132        161      186      585         0              0               1730
  2004        383        91         85        91      122        141      147      201       661              0               1922
  2005        372        86         70        78      100        118      112      136       180             702              1953
                                                    Value of exports (US$ Millions)
                                                        First year exporting to destination n
  Year       1996      1997       1998      1999     2000       2001     2002     2003      2004            2005      Total Value of exports
  1996        896        0          0         0         0          0        0        0         0              0                896
  1997        913       43          0         0         0          0        0        0         0              0                956
  1998        824       39         55         0         0          0        0        0         0              0                919
  1999        868       47         42        32         0          0        0        0         0              0                990
  2000        966       44         32        48        29          0        0        0         0              0               1119
  2001        848       42         31        47        41         48        0        0         0              0               1058
  2002        811       31         26        35        33         43       29        0         0              0               1009
  2003        813       47         34        30        35         70       33       38         0              0               1100
  2004        999       56         42        37        44         88       42       45        45              0               1397
  2005       1163       55         50        42        58        116       43       44        53             123              1748
                                                   Exports per firm (US$ Thousands)
                                                        First year exporting to destination n
  Year       1996      1997       1998      1999     2000       2001     2002     2003      2004            2005      Total Exports per firm
  1996        620         0         0          0        0          0        0        0         0              0               620
  1997       1321        58         0          0        0          0        0        0         0              0               666
  1998       1476       225        115         0        0          0        0        0         0              0               756
  1999       1792       371        267        81        0          0        0        0         0              0               849
  2000       2127       387        249       299       60          0        0        0         0              0               838
  2001       1965       398        266       358      207         88        0        0         0              0               688
  2002       1979       324        255       310      217        201       56        0         0              0               625
  2003       2080       513        386       306      269        434      177       66         0              0               636
  2004       2608       621        492       404      358        624      284      225        68              0               727
  2005       3125       646        714       540      575        984      386      327       298             175              895

Notes: this table classifies firms exporting to market n each year according to the first year in which they reported exporting to market n in our
sample period (1996-2005) . Total number of firms and value of exports to market n represented by these firms are reported for each entry
cohort. Simple averages for the ten most popular destinations, characterized as in Figure 4, are reported.
                       Table 10. Transition matrix for number of destinations a firm sells to
 Conditional Probability of transiting from exporting to x destinations in t-1 to y destinations in t

                                                             Initial number of destinations (x)
                                      0               1                2            3-5                6-10             10+
                           0        0.88            0.65             0.27          0.10                0.04             0.01
    Final number of
    destinations (y)



                           1        0.11            0.26             0.27          0.10                0.02             0.01
                           2        0.01            0.06             0.25          0.16                0.02             0.00
                          3-5       0.00            0.03             0.20          0.49                0.22             0.02
                         6-10       0.00            0.00             0.02          0.14                0.57             0.16
                         10+        0.00            0.00             0.00          0.01                0.13             0.80
  P(start exporting to x
                                    0.80            0.13             0.03             0.03             0.01             0.01
 number of destinations)

Notes: this table reports number of firms which transited from exporting to x destinations in t-1 to y destinations in t, divided by
the number of firms exporting to x destinations in t-1. Sample consists of all firms that reported at least one exporting transaction
between 1996 and 2005.
 Table 11 Transition matrix for groups of destinations a firm sells to. USA, neighbors and others.
           Conditional Probability of transiting from exporting to group of destinations x in t-1 to group of
                                                   destinations y in t

                                                                     Initial group of destinations (x)
                                                                                                                        Neighbors,
                                                                                 Neighbors,     USA, Neighbors,
                                       None     Others     Neighbors USA                                                  USA,
                                                                                  Others        Other  USA
                                                                                                                         Others
                     None               0.88     0.63         0.56       0.64       0.12         0.15        0.19          0.04
                    Others              0.06     0.27         0.03       0.02       0.10         0.10        0.04          0.03
 destinations (y)
 Final group of




                  Neighbors             0.03     0.02         0.31       0.01       0.09         0.00        0.16          0.02
                     USA                0.03     0.01         0.01       0.26       0.00         0.09        0.13          0.01
              Neighbors, Others         0.00     0.04         0.08       0.00       0.56         0.02        0.08          0.16
                 USA, Other             0.00     0.03         0.00       0.06       0.01         0.57        0.05          0.08
               Neighbors, USA           0.00     0.00         0.01       0.01       0.01         0.01        0.18          0.02
          Neighbors, USA, Others        0.00     0.01         0.01       0.01       0.11         0.07        0.17          0.65
    P(start exporting to group of
                                        0.80     0.07         0.04       0.03       0.03         0.02        0.00           0.01
            destinations x)

Notes: this table reports the number of firms which transited from exporting to the group of destinations x in t-1 to the group of
destinations y in t, divided by the number of firms exporting to the group of destinations x in t-1. Destinations classified into USA,
Neighbors, and others, where “Neighbors” refers to Venezuela and Ecuador. Combinations where x and y represent the same
number of destinations are highlighted. Sample consists of all firms that reported at least one exporting transaction between 1996
and 2005.
                                                        Table 12 Transition matrix for groups of destinations a firm sells to. USA, neighbors, Latin America, EU and ROW.
                                                              Conditional Probability of transiting from exporting to group of destinations x in t-1 to group of destinations y in t

                                                                                                                             Initial group of destinations (x)
                                                                                                                                                                        USA,
                                                                                                                   USA,                 LA,                                                        Neighbors,
                                                                           EU                  Neighbors,                                            Neighbors,          LA, Neighbors,
                                                                                                                    EU USA, Neighbors, EU Neighbors,                                    Neighbors, USA, LA,
                                                                     None and Neighbors USA LA  EU and                                               USA, EU             EU   LA, EU
                                                                                                                    and LA     LA       and USA                                         USA, LA     EU and
                                                                          ROW                    ROW                                                 and ROW             and and ROW
                                                                                                                   ROW                 ROW                                                           ROW
                                                                                                                                                                        ROW
                                                  None                0.88   0.67    0.56    0.64   0.64   0.23     0.15   0.24      0.13      0.26       0.19   0.08   0.08    0.05       0.05       0.02
                                             EU and ROW               0.02   0.23    0.01    0.01   0.01   0.11     0.07   0.01      0.00      0.11       0.01   0.03   0.03    0.01       0.00       0.00
                                                Neighbors             0.03   0.01    0.31    0.01   0.02   0.16     0.00   0.01      0.11      0.01       0.16   0.03   0.00    0.03       0.04       0.00
                                                  USA                 0.03   0.01    0.01    0.26   0.01   0.01     0.12   0.13      0.00      0.01       0.13   0.03   0.03    0.00       0.02       0.00
 Final group of destinations (y)




                                                    LA                0.03   0.01    0.02    0.01   0.23   0.02     0.00   0.13      0.09      0.14       0.03   0.00   0.02    0.02       0.04       0.01
                                       Neighbors, EU and ROW          0.00   0.01    0.01    0.00   0.00   0.20     0.00   0.00      0.01      0.01       0.02   0.05   0.00    0.03       0.01       0.01
                                          USA, EU and ROW             0.00   0.02    0.00    0.04   0.00   0.01     0.50   0.03      0.00      0.03       0.02   0.18   0.16    0.00       0.01       0.01
                                                USA, LA               0.00   0.00    0.00    0.02   0.01   0.00     0.01   0.20      0.01      0.02       0.02   0.00   0.03    0.00       0.04       0.01
                                             Neighbors, LA            0.00   0.00    0.06    0.00   0.04   0.07     0.00   0.03      0.46      0.04       0.05   0.01   0.00    0.17       0.19       0.02
                                           LA, EU and ROW             0.00   0.02    0.00    0.00   0.02   0.02     0.01   0.02      0.01      0.21       0.01   0.02   0.04    0.05       0.00       0.01
                                            Neighbors, USA            0.00   0.00    0.01    0.01   0.00   0.01     0.00   0.01      0.01      0.00       0.18   0.05   0.00    0.00       0.03       0.01
                                    Neighbors, USA, EU and ROW        0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.02     0.02   0.01      0.00      0.00       0.04   0.22   0.02    0.01       0.01       0.02
                                       USA, LA, EU and ROW            0.00   0.01    0.00    0.01   0.00   0.01     0.09   0.09      0.00      0.06       0.01   0.07   0.47    0.01       0.02       0.05
                                    Neighbors, LA, EU and ROW         0.00   0.00    0.01    0.00   0.01   0.10     0.00   0.01      0.10      0.07       0.01   0.03   0.01    0.42       0.07       0.10
                                         Neighbors, USA, LA           0.00   0.00    0.01    0.00   0.00   0.01     0.00   0.05      0.06      0.00       0.10   0.03   0.01    0.03       0.29       0.05
                                   Neigh, USA, LA, EU and ROW         0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.02     0.01   0.03      0.03      0.03       0.04   0.15   0.09    0.17       0.18       0.68
                                   P(start exporting to group of
                                                                      0.80   0.03    0.04    0.03 0.04     0.00     0.01   0.00      0.02      0.00       0.00   0.00   0.01     0.01      0.00       0.01
                                           destinations x)
                                   Participation on total exports     0.00   0.01    0.02    0.05 0.01     0.01     0.07   0.04      0.03      0.01       0.01   0.01   0.21     0.06      0.02       0.45


Notes: this table reports the number of firms which transited from exporting to the group of destinations x in t-1 to the group of destinations y in t, divided by the number of firms exporting to the
group of destinations x in t-1. Destinations classified into USA, Neighbors, Latin America and Caribe (LA) excluding Neighbors and others, where "Neighbors" refers to Venezuela and Ecuador and
“Others” to European Union (EU) and Rest of the World (ROW). Combinations where x and y represent the same number of destinations are highlighted. Sample consists of all firms that reported at
least one exporting transaction between 1996 and 2005. Last row represent exports to column group of destinations in year t (t=1996,...2004) as a percentage of total exports in year t (t=1996,...,2004).
          Figure 1 Colombian exports by destination




Figure 2. Number of firms and total exports to a given destination, 1996-
                             2005
                           Figure 3 Decomposition of export growth




                Figure 4 Decomposition of export growth across markets




Note: Results for the ten most popular destinations, classified according to the number of firms selling in
that destination between 1996 and 2005, are being reported. The share of those destinations in total
exports (annual average for 1996-2005) is as follows: United States (42.1%), European Union (17.0%),
Venezuela (9.3%), Ecuador (5.1%), Peru (3.5%), Mexico (2.0%), Puerto Rico (1.5%), Panama (1.4%),
Costa Rica (1.1%), Dominican Republic. (1.4%).
Figure 5 Size distribution by quintiles
