                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BUDGET DEFICITS AND RATES OF
                  INTEREST IN THE 'RLD ECONOMY



                         Jacob A. Frenkel
                           Assaf   Razin


                      Working Paper No. 1354




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May l98




This paper was written while A. Razin was a visiting Professor at
the Woodrow Wilson School of International Affairs, Princeton
University. The researth reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity (World Econorrw). Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NEER Working Paper #1354
                                               May 1984




           Budget Deficits and Rates of Interest in the World Economy


                                 ABSTRACT



      This paper deals with the international transmission of the effects of
budget deficits on world rates of interest and spending. The model assumes
a two—country world within which capital markets are integrated, individuals
behave rationally, and the behavior of individuals and governments are governed
by temporal and intertemporal budget constraints. Adopting Olivier Blanchard's
formulation it is assumed that due to the probability of finite life individ-
 uals behave as if their horizon was finite. This formulation generates a
simple pattern of aggregate behavior of the two—country world, and it assures
that the model is not subject to the Ricardian proposition according to which
budget deficits do not matter.
      It is shown that, for a given time path of government spending, a budget
deficit raises world rates of interest and domestic wealth while it lowers
foreign wealth. Thus, the deficit is transmitted negatively to the rest of
the world. The channel of transmission is the world capital market and the
negative transmission results from the higher rate of interest. The paper pro-
ceeds with an analysis of balanced—budget changes in government spending. It
is shown that a transitory current rise in government spending raises interest
rates and lowers domestic and foreign wealth while an expected future rise in
government spending lowers interest rates, reduces the value of domestic wealth
and raises the value of foreign wealth. The effect of a permanent rise in
government spending on the rate of interest depends on whether the domestic
eonoray is a net saver or dissaver iii the world economy, i.e., if it has a
current account surplus or deficit. If the home country runs a current account
surplus then a rise in government spending raises world interest rates and
lowers domestic and foreign wealth, and if the home country runs a current
account deficit then a permanent balanced—budget rise in government spending
lowers interest rates and domestic wealth and raises foreign wealth.

Professor Jacob A. Frenkel                                Professor Assaf Raziñ
Department of Economics                                   Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                     Tel—Aviv University
1126 E. 59th Street                                       Ramat Aviv,
Chicago, IL 60637                                         Israel
(312)962—8253
I. Introduction

        This paper deals with international economic interdependence and the

international transmission of the effects of budget deficits. The question

of the effects of budget deficits on rates of interest, on consumption, and

on the nature of the real equilibrium, has been the subject of analysis in

both closed and open economy contexts. Much of the traditional analysis

demonstrating that budget deficits exert real effects have built on the

presumption that government bonds constitute net wealth to individual asset—

holders. The key issue of debate has been whether asset—holders take full

account of the prospective tax liabilities that are associated with the need

to service the debt created by current deficits. Recent research on the effects

of government spending has embodied the Ricardian proposition according to

which individuals take full account of future tax liabilities and, therefore,

as long as government spending remains unchanged, the path of taxes and there-

by the path of budget deficits do not affect the real equilibrium of the

system. [For expositions see Bailey (1962) and Barro (1974)].

        In the international context this perspective implies that world rates

of interest and other real variables depend only on total government spending

rather than on the time path of the deficit. Thus, in a previous paper (Frenkel

and Razin (1984)) we have analysed the effects of fiscal spending on real rates

of interest, debt and their international transmission. Our model, which

assumed full rationality, perfect markets and absence of distortions, embodied

the Ricardian feature and, therefore, in it budget deficits played no role. As

is well known there are several ways by which a "fully rational" model can in-

corporate the feature that budget deficits influence the nature of the real equili-

brium. For example, models which allow for distortionary taxes, [e.g. Barro (1979),

Kydland and Prescott (1980), Lucas and Stokey (1983), and Razin and Svensson (1983)],
                                       —2—


price rigidities or incoraplete markets for intergenerational risk sharing

[e.g. Stiglitz (1983)], or individuals with finite horizons, [e.g. Diamond (1965)

and Samuelson (1958)], will all yield the result that fiscal deficits matter.

       In this paper we extend our previous analysis in order to deal with the

role of budget deficits in effecting world rates of interest, consumption and

international indebtedness, and to study the resulting nature of the international

transmission mechanism. Our earlier model is modified by the inclusion of indivi-

duals with the possibility of finite horizons. We adopt the formulation deve-

loped in Blanchard (1984) according to which the finiteness of the horizon is

introduced through the assumption that, at each point in time, individuals, who are

assumed to have no bequest motive, face a given probability of death. The main

attraction of Blanchard's formulation lies in its capacity to generate a relatively

simple pattern of aggregate behavior in a general equilibrium framework in which

rational individuals respond to government deficits.

       Analyses of the nature of the international transmission mechanism and of

the impact of fiscal policies on world rates of interest have been central to

earlier studies of open—economy macroeconomics. Typical examinations of the

international transmission of fiscal policies have employed variants of the

Mundell—Fleming models [Nundell (1968), Fleming (1962)]. These contributions

were stimulated by the increased integration of world capital markets. They

highlighted the interdependence among the exchange rate regime, the degree of

capital mobility and the impact of fiscal policies, and they paid special atten-

tion to the conditions determining whether fiscal policies are transmitted posi-

tively or negatively to the rest of the world. Typical to this approach has been

the lack of a sharp distinction between the impacts of different time patterns of

fiscal spending and budget deficits. Our paper attempts to deal with these ques—
                                       —3—


tions using an analytical framework within which capital markets are fully inte-

grated, economic agents are rational and the behavior of all agents, including

governments, are constrained by an intertemporal solvency requirement.

       Section II outlines the building blocks of the model. It contains a

derivation of individual consumption, a characterization of aggregate wealth

accumulation, and a specification of the government budget constraint. In this

section we illustrate the key features of the model by analysing the impact of

budget deficits for a small open economy.

       The core of the paper is contained in sections III, IV and V where we

analyse the interdependence between two open economies. In section III, we

characterize the equilibrium conditions for the integrated two—country world

economy. The impacts of budget deficits are analysed in section IV. It is

shown that a budget deficit raises world rates of interest as well as domestic

wealth and consumption while it lowers foreign wealth and consumption. Thus,

the deficit is shown to be transmitted negatively to the rest of the world.

The channel of transmission is the world capital market and the negative trans-

mission results from the higher rate of interest.

       The analysis of budget deficits is conducted under the assumption that the

deficit results from changes in the time path of taxes while holding constant the

time path of government spending. In section V we analyse the impact of changes

in the level of government spending.    In order to separate the effects of the

level of government spending from those of the budget deficit we assume in this

section that changes in fiscal spending are accompanied by corresponding changes

in taxes so as to yield a balanced budget.   It is shown that a transitory

rise in government spending raises interest rates and lowers domestic and foreign

wealth. On the other hand, an expected future rise in government spending lowers
                                     —4—



interest rates and reduces the value of domestic wealth and consumption, while

it raises the value of foreign wealth and consumption. We then analyse the

effect of a permanent rise in government spending. It is shown that its impact

on the rate of interest depends on whether the domestic economy is a net saver

or dissaver in the world economy or, equivalently, whether it has a current

account surplus or deficit. If the home country runs a current account surplus

then a rise In government spending raises world interest rates and lowers domestic

and foreign wealth and consumption. On the other hand if the home country runs

a current account deficit then a permanent balanced—budget rise in government

spending lowers interest rates and domestic wealth and raises foreign wealth.

We thus, show the critical importance of specifying the details of fiscal policy

in terms of the level and timing of government spending and taxes. Section VI

contains some concluding remarks.
                                                            —5—




II. The Model

              Our model has two economies each of which consists of consumers and

government. The path of output in each economy is assumed to be given.

In this section we outline the key building blocks of the model, starting

with the specification of consumption in the home country.



11.1 Consumption

              Individuals are assumed to face a given probability of death. We

denote the probability that an individual will survive from one period to

the next by y , which is assumed to be independent of the individual's age.

Thus, the probability that an individual will survive the next t                     periods
          t
is    y


              Let the utility function at period t of an individual who was born

in period s be:

                                       v-t
(1)                   U =    Z     5         log   c
                                                       sv
                            v= t




where S         denotes the subjective discount factor and where a                  denotes the

rate of consumption in period v of an individual born in period s .                       It   is

assumed that the individual maximizes expected utility which is computed on

the basis of the probability of survival. The probability, as of period t, that

the individual will be alive in period v (and enjoy the utility of level

log c) is 1vt               Therefore, expected utility can be written as




(2)                                          log a          =
                                                                     (13)vt log a
                                                                vt
                                                    —6—




Equation (2) is the certainty equivalent utility function with an effective

discount factor equaling y6                  Thus, the probability of death reduces the

effective discount factor.

        Following Yaari (1965) and Blanchard (1984) we assume that because of

uncertain life time all loans require in addition to regular interest payment

a purchase of life insurance. This life insurance guarantees to cover the

outstanding debt in case of death. It is assumed that there is a large number

of individuals and, therefore, competition among insurance companies implies

that the percentage insurance premium equals the probability of death. The

present—value factor,which is composed of one—period rates of interest com-

pounded from period zero up to period t , is denoted by a                              and, therefore,

         is the market discount factor that is equal to one plus the market

rate of interest in period t—l. Analogously, the market risk factor

equals one plus the life—insurance premium. It follows that the effective

interest factor faced by individuals is                            t—l    t
                                                              (i         /'y )(a1/a)
        Using these considerations the budget constraint in period t—l for

an individual born in periods            s    is:
                           t—l
(3)              b =
                       y

                           y
                               a

                                 a
                                     (b
                                     1
                                                    + c1 —


where bt denotes the value of debt at the beginning of period t (which tas

carried over from the end of period t—l)                  ,    and        3t—l denotes disposable income
which is assumed to be the same across all individuals regardless of age. The

budget constraint states that at the beginning of each period the value of debt

equals the corresponding value in the previous period plus the excess of con-

sumption over income plus the interest on that quantity. This last term is
                                                       —7—




reflected in the effective interest factor in equation (3). In addition to

the periodical budget constraint, the individual is also subject to a solvency

requirement by which the present value of his debt must approach zero in the

limit:


(4)               lim tb =                     U




Consolidation of the periodical budget constraints together with the solvency

requirement yields:

                      yVav
(5)                          a
                                 sv
                                      =    E   ——y V —bSt :wst
                vt y ta                   v=t y a
                                                   t




Equation (5) is the consolidated budget constraint according to which the sum

of present values of consumption in all periods must equal the sum of the

present values of disposable income minus the debt cottmiitment. This quantity

is defined as the value of wealth, w .                       As is seen in equation (5) the value

of wealth is composed of two terms. The first is the present value of ex-

pected life time income, and the second (negative component) is the accumu-

lated financial debt. For further reference it is convenient to follow

Slanchard's convention of refering to the first term as human wealth.                     We

assume that except for the uncertain length of life, about which the indivi-

dual knows the objective probability, individuals possess perfect foresight

concerning all other relevant economic magnitudes.

         Maximization of the certainty equivalent utility function (2) subject

to the consolidated budget constraint (5) yields
                                                  —8—




                                          V
 (6)                      c   =   (l—y)
                                          ( a


 where c       denotes planned consumption for period v of an individual born
 in    period s and who makes his plan in period t               .   Thus, this consumption is
 contingent   on his survival in period v .             In    the case for which vt we obtain

 (6')                 c =         (l—yó)w



Equation    (6') describes the consumption function. It exhibits constant marginal

propensity to consume out of wealth. As may be seen this marginal propensity

decreases with the probability of survival,              'r




           We now turn to the derivation of aggregate consumption function.              Popu—
lation is normalized so that every cohort born in period                 s starts with one

individual. Due to death, its size in period t becomes 1ts                        The equality

between the probability of survival of a given cohort and its frequency rela-

tive to its initial size sterns from the law of large numbers. Since at each

period t there are 1t5 members of each cohort, the (constant) aggregate

size of population is:


                              t—s        1
                      L
                                       1—)'




          Aggregate       consumption in period t is the sum of consumption of indivi-

duals from all cohorts. Since consumption of the s cohort is
                                                                                Itscst
aggregate consumption, c ,               is

                                   t
(7)                c =                 '' t—s c
                                           —9—




Using the individual consumption function (6') and the definition of wealth

from equation (5) yields


(8)               c =      (1—y5)


where

                                           v
                                           ya
                  H=        Z y      t—s
                                 E ____
                           s— vt Y a y
                                                         and




                           t     t
                 S     =   E
                  Dt             S St

Equation   (8) is the aggregate consumption function in which H denotes aggre-

gate human wealth,             denotes aggregate private sector indebtedness and

(Ht_B) denotes aggregate wealth, W .             In   equation (8) the aggregate marginal

propensity to consume out of wealth is constant. This reflects the specification

of the utility function (which yields a unit elastic consumption function) and

the assumption that the probability of death is equal across cohorts.



11.2. Dynamics of Aggregate Wealth

        The analysis of aggregate consumption specified the behavior of the

economy at a point in time as a function of aggregate wealth. In order to

characterize the behavior of the economy over time so as to be able to deal

with the dynamic effects of budget deficit, we need to determine the evolution

of aggregate wealth through time. Since, as will be shown later, the two

components of wealth are governed by different laws of motion, we need to study

them separately. We start with an analysis of the dynamics of human wealth.
                                                             —10—




          Aggregate human wealth in period t (which was defined in equation (8)),

 can be expressed as the product of the size of the population (l/1—y) and the

(cohort—independent) individual human wealth. Thus,
                                           v
(9)                        =
                                vt
where

                                1-


Lagging equation (9) by one period yields an analogous expression for 11t—1

which, together with equation (9), yields1


                                  —l
                                           a
/ifl\
SV)                      U— —                            —
                                       t       '
                                                   t—l
                                  ,Y




Equation (10) describes the evolution of aggregate human wealth as a function

of the difference between its own lagged value and the lagged value of aggregate

income tl                Equation (9) expresses aggregate human wealth in period t as

the sum of the present values (as of period t) of aggregate income. It is

important to note that both, the definition of aggregate human wealth (in equa-

tion (9)) and its law of motion (in equation (10)) use the effective interest

factor which includes the life—insurance premium associated with the probability


              11n               equation (10) we first write H1as


        Htl         1_I v=t—l t—l
                             y
                                               v     =              +
                                                                        vt   t—1
                                  t—l

Substracting v1             from                   , multiplying    by (ytatl/ytut) and using
equation       (9) yields equation (10) in the text.
                                              —11—




 of death. This feature is specific to the human wealth component and will not

 play a role in the computation of the other component of wealth to which we

 turn next.

         The evolution of aggregate private debt, B           ,   can be obtained by

substituting equation (3) into the definition of debt in equation (8) along

with the definitions of lagged aggregate consumption, income and debt:



(11)                    =    t-l    pt—l + c_1       -




         In   contrast with the law of motion governing the accumulation of human

wealth (in equation (10)) and individual debt (in equation (3)), the accumula-

tion of aggregate private debt is governed by the market interest factor

rather than the effective interest factor. The absence of the life—insurance

premium from the law of motion governing aggregate debt accumulation in equation

(11) stems from the fact that from the perspective of the society at large, the

life—insurance premia represents transfers within the society which do not alter

the social rates of return.

         Using the aggregate consumption function from equation (8) ,        together with
the law of motion of human wealth from equation (10) and iterating yields



                       =    (y5)t             H)   — (1—y)
(12)                                [(B   -
                                                             (Y)aH] +

where   Hv    is defined by equation (9) and where B         is the initially given level

of debt. Equation (12) characterizes the evolution of debt through time. This

evolution together with the evolution of human wealth (from equation (10)),
                                                 —12—




determines the path of total wealth and, thereby, the path of consumption. The

path of total wealth               can be obtained by substracting equation (12) from H:



(13)               U = _L[(yS)tw + (l—y)
                                                     v1          6)t_vHv1


Equation (13) expresses the value of wealth at each period of time in terms of

its initial value U        as well as terms involving human wealth. The dependence

of the path of wealth on its composition reflects the asymmetry between human

and non—human wealth which arises from the uncertainty concerning the length of

life. This asymmetry disappears when the probability of survival is unity.

Thus, with y=l ,    the   value of wealth becomes



 (13')             w     = St
                     t     a       0
                               t




In    this case, which corresponds to the one analyzed in Frenkel and Razin (1984),

the evolution of wealth depends on its aggregate value and not on its composi—

t   ion.
           In order to examine the effects of the uncertain length of life on the

evolution of aggregate consumption we express                    ct in terms of ct_l using
equation (13) in the aggregate consumption function (8)

                                                           r
                                                                        t—v
                          t—l (yó) W +            (l—)1          (yS)      CLH
                   c =
(14)
                    t              [


                                       5)tl U0 +                                 t—l
                                                          tl(15)tlvV V
                                                    (l—y) v=1




and in the special case with y=1            ,   equation       (14) reduces to
                                      —13—




(14')               c =


The comparison between (14') and (14) reveals the role of uncertainty concerning

the length of life. As seen in (14'), given the rates of interest, the only

variable relevant for predicting future consumption is current consumption;

in particular, once current consumption is known, knowledge of wealth is not

required for the prediction of future consumption, as demonstrated in Hall

(1978). In the general case, however, as seen from equation (14), once y<l

knowledge of current consumption is not sufficient for the prediction of future

consumption, and one needs to know the derailed path of the composition of wealth.




11.3 Government

           Government spending can be financed by taxes or by debt issue. The

requirement of intertemporal solvency implies that the sun of the present values

of government spending and debt retirement equals the sum of the present values

of taxes. Alternatively this solvency requirement can be expressed as


                       a
(15)                E a—(TV —C)=B
                              v
                   vt t           gt



where     TV ,CV denote taxes and government spending in period v and where

denotes    the value of government debt at the beginning of period t .   Equation
(15) expresses the solvency requirements by stating that the value of government

debt in period t must equal the sums of the present values of current and

future budget surpluses.
                                          —14—




         Equations (15) implies that government debt in the beginning of period

t   is


(16)               Bgt _tl(B gt—1 +Gt—l—Tt—1

As is evident from equation (16), in analogy with the evolution of
                                                                   aggregate

private debt in equation (11), the law of motion governing the accumulation

of government debt depends on the market interest factor.

         The sum of private debt,
                                      B , and government debt Bg equals the
value of the economy's external debt, B .            Thus, by adding equations (11) and
(16) we obtain



(17)               Bt =        ttl   +
                                         (cvi    +
                                                     G1)   +



where        =
                 _1 +   Tt_l   is gross domestic product.




11.4 Budget Deficits in a Small Open Economy

         Prior to incorporating the foreign economy arid determining the charac-

teristics of world equilibrium we illustrate in this section one of the key

implications of the model. For this purpose suppose that the economy that

was described in the previous sections is small in the sense that it is facing

an exogenously given       path of world rates of interest. In order to examine

the role of government budget deficits, suppose that the government changes the

time pattern of taxes and debt issue while holding the path of spending unchanged.

Specifically, consider the situation in which current taxes are reduced while
                                             —15—




taxes in a future period, ts, are raised so as to satisfy the government

intertemporal solvency constraint.

        From equation (15) the solvency requirement as of period t=O is:



                  a (T —           G )   =B
                vo v V
(15')
                                   v         go



In order to find the effect of the current budget surplus on current consump-

tion we need to determine the change in current wealth, W     .   Since the only
component of wealth that is affected is the current value of human wealth, H

it is sufficient to determine the effect of the change in the timing of taxes

on current human wealth. Using equation (9) current human wealth is



                              v
(9')            H =                      —   T)
                       vo

and the change in current human wealth is



                dHo =—dT o—y5ctdT
                               S $


From the government solvency requirement (15') we note that



                dT =      — a dT
                   0         5 $

substituting into the above equation, which expresses the change in current

human wealth, we obtain



                dH = — (ly5)dT
                                         —16—




Thus, as shown by Blanchard (1984), a current budget deficit (dT <0) raises
                                                                          0

current wealth and current consumption even though individuals know that future

taxes will be raised by an equal amount in terms of present value. This positive

wealth effect diminishes the higher is the value of               .   That is, the higher the

probability of survival and the closer the date of offsetting future tax

changes, the weaker is the impact of current budget deficits on current wealth

and consumption. In the limit, when y1          ,   the Ricardian proposition re—emerges
and, once government spending are given, the time pattern of taxes and government

debt issue are irrelevant.

         The explanation for this result can be given as follows. If the pro-

bability of survival was unity, then the rise in future taxes which is equal

in present value to the reduction in current taxes would leave wealth unchanged.

The same change in the pattern of taxes raises wealth if each individual knows

that there is a probability of (l—y5) that he will not survive to pay these

higher future taxes. Therefore, the current reduction in taxes constitutes net

wealth. Equivalently, the explanation can be stated in terms of the difference

between the market and the effective interest factors. While the government

solvency requirement implies that changes in current taxes must be made up for

by a 5   times the offsetting change in future taxes, individuals discount these
                  5
future taxes by y a
                      5
                          .
                              Therefore, as long as y < 1    ,   the current budget deficit
raises human wealth.2
         This discussion illustrates that the model developed in the previous

sections contains the key ingredient necessary for a meaningful analysis of the



          2Yet another interpretation may be given in terms of a 'transfer pro-
blem criterion" familiar from the theory of international transfers. Accordingly,
the budget deficit exerts real effects because it redistributes wealth from those
who have not yet been born, and whose marginal propensity to consume current
goods is obviously zero, to those who are currently alive, and whose marginal pro-
pensity to consume current goods is positive. The clear presumption concerning
the results of this redistribution is analogous to the presumption concerning the
effects of an international transfer on relative prices in the presence of non—
traded goods. We are indebted to Michael Mussa for this interpretation.
                                                       —17—




effects        of budget deficits. The illustration was provided, however, within a

limited set up in which the foreign economy was ignored and the path of the

rates of interest was given exogenously. Since our prime interest is in the
impact of budget deficits on the path of world rates of interest, on the inter-

national transmission mechanism,on external debt, and on the possible policy

responses of the interdependent economies, we turn next to the specification

of the foreign economy and to the analysis of wold equilibrium.



11.5 The Foreign Economy

               In this section we specify the behavioral equations for the foreign

economy. The foreign economy is assumed to be characterized by an economic

structure similar to that of the home country. We denote variables pertaining

to the foreign economy by an asterisk (*).                    Analogously to the home country's
behavior, the aggregate consumption function is



(18)                    c = (1_y*d*)(H             —
                                                       B)
where H           is foreign human wealth,


                         *       )'            *
                                      Cv
(19)                    Iit= E             y
                             v=t y


and where Bt is foreign private debt which can be expressed as in equation

(12) by adding an asterisk to all the country specific variables. Since we

assume that capital markets are integrated internationally, the market interest

factors are the same for both countries. It is noteworthy, however, that if

the probability of survival differs across countries, i.e., if y differs from
    *
y       ,   then the effective interest factors will differ across countries.
                                      —18—




III. World Equilibrium

         Our previous discussion focused on the behavior of a small open economy

that takes the path of world rates of interest as given. In this section we

turn to the determination of the equilibrium path of these world rates of

interest in a two—country world economy. We will continue to assume that

world capital markets are fully integrated and, therefore, that individuals

and governments in both countries face the same market rates of interest. This

feature provides for the key channel through which policies undertaken in one

country impact on economic conditions in the rest of the world. The structure

of the model embodies the assumptions that the behavior of individuals is

rational, that it is based upon self fullfilling expectations, and that govern-

ments and individuals are constrained by intertemporal budget constraints.

These assumptions imply that economic policies have an impact on the entire

path of interest rates and,thereby, on the paths of the key economic variables

relevant for current and future generations in both countries.



111.1 The Formal Equilibrium Conditions


         World equilibrium requires that in each period the given supply of

world output equals world demand. In what follows we discuss the various

equilibrium conditions. Using the consumption functions (8) and (18), equili-

brium in period t=O requires that world private spending equals world output

net of world governments' spending:



(20)             (l—y) (H0+Bg0B0) +   l1*6*   (H+B*+B) =


where   Y denotes world output. In equation (20) we have substituted the dif-

ference between external and government debts for the initially given values of
                                                  —19—



private debts. It is also noteworthy that equation (20) embodies the require-

ment that the sum of the balance of external indebtedness of both countries
                                                        *
must be zero and, therefore, B = — B
                                          0             0
             For all future periods (t > 0)         ,       the equilibrium condition can be written
as




(21)                    (l_16)[(15)t(Ho+Bg0_B0) + (1—y)                     (y6)tV aEl] +
                                                                     v=l

                              ** **t * *                               *            **t_v     *
                        (l—'y 6 )[('r 6   )
                                               (H0+3g0+30)
                                                                 + (l—y )         (y 6 )    aH]   =
                                                                            v 1


                                                                                     (—G-G)


In   equation (21) we have substituted equation (13) for the value of wealth in

the home country's consumption function (8) while noting that W = El—B                             =

               ;   the expressions            pertaining to the foreign country's wealth were
Elt+Bgt_Bt
obtained by adding an asterisk to the relevant foreign variables and by noting
                    *
that S
         0          0

             The next set of conditions state that the values of human wealth in

each period must equal the sum of the present values of disposable incomes

where, as shown in equation (9), the discounting employs the effective interest

factors. Thus, for period t0, this requirement is:



                          =        v
(22)                           E
                                          (Yv_Tv)
                              v0

and for all other periods (t > 0) we have
                                                   —20-




 (23)              nfl =-- Ey"a (Y—T)
                    tt   t
                        Y v=t
                               V VV

                         *                                   * *
                                           E y*vaV(Y—T)
   /                             1
                   nfl
 (24)
                    t t
                             I   ,ct
                                       V=t
                                                   VV

          Finally, the system is closed by the requirements that both governments

are intertemporally solvent. Using equation (15) and its foreign—country

analogue, we obtain



 (25)               L    a (T —G ) = B
                                       t       go
                   t=O


                             * *               *
 (26)               E a(T—G)=B
                          t    go
                   t=0


          For any given initial values of the external debt, governments' debt

and the paths of governments' spending, the system of equations (20)—(26) solves
                                               *
for the initial period's values of
                                     0
                                        and  H 0 as well as for a t , a tt
                                                    I-I                  H  and

        for all other periods (t >           0).          In addition, the system also solves for the

sum of the present values of taxes in each country. Finally, it is relevant to

note that in specifying the above system of equations we have made use of Walras

Law. Therefore, we have excluded the condition analogous to equation (22)

according to which the initial value of foreign human wealth, H                      ,   equals   the

sum of the present values of foreign disposable incomes.

         As is evident, an analytical solution of the system of equations (20)—(26)

is extremely complex. In order to obtain a more tractable system, we turn now

to an alternative representation of the equilibrium conditions.3


        3The explicit solution of the system for the
Appendix A.                                          case y=l is given in
                                                 —21—



111.2 An Alternative Representation of the Equilibrium Conditions

          One of the sources for complexities of the formal system presented in

section 111.1 stems from the multiplicity of market clearing conditions which

are interrelated. Specifically, as seen in the set of equations (21), as long
as y and           are less than unity, the present—value factors,                     ,   depend on
the entire path of past and future values of these factors. In order to simplify

the analysis we provide an alternative representation of the equilibrium condi-

tions. The key feature of the alternative representation is an aggregation of

the entire set of the future equilibrium conditions into an equivalent single

condition.

          To facilitate the exposition we divide the horizon into two periods:

the present, which is denoted by t=O, and the future (t1,2,...), and we

suppose that outputs, government spendings and taxes, do not vary across future

periods (t=l,2,...). In aggregating the future into an equivalent single period

we need to compute the present values of the various flows. For that purpose

we define an average—interest factor


                              1
                       R -
                             l+r
where r denotes the rate of interest. This average—interest factor represents

the entire path of the rates of interest that actually do change over time.

For further reference R may be termed as "constancy equivalent" interest factor.

          Substituting R" for a             in equations (23)—(24) and substituting the

resulting values of a H           and a H         into the left hand side of equation (21)
                        vv                 vv
yields:

                                                             T)
                    (lYo)(5)t[w +                                   (l_(R/y6)t)] +
                                                (l_y)(l
                        **)(y** *
                    (1—i 6         5   )   [W    + (l—y)      *
                                                                  **
                                                              R(Y—T)
                                                                    **       (l—(R/y       6 )   I
                                                           (l—i R)(y 6 —R)
                                             —22—


                    * *
where Y—T and Y —T          denote the time invariant           domestic and foreign

disposable incomes for all future periods (t > 0). Analogously, the right hand

side of equation (21) can be written as

                        t              * *
                       R [(Y—G) + (Y —G )]


Summing these expressions for all future periods (t=l,2,...), yields equation

(27) as the composite present-value equivalent to equations (21):



(27)       yôW + (1-y) (1-R) (Y-T) +
                                        *** +
                                                                -Rl-R     (1R) [(Y_G)+(Y*_G*)   I




Equation   (27) states that the present values of world output net of government

spending as of period t=l must equal the present value of world private sector

consumption which in turn equals the value of world wealth. As is evident the

value of each country's wealth is expressed in terms of its initial wealth, as

well as in terms of its human wealth. In that formulation the present values are

computed by using the constancy—equivalent interest rates.

       Substituting R' for i         in equation (22) yields:



                      W0 = (Y—T)+
(28)
                            00 1—yR (Y—T)+B —Bo            go



This equation defines the value of wealth in period t=0 in terms of R

Finally, condition (20) specifying the equality of world demands with world out-

put in period t=0 is rewritten as

                                        ** *        =
                                                                  * *
(29)                  (l—y6)W + (1—y 6                  (Y—G) + (Y—G)
                                     —23—


       The system of equations (27)—(29) can be solved for the values of W
W   and R for any given value of the parameters. The solutions obtained for
the initial values of wealth W and W*       ,   are the same as those which may be
obtained from the complete syst:m outlined in section III.l.       While the use

of the constancy—equivalent interest factor simplifies the analysis considerably,

it does not permit a detailed examination of the impacts of policies on the

patterns of consumption and rates of interest within the composite period com-

prising the "future". However, it provides complete information about the impacts

of policies on the precise current values of all key variables including wealth,

consumption, and debt accumulation, as well as on the average value of the rate of

interest.




IV. The Impacts of Budget Deficits

       In this section we analyse the impacts of budget deficits on world rates of

interest and on the levels of domestic and foreign wealth and consumption. The

analysis of the effects of budget deficits on the levels of foreign wealth and con-

sumption serves to clarify the nature of the international transmission mechanism

of fiscal policies. In order to focus on the impact of deficits rather than the

impact of government spending, we will assume that changes in budget deficits

are brought about through changes in taxes for a given path of government
spending. Since government spending remains unchanged, solvency requires that

current changes in taxes be accompanied by offsetting changes in future taxes.

The present values of these tax changes must equal to each other.        Thus, a change
in current taxes, dT , must be related to the future change, dT      ,    according   to


       "These solutions are obtained with the aid of a shortcut which transformes
the entire set of equations for t=l,2
                                            into its composite present—value equi-
valent. To verify that these solutions are indentical to those obtained from the
complete system, we note that the complete system with time—varying interest factors
could be reduced to an analogous composite
                                           system which provides a unique link among
W, W* and a composite function of the entire path of the time—varying interest
factors (ci
          1 ,a,,...). Thus, the equilibrium values of W and Wu remain unchanged as
                                                       o      o
long as the value of the composite function of the interest factors is unchanged.
Our shortcut replaces the composite function of the time—varying interest factors
with its constancy equivalent.
                                                       —24—




 (30)                            dT =   — iKT

In    equation (30) the term R/(l—R) equals lit which is, in turn, the annuity

value of a unit tax change.

          Throughout the analysis in this section we assume that the foreign govern-

ment follows a balanced—budget policy. This assumption ensures that changes in

world rates of interest which result from domestic fiscal deficits, do not impact

on the solvency of the foreign government and, therefore, do not necessitate

secondary changes in foreign fiscal policies.

          Using equations (27)—(29) the impacts of changes in domestic taxes on R

W ,     and   V    (evaluated around an initial balanced budget) are:


              dR     — (l—y) (l—R)(l—yd) > 0
(31)          dT         A      R (1—yR)
                   0



              dW                          **
(32)          . = _Qjx)             R(l—R)(l—yR)
                                                       [e(Y—G)    +(Y*_G*)I <       0




                  *

(33)                  =    (1-i)                   [e(Y-G) +(Y*.Gt)]                0
                                   R(l-R)(l-'rR)



where, as shown           in   the Appendix, A ,   S   ,   and   (Ii   are   positive.

         Equation (31) shows that a budget deficit arising from a reduction in

domestic taxes lowers R and raises the value of the world interest rate. The

economic interpretation of this result is as follows. From equation (28) we

note that, at the prevailing rate of interest, the fall in current taxes (which

is accompanied by a corresponding rise in future taxes according to equation (30)),

raises the value of domestic wealth by (l—'y)(l—fl)/ R(l—yR)                             and, thereby, raises
                                         —25—



spending by the value of the marginal propensity to spend, l—y6 ,         times   the

change in wealth. The resulting excess demand for current goods raises their

relative price in terms of future goods, and thus raises the world interest rate.

As shown in the Appendix, (l/) serves to translate excess demands for current

goods into equilibrating changes in the rate of interest.

            Equations (32)—(33) show that the domestic budget deficit raises the

equilibrium—value of domestic wealth, W , and lowers the corresponding value

of foreign wealth, W .         Thus, domestic budget deficits are transmitted negatively
to the rest of the world. The international transmission mechanism is effected

through the rate of interest. The rise in the world interest rate lowers the

value of foreign wealth and mitigates the initial rise in the value of domestic

wealth. These changes in wealth raise domestic spending, lower foreign spending

and worsen the domestic current account of the balance of payments.

           As may be seen from equation (3l)—(33), when the probability of survival,

y ,   is   unity budget deficits do not impact on interest rates and wealth: in this

case the model yields the familiar Ricardian proposition.



V. The Impact of Fiscal Spending

           The previous section analysed the effects of budget deficits on the equili-

brium of the system. In that analysis changes in the deficit were brought about

through changes in taxes while holding government spending intact. In the

present section we analyse the effects of changes in the level of government

spending. In order to focus on the volume of fiscal spending rather than on

the consequent changes in deficits, we suppose that all changes in government

spending are accompanied by corresponding changes in taxes so as to yield balanced

budgets. We also distinguish between transitory and permanent changes. Transitory
                                             —26—



changes alter only current spending by dG           whereas permanent changes also

alter future spending by dG

         Using equations (27)—(29) the impact of a transitory balanced—budget

change in domestic fiscal spending on the interest factor is:



                       dR      ——
                               —    yó(1—R) <
(34)
                       dG               R
                           0


         Equation (34) shows that a transitory rise in government spending lowers

R and, therefore, raises the interest rate. This change in the interest rate

is necessary in order to eliminate the excess demand for current goods consequent

on the rise in government spending. This balanced—budget rise in government

spending results in an excess demand for current goods because the rise in taxes

lowers wealth by an amount equal to the rise in government spending and, since

the private sector's marginal spending propensity is smaller than unity, private

expenditure is reduced by only a fraction of the rise in government spending.

         The rise in the rate of interest lowers both domestic and foreign wealth

and, thereby, results in a reduction of domestic and foreign consumption.        Thus,

the current transitory balanced—budget rise in domestic fiscal spending is being

paid for in part by the foreign country.

         The same argument applies to the analysis of the effect of an expected

future change in government spending. Formally, using equation (27)—(29) we
obtain



35
                      dR — y(l—R) (l—yS)
                                                >
                      dG            (1—yR)
                                                —27—



As seen in equation (35) a future balanced—budget rise in government spending

raises R and lowers the rate of interest. The fall in the rate of interest

is necessary since, at the prevailing rate of interest, the expected rise in

future taxes lowers wealth and reduces consumption demand and, thereby, results

in an excess supply of current output. This excess supply is eliminated by the

fall in the rate of interest which raises foreign wealth and which mitigates

the initial fall in domestic wealth.

        The results in equations (34)—(35) provide the ingredients necessary for

the analysis of the effects of a permanent balanced—budget rise in government

spending. In that case dG =               dG E dG , and the impact of this fiscal expansion

on the rate of interest can be obtained by adding the expressions in equations

(34) and (35). It follows, therefore, that




                            dR —   y(l—R)
(36)
                            dG     AR(l—YR)
                                                R)

Thus, the effect of a permanent rise in government spending on the rate of interest

depends on whether the interest factor, R               ,   exceeds or falls short of the discount

factor,           The interpretation of this result can be given in terms of the

effect of the fiscal spending on the excess demand for current goods or, equi-

valently, in terms of its effect on world savings. As a result of the permanent

rise in fiscal spending, at the prevailing interest rate, both the supply of

output net of government absorption as well as the demand for consumption are

reduced by the same proportion. Therefore, the excess supply of current goods

or, alternatively, the level of savings also change by the same proportion. If

the initial level of domestic savings was negative, then the rise in fiscal

spending raises the value of savings (by making it less negative) and, thereby,

induces a fall in the relative price of present goods, that is, a fall in the
                                            —28—




 rate of interest. On the other hand, if the initial value of savings was positive

 the permanent rise in government spending lowers domestic savings and results

 in a higher rate of interest. The link between this explanation and the expres-

 sion in equation (36) is completed by noting that if R> 6 the initial value of

 the home country's savings is negative and the economy runs a current account

 deficit, whereas the opposite holds if R < 6

        The change in the rate of interest alters the values of domestic and

 foreign wealth and consumption. If the rate of interest rises, then foreign

wealth falls and if the rate of interest falls
                                                        foreign wealth rises. As is
obvious the permanent rise in domestic fiscal spending lowers domestic wealth;

 the fall in wealth occurring at the initial rate of interest is being reinforced

or mitigated depending on whether the equilibrium rate of interest rises or falls.

        Finally, it is relevant to note that in contrast with the analysis of

budget deficits in section IV, here, no qualitative result depends on whether

the probability of survival, y     ,   is   smaller from or equal to unity. In fact,
the qualitative results of the effect of fiscal spending are identical to those

in Frenke]. and Razin (1984) where the analysis was conducted under the assump-

tion that yl .       In   the present section, however, we restricted ourselves only

to balanced—budget change5 in government spending. This restriction was intro-

duced in order to isolate the impact of spending from the impact of deficits

since, when y c 1 the Ricardian proposition
                                                      concerning the irrelevance of
budget deficits ceases to apply.



VI.   Concluding   Remarks
      In this paper we analysed the effects of budget deficits and government

spending on world interest rates and wealth. We examined in detail the nature

of the international transmission mechanism.         The model that was used embodied
the assumptions that world capital markets
                                                   are fully integrated and that indivi—
                                    —29—



duals behave rationally on the basis of self—fulfilling expectations. Economic

behavior of individuals and governments was assumed to be governed by temporal

and intertemporal budget constraints. In order to capture the effects of budget

deficits on world equilibrium, we assumed that the probability of survival is

less than the unity and, therefore, individuals behave as if their horizon was

finite. The formulation assured that the model was not subject to the Ricardian

proposition according to which budget deficits do not matter. Our analysis de-

monstrated that the dependence of world rates of interest, wealth, and consumption,

on fiscal policies is highly sensitive to the detailed specification of the

policies in terms of the level and the time path of government spending and taxes.

       Rather than summarizing the results it may be instructive to outline some

possible extensions. Among such extensions would be (i) an analysis of the impacts

of future budget deficits (ii) a more refined degree of conunodity aggregation that

would result in possible changes in relative prices and would introduce an addi-

tional channel for the international transmission of fiscal policies; and (iii)

an incorporation of investment which responds to interest—rate changes and which

influences the future path of output.

       Throughout the analysis in this paper we assumed that the foreign govern-

ment followed a balanced—budget policy. This assumption was adopted in order to

ensure that changes in world rates of interest which result from domestic fiscal

policies do not impact on the solvency of the foreign government. If the foreign

government does not follow a balanced—budget policy, then interest rate changes

would necessitate secondary changes in foreign spending or taxes in order to

restore solvency. An extension of the analysis would relax the foreign balanced—

budget assumption and would allow for the necessary adjustment of foreign fiscal
                                       —30—



management. A more major extension would recognize that the interdependencies

among the various open economies provide incentives for strategic behavior by

individual countries. Such behavior could then be incorporated into a more

elaborate game—theoretic framework. Further, the interdependencies and the

strategic behavior could result in inefficient outcomes from a global perspec-

tive that may   call   for harmonization of fiscal policies. In such an extended

framework, government spending and the timing of taxes would become endogenous

variables that are determined in the context of world equilibrium.
                                             —31—


                                        APPENDIX



A.   The Solution of the System with y=l

        In this Appendix we examine the properties of the model for the special

case in which the probability of survival is unity. In that case, with 1=1

the market interest factor equals the effective interest factor and, therefore,

from equations (22) and (25) in the text, H                 depends on the path of output

net of government spending and is independent of the time pattern of taxes.

Furthermore, in that case the equilibrium condition (21) of the text, depends

on the initial values of human wealth and on the paths of outputs net of govern-

ment spending, and is not influenced directly by the values of human wealth in

all other periods. Therefore, in that special case, equations (23)—(24) of the

text may be left out of the system. The resulting equilibrium conditions are:



(A—i)            (l—) 14 +
                           0     (l_6*) W0 = 0


(A—2)            (1_6)t        W + (1                =




(A—3)                 =
                  0
                           Z    ay—B
                          t=o


where

                      =   H+3 —B
                                         *
                                             =
                                                  a. *
                             go 0        o       H+3 +3
                                                  o go o
                      =
                                  and                         •
                                                 Yt_Gt_c*


Equations (A—1)—(A—3) correspond to equations (20)—(22) of the text.
                                                   —32—




The solution of this system is
                                       * —           *t A        — B0]
 (A—4)
                                 (1—6 )fy0   E06
                        W0=


 (A-5)
                            *
                                =
                                 —

                                  'o
                                        —

                                        t=o GA t   B
                         *     *
                                                   S'A
                                                         *
                                                             +
                                                                   —
                                                                 S =a 6
                                                                        *t 1] +        *t
                                                                                            — 6t )B}
                      (1—6 )o1&                                                   (6
(A6)           at =




            = [1—(1—ó
                        *              *t t *                            *
where                                   —ä )À] >0 , and where At denotes the share of

foreign product net of government spending, i.e., A' E                            and, A        denotes

the corresponding share of the home country, i.e., A                     E             = 1 —
                                                                                               At
         As is evident by inspection of equations (A—4)—(A—6), the system conforms

with the Ricardian proposition. Thus, given the path of government spending
                                                    *
(which governs the paths of y and y ) the time pattern of taxes and govern-

ment debt issue is irrelevant for the determination of world equilibrium.

These solutions (which are discussed in detail in Frenkel and Razin (1984)),

provide answers to questions about the effects of current or future changes

in government spending on the paths of world rates of interest and consumption

and, thereby, on the paths of the currcnt account and the balance of indebtedness.
B. Derivation of the Impact of Budget Deficits

             In this Appendix we derive the formal solutions to the impact of budget
                                    *
deficits on R, W and W                        Differentiating equations (29), (27) after multi-
                          0         0

plying it by (l—R)/R, and (28) yields:


                                              **
               l—yS                     l—y 5                   0          dW           0
                                                                             0

                                                  **
                (l—R)y&                 (l—R)y 5
                                                                a          dW          11         i__i dT
                    R                         R                              o          R         1-Ito

                                                             —y(Y—G)
                    1                     0                                dR
                                                             (1—fl)




where
                    1
                              [u(Y—G) +w(Y —C )]
                                                  **
               R(l—R)

                    — (l—y)(l—yR2)
        U = (1—yR)2                >
                         (1—yR)
                 *          *
             (l—y R)2 — (1—y )(l—y RL)                 > o
                               *
                         (l—y R)2


The determinant of the matrix is denoted by —                          .   The value of t   is:

                    **
         -   (1-y       S [(y-G) +w(Y*_G*)]             > 0
              R(1-R)

where

                                                   **
         =     (l—yR2) — (1—R)2 (yS—y S ) >
                                    2
                           (1—yR)

The solutions of the system are given in equations (31)—(33) in the text where


             (1—yR)2 — y(l—R)2 — (1—y)(l—yR2)

                           (1—yR)2
                                    —34—


                                REFERENCES




 Bailey, Martin J., National Income and the Price Level, New York: McGraw—Hill,
       1962.

 Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
       Economy 82, No. 6 (November/December 1974): 1095—1117.

 _____________   "On the Determination of the Public Debt," Journal of Political
      Economy 87, No. 5, Part 1 (October 1979): 940—71.

 Blanchard, Olivier J., "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons," Unpublished
       manuscript, MIT, April 1984.

Prenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin. "Fiscal Policies, Debt and International
      Economic Interdependence," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
      Paper Series No. 1266, January 1984.

Diamond, Peter A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American
      Economic Review 60, No. 5 (December 1965): 1126—50.

Fleming, J. Marcus. "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Floating
      Exchange Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 9, (November
      1962): 369—79.

Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income
      Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy 86, No. 6
      (December 1978): 971—87.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. "A Competitive Theory of Fluctuations
      and the Feasibility and Desirability of Stabilization Policy" in Fischer
      Stanley (ed.) Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Lucas, Jr., Robert E. and Nancy L. Stokey, "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
      in an Economy Without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics 12, No. 1
      (July 1983): 55—93.

Mundell, Robert A., International Economics, New York: MacMillan, 1968.

Razin, Assaf and Lars E.O. Svensson. "The Current Account and the Optimal
      Government Debt," Journal of International Money and Finance 2, No. 3
      (August 1983): 215—24.

Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest With or Without
      the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy 66, No. 6
      (December 1958): 467—82.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy:
      Indexation, Price Rigidities, and Optimal Monetary Policy," National
      Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper Series, No. 1106, April 1983.

Yaari, Menahem E., "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance and the Theory of the
      Consumer," Review of Economic Studies 32, No. 2 (April 1965): 137—50.
