                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY AND THE SOURCES OF LOCAL-CURRENCY
                           PRICE STABILITY

                                          Giancarlo Corsetti
                                            Luca Dedola
                                           Sylvain Leduc

                                        Working Paper 13544
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13544


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




Prepared for the NBER 'Conference on International Dimensions of Monetary Policy', S'Agaró Catalonia,
Spain, June 11-13, 2007. We thank our discussant Philippe Bacchetta and participants in the ECB
macro seminar, and the University of Amsterdam for comments. We thank Francesca Viani for superb
research assistance. Giancarlo Corsetti's work on this paper is part of the Pierre Werner Chair Programme
on Monetary Union at the European University Institute. Hospitality by De Nederlandsche Bank while
working on this project is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the positions of the ECB, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, The National Bureau of Economic Research or any other institutions with which the authors
are affiliated.

© 2007 by Giancarlo Corsetti, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Monetary Policy and the Sources of Local-Currency Price Stability
Giancarlo Corsetti, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc
NBER Working Paper No. 13544
October 2007
JEL No. F31,F33,F41,F42

                                                ABSTRACT

We analyze the policy trade-offs generated by local currency price stability of imports in economies
where upstream producers strategically interact with downstream firms selling the final goods to consumers.
We study the effects of staggered price setting at the downstream level on the optimal price (and markup)
chosen by upstream producers and show that downstream price movements affect the desired markup
of upstream producers, magnifying their price response to shocks. We revisit the international dimensions
of optimal monetary policy, unveiling an argument in favor of consumer price stability as the main
prescription for monetary policy. Since stable consumer prices feed back into a low volatility of markups
among upstream producers, this contains inefficient deviations from the law of one price at the border.
However, efficient stabilization of different CPI components will not generally result into perfect stabilization
of headline inflation. National policies optimally respond to the same shocks in a similar way, thus
containing volatility of the terms of trade, but not necessarily of the real exchange rate. The latter will
be more volatile, among other things, the larger the home bias in expenditure and the content of local
inputs in consumer goods.


Giancarlo Corsetti                                      Sylvain Leduc
European University Institute                           Board of Governors of the
Florence, ITALY                                         Federal Reserve System
giancarlo.corsetti@iue.it                               20th and C streets NW, Mail Stop 23
                                                        Washington, DC 20551
Luca Dedola                                             sylvain.leduc@frb.gov
Monetary Policy Research Div.
European Central Bank
Postfach 16 03 19
D- 60066 Frankfurt am Manin GERMANY
luca.dedola@ecb.int
1        Introduction

The high degree of stability of import prices in local currency, documented both at the border
and at consumer level, vis-a-vis large movements in exchange rates, raises issues at the core of
the design of national monetary policies in a globalizing world economy.1 On the one hand, a
low elasticity of import prices with respect to the exchange rate can result from the presence
of costs incurred locally before the imported goods reach the consumers, such as distribution
costs or assembling costs, i.e. costs of combining imported intermediated inputs with domestic
inputs. By the same token, it may result from optimal markup adjustment by monopolistic
 rms, which maximize pro ts through price discrimination across national markets (\pricing to
market"). These are real sources of local-currency price stability of imports, which in uence
pricing even in the absence of nominal rigidities. Although these factors may result in ine -
ciencies | like deviations from the law of one price due to pricing to market | they also shield
price and wage dynamics from currency volatility, thus helping central banks maintain a low
and stable headline in ation. On the other hand, stable import prices and low exchange rate
pass-through can also stem from nominal frictions impeding desired markup adjustment, thus
interfering with equilibrium movements in relative prices. When local-currency-price stability of
imports is due to price stickiness, it creates policy trade-o s between competing objectives, e.g.
between stabilizing the prices of domestically produced goods as opposed to the (relative) price
of imported goods, which raise the importance of international considerations in the conduct of
monetary policy.
        In this paper we reconsider these policy trade-o s in economies where stable import prices in
local currency result from both nominal rigidities and endogenous destination-speci c markup
adjustment. We specify a two country model where each economy produces an array of country-
speci c, di erentiated traded goods. In each country, we model local downstream                          rms as
using one intermediate traded good, and possibly local inputs, to produce nontradable                        nal
goods. In other words, each intermediate good is produced by an upstream monopolist and
sold to a continuum of monopolistic downstream rms, active in each country, from which local
consumers can directly buy further di erentiated nal varieties. Thus, because both upstream
    1
        See, e.g., Engel and Rogers, [1996]; Goldberg and Knetter, [1997]; Campa and Goldberg, [2005] and Frankel
et al. [2004].




                                                         1
and downstream rms have monopoly power,                   nal prices re ect double marginalization. We
posit that markets are segmentated across national borders, so that intermediate producers price-
discriminate between domestic and foreign local downstream producers as a group, although not
among individual local producers (charging di erent prices within the same country).
      As in standard monetary models, we assume that rms set prices in local currency, adjusting
them infrequently according to the Calvo mechanism.2 Di erent from the previous literature,
however, we explicitly model strategic interactions among upstream and downstream                rms:
upstream rms exercise their monopoly power by taking into account country-speci c di erences
in the properties of the demand for their products. Relative to the literature already modelling
vertical interactions between exporters and local rms (e.g. Bacchetta and Van Wincoop [2005],
Corsetti and Dedola [2005], Devereux and Engel [2007], Monacelli [2005]), an important novel
contribution of this paper consists of analyzing the e ects of staggered price setting at the
downstream level on the optimal price (and markup) chosen by upstream producers.
      Speci cally, our analysis establishes three key characteristics of the perceived demand elas-
ticity by upstream producers when nominal rigidities constrain price decisions by downstream
 rms. First, this elasticity is a decreasing function of the rate of change of nal prices in each
industry: the higher this rate (thus the higher the price dispersion among nal producers selling
an industry product), the higher the intermediate producer's equilibrium markup. Second, the
perceived demand elasticity is market-speci c, depending on di erences in industry-speci c in-
 ation rates across the domestic and the export market. Sticky prices at consumer level create
an incentive for upstream rms to price discriminate across borders, which leads to equilibrium
deviations from the law of one price, independently of the degree of nominal rigidities in the
upstream rms' own prices. Third, if either local inputs in downstream production are good
substitute of intermediate imported goods, or their share in the downstream rms' costs is low,
the demand elasticity is decreasing in the price charged by upstream producers. In other words,
downstream nominal rigidities magnify the price response to shocks by upstream monopolists
who optimally reset their price in any given period. This generates strategic substitutability
among upstream producers: a rise in marginal costs will lead to an increase in their desired
markups.
  2
      See the literature review in section 2 below.




                                                      2
       These results have at least two notable implications for policy modelling and design. First, by
shedding light on the link between optimal price adjustment at the dock and domestic in ation
rates, our results suggest a speci c reason why, in line with the observations by Taylor [2000],
lower CPI in ation volatility and price dispersion may result in a lower degree of exchange-
rate pass-through: stable in ation reduces at the margin the producers' incentives to price
discriminate across countries, decreasing the sensitivity of their `desired markup' to cost changes.
       Second, by showing that downstream price rigidities result into strategic substitutability
among upstream producers, our results emphasize that adding several layers of nominal rigidi-
ties do not necessarily results into more price inertia. Strategic interactions among vertically
integrated rms with sticky prices may create incentive for large price adjustment, feeding back
into in ation volatility.
       In addition, our model speci cation implies an important dimension of heterogeneity across
 rms which has a bearing on optimal monetary policy. In contrast to standard models, the
marginal costs of our downstream rms are generally not symmetric, not even when the economy
is completely closed to foreign trade and there are no markup shocks. Thus, monetary authorities
are not able to achieve complete stabilization of nal prices.3
       The mechanism underlying these results is di erent from that emphasized by the previous
literature focusing on vertical interactions between upstream and downstream rms, but that
stresses real determinants of the local currency price stability of imports. In previous work of
ours, we assume that local rms produce consumer goods by combining intermediate tradable
goods with local inputs (Corsetti and Dedola [2005], Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc [2007]). In
this framework, provided that the tradable goods and the local inputs are poor substitutes
in production, the presence of local inputs tends to mute the response of upstream prices to
shocks (corresponding to a case of strategic complementarity), and makes the exchange-rate
pass-through incomplete, even in the absence of nominal rigidities. Building an example of an
economy encompassing both channels, we analyze conditions under which the properties of the
demand elasticity faced by upstream producers are dominated by the e ect of local inputs in
production, as opposed to the e ect of downstream nominal rigidities.
   3
       In standard models with cost-push and markup shocks, monetary authorities can achieve complete price
stability, but face trade-o s that motivate deviations from it | see for instance the discussion in Woodford
[2003]. In our model, instead, stability of all prices is unfeasible to start with.



                                                           3
       We characterize the optimal cooperative monetary policy under commitment. In order to
reduce ine ciencies due to price stickiness, monetary policy does mitigate uctuations in the
major components of consumer price in ation. However, it falls short of stabilizing completely
either the CPI, or the price of domestic intermediate goods.4
       Optimal monetary policies address di erent trade-o s, speci c to both the international and
the domestic dimensions of the economy. First, as in Corsetti and Pesenti [2005], nominal rigidi-
ties in local currency at upstream level lead benevolent monetary authorities to attach a positive
weight to stabilizing the consumer price of imports, and thus deviate from perfect stabilization
of the nal prices of domestic goods. Second, downstream technology shocks prevent perfect
stabilization of all consumer prices, because vertical interactions with upstream rms, which
may or may not adjust their prices, induce heterogeneity of marginal costs at retail level. This
e ect is compounded in an open economy setting, because of the response of the intermediate
price of imports to exchange rate uctuations. Third, the elasticity of the producer's demand
curve falls with the industry's dispersion of nal goods prices, motivating policy emphasis on
 nal price stabilization.
       None of these trade-o s, however, entail speci c prescriptions regarding the volatility of the
real exchange rate. In the literature, optimal monetary policy in models with nominal rigidities
in local currency is sometimes associated with a limited degree of real exchange rate volatility,
relative to the terms of trade | see e.g. Devereux and Engel [2007]. In contrast, we nd that
implementing the optimal policy in our economy with nominal rigidities leads the real exchange
rate to be more volatile, and the terms of trade to be less volatile, than in the same economy
under      exible prices. This is because of the combined e ects of nominal rigidities, and the
presence of nontradable components in nal goods. We take these ndings as a caution against
strong policy prescriptions on the need to curb the volatility of the real exchange rate. The
point is that, while there are good reasons to expect optimal policies to contain the volatility
of the terms of trade, these reasons cannot be mechanically extended to the real exchange rate,
whose volatility is bound to depend on a number of structural features of the economy.
       This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we will brie y survey the literature
   4
       In our model economy the isomorphism between optimal monetary policy in closed and open economies
characterized by Clarida, Gal and Gertler [2002] obviously does not hold, as policymakers face several trade-o s
which make perfect stabilization of domestic in ation suboptimal.



                                                       4
on pricing to market and monetary policy, with the goal of clarifying our contributions to it.
Section 3 speci es the model, while Section 4 provides analytical results on the link between
price stickiness and price discrimination arising from vertical interactions. Section 5 describes
our calibration of the model. Section 6 presents the equilibrium dynamics of prices in response to
shocks, while Section 7 discusses the allocation under the optimal policy, relative to alternative
policy rules and the case of exible prices. Section 8 concludes. An appendix provides analytical
details on the model and the derivation of the main results.


2     Local currency price stability and e cient monetary stabi-
      lization

In this section we brie y reconstruct the main development of recent debates on the local cur-
rency price stability of imports, and their implications for the international transmission and the
optimal design of monetary policy, with the goal of clarifying our contribution to the literature.
A core issue underlying these debates is whether monetary policy should react to international
variables, such as the exchange rate or the terms of trade, beyond the in uence that these vari-
ables have on the domestic output gap (for example, via external demand) and on the domestic
good prices | so that it would have a speci c `international dimension.' As discussed below,
models stressing the stability of import prices in local currency have provided one possible an-
swer to this question stressing the implications of nominal rigidities for monetary transmission
and stabilization policy.


2.1   Nominal rigidities and the international dimensions of optimal monetary
      policy

At the heart of the international dimension of monetary policy lies the role of the exchange
rate in the international transmission mechanism. Consistent with traditional open macroeco-
nomic models, the seminal contribution to the New Open Economy Macroeconomics (henceforth
NOEM) by Obstfeld and Rogo [1995] embraces the view that exchange rate movements play
the stabilizing role of adjusting international relative prices in response to shocks, when frictions
prevent or slow down price adjustment in the local currency. The idea is that nominal depre-
ciation transpires into real depreciation, making domestic goods cheaper in the world markets,

                                                 5
hence redirecting world demand towards them: exchange rate movements therefore have `ex-
penditure switching e ects'. Accordingly, NOEM contributions after Obstfeld and Rogo [1995]
draw on the Mundell{Fleming and Keynesian tradition, and posit that rms preset the price for
their products in domestic currency, implying that export prices are sticky in the currency of
the producers | this is why such hypothesis is commonly dubbed `producer currency pricing'
(henceforth PCP). Under this hypothesis, nominal import prices in local currency move one-to-
one with the exchange rate and pass-through is perfect. In the baseline model with preset prices,
to the extent that the demand elasticities are identical across countries, there is no incentive
for producers to charge di erent prices in di erent markets: in equilibrium there would be no
deviations from the law of one price even if national markets were segmented.
   In model economies with PCP, optimal monetary policy rules tend to be `inward-looking' and
`iso-morphic' to the rules derived in closed-economy models: welfare-maximizing central banks
pursue the stabilization of domestic producers marginal costs and markups | hence they aim
at stabilizing the GDP de ator |, while letting the consumer price index (CPI) uctuate with
e cient movements in the relative price of imports. There is no need for monetary policies to
react to international variables | a result that in the baseline NOEM model after Corsetti and
Pesenti [2001] goes through under di erent assumptions regarding nominal rigidities, including
staggered price setting and partial adjustment (see, for example, Clarida, Gal and Gertler
[2002], or Benigno and Benigno [2003] for a generalization of the baseline model).
   The high elasticity of import prices to the exchange rate underlying the contributions after
Obstfeld and Rogo [1995], however, is clearly at odds with a large body of empirical studies
showing that the exchange rate pass-through on import prices is far from complete in the short
run, and deviations from the law of one price are large and persistent (see, for example, Engel
and Rogers [1996]; Goldberg and Knetter [1997]; Campa and Goldberg [2005]). Based on this
evidence, several contributions have engaged in a thorough critique of the received wisdom on
the expenditure switching e ects of the exchange rate. Speci cally, Betts and Devereux [2000]
and Devereux and Engel [2003], among others, posit that        rms preset export prices in the
currency of the market where they sell their goods. This assumption, commonly dubbed `local
currency pricing' (henceforth LCP), attributes local currency price stability of imports entirely
to nominal frictions. The far-reaching implications of LCP for the role of the exchange rate in
the international transmission mechanism have been widely discussed by the literature (see e.g.


                                               6
Engel [2003]).
   To the extent that import prices are sticky in the local currency, a Home depreciation does
not a ect the price of Home goods in the world markets; hence, it has no expenditure switching
e ects. Instead, it raises the ex-post markups on Home exports: at given marginal costs,
revenues in domestic currency from selling goods abroad rise. In contrast with the received
wisdom, nominal depreciation strengthens a country's terms of trade: if export prices are preset
during the period, the Home terms of trade improves when the Home currency weakens.
   As opposed to earlier literature, models assuming LCP unveil a clear-cut argument in favour
of policies with an `international dimension.' One way to present the argument is as follows.
To the extent that exporters' revenues and markups are exposed to exchange rate uncertainty,
 rms' optimal pricing strategies internalize the monetary policy of the importing country. In the
benchmark model by Corsetti and Pesenti [2005], for instance, foreign rms optimally preset the
price of their goods in the Home market one period ahead, by charging the equilibrium markup
over expected marginal costs evaluated in Home currency. The preset price of Home imports
then depends on the joint distribution of Home monetary policy and Foreign productivity shocks:
in the model, it is increasing in the variance of nominal marginal costs.
   The reason why the isomorphism between closed-economy and open-economy monetary rules
breaks down is apparent. Suppose that the Home monetary authorities ignore the in uence of
their decisions on the price of Home imports. Incomplete stabilization of Foreign rms marginal
costs and markup in local currency will translate into ine ciently high local prices of their
product (relative to their level in the exible-price allocation). On the other hand, if Home
monetary authorities wanted to stabilize Foreign rms' marginal costs, they could only do so
at the cost of raising costs and markup uncertainty for Home producers, resulting in ine cient
Home good prices. It follows that, to maximize Home welfare, Home policymakers should
optimally trade-o the stabilization of marginal costs of all producers (domestic and foreign)
selling in the Home markets. The optimal response to Foreign shocks by domestic policymakers
depends, among other factors, on the degree of openness of the economy, as indexed by the
overall share of imports in the CPI (see Corsetti and Pesenti [2005], and Sutherland [2005], for
a discussion of intermediate degrees of pass-through).
   In section 7 of this paper we will show that these basic principles of the `international
dimensions of optimal monetary policies' go through in models assuming LCP and staggered


                                                7
price adjustment. Namely, in our model monetary authorities will optimally attempt to stabilize
the CPI, although CPI stabilization will not be complete because of the asymmetry in shocks
hitting di erent economies and di erent sectors of the same national economy, creating the need
for relative price adjustment. At an optimum, welfare-maximizing policymakers will thus trade-
o   ine cient misalignment of import prices, with ine cient relative price dispersion among
domestic and foreign goods (see also Smets and Wouters, [2002], and Monacelli [2005]).


2.2   Interactions of nominal and real determinants of local currency price
      stability of imports

While most of the discussion in the NOEM literature has focused on incomplete pass-through as
an implication of nominal rigidities, a low pass-through, in itself, is not necessarily incompatible
with expenditure switching e ects | a point stressed by Obstfeld [2000] among others. In
this respect, Obstfeld and Rogo [2000] points out that, in the data (and consistent with the
received wisdom), nominal depreciation does tend to be associated with deteriorating terms of
trade. This piece of evidence clearly sets an empirical hurdle for LCP models: speci cations
which assume a very high degree of price stickiness in local currency cannot pass this test (see
Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc [2005], for a quantitative assessment). Interestingly, estimates
of LCP models attributing incomplete pass-through exclusively to nominal rigidities in local
currency, tend to predict that the degree of price stickiness is implausibly higher for imports
than for domestic goods | a result suggesting model misspeci cation (see, for example, Lubik
and Schorfheide [2006]).
    The key issue is the extent to which the evidence of local currency price stability of imports
can be explained by nominal rigidities. In the literature, it is well understood that the low
elasticity of import prices at the retail level with respect to the exchange rate is in large part
due to the incidence of distribution (see Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo [2006] for a recent
reconsideration of this point). Namely suppose that import prices at the dock move one-to-one
with the exchange rate, but the distribution margin account for 50 percent of the retail price,
mostly covering local costs. A one percent depreciation of the currency will then a ect the nal
price of the imported good only by 1/2 percent.
    In addition, several macro and micro contributions have emphasized that import prices at
the dock do not move one-to-one with the exchange rate because of optimal destination-speci c

                                                 8
markup adjustment by monopolistic rms. Instances of these studies include Dornbusch [1987],
stressing market structure, as well as previous work by two of us (Corsetti and Dedola [2005]),
where upstream monopolists sell their tradable goods to downstream rms, which combine them
with local inputs before reaching the consumer. The latter contribution establishes that, to the
extent that the tradable goods and the local inputs are not good substitutes in the downstream
 rms' production, the demand elasticity faced by upstream monopolists will be (a) market spe-
ci c, causing optimal price discrimination across markets, and (b) increasing in the monopolists
price, thus leading to incomplete exchange rate pass-through independently of nominal rigidities.
Based on this principle, that paper then generalizes the model with distribution by Burstein,
Neves and Rebelo [2003], as to encompass local currency price stability due to endogenous move-
ments of markups implied by the presence of distribution services intensive in local inputs. The
same principle nonetheless can be applied to models where intermediate imported inputs are
assembled using local inputs | a case analyzed by Bacchetta and Van Wincoop 2003. Whether
one has in mind markets with high distribution margins (such as the market for cups of co ee
at Starbucks in the US), or markets for goods with a relatively high incidence of imported parts
(such as the market for cars `made in the US'), incomplete exchange rate pass through can be
traced back to some degree of complementarity between imported goods and local input/services.
   Analyses of the relative importance of these di erent sources of import price stability (espe-
cially local costs) are provided by several market-speci c studies | such as Goldberg and Ver-
boven [2001], Goldberg and Hellerstein [2007], and Hellerstein [2006]. The main result emerging
from these partial-equilibrium contributions is that real factors can explain a large extent of local
currency price stability of imports. Most interestingly, similar conclusions can be reached using
quantitative, general equilibrium models, as suggested by the numerical exercises in Corsetti
and Dedola [2005].
   Yet, quantitative studies incorporating these factors also corroborate the idea that a realistic
degree of nominal rigidities can improve substantially the performance of the model. In Corsetti,
Dedola, and Leduc [2005], we show that a model assuming LCP together with vertical interaction
between producers and distributors can pass the empirical hurdle set by Obstfeld and Rogo
[2000], provided that the average frequency of price adjustment is consistent with the evidence
by Bils and Klenow (2004).
   Research is therefore increasingly focused on the interaction between real and monetary


                                                 9
determinants of low exchange rate pass-through and deviations from the law of one price. A
 rst early instance of research focused on such interaction is provided by contributions which
emphasize the need to treat the currency denomination of exports as an endogenous choice by
pro t maximizing rms. Bacchetta and Van Wincoop [2005], Devereux, Engel and Storgaard
[2004], and Friberg [1998] have developed models where rms can choose whether to price export
in domestic or in foreign currency, knowing that price updates will be subject to frictions. A
number of factors | from the market share of exporters to the incidence of distribution, and
the availability of hedging instruments | potentially play a crucial role in this choice (see Engel
[2006], for a synthesis).
   Although most of these models are developed assuming an arbitrary monetary policy, the
role of optimal stabilization policy in the choice between LCP and PCP is addressed by Corsetti
and Pesenti [2001]. The main idea is that expansionary monetary shocks unrelated to funda-
mental shocks (e.g. productivity) raise nominal wages and marginal costs while depreciating the
currency. Consider a rm located in a country with noisy monetary policy, i.e. hit by frequent
monetary shocks unrelated to fundamentals. For such rm, pricing its exports in foreign cur-
rency (that is, choosing LCP) is attractive in the following sense: it ensures that revenues from
exports in domestic currency will move in parallel with nominal marginal costs, with stabilizing
e ects on the markup. This is because any expansionary monetary shock depreciating the Home
currency would simultaneously raise wages and the domestic currency revenue from unit sales
abroad (at an unchanged local price). This observation may help explain why exporters from
countries with relatively unstable domestic monetary policies (e.g. some developing countries)
prefer to price their exports to developed countries in the importers' currency. The same argu-
ment, however, suggests that LCP is not necessarily optimal for exporters producing in countries
where monetary policy systematically stabilizes marginal costs (see Goldberg and Tille [2005],
for empirical evidence). For rms located in these countries, real factors arguably become more
relevant in the choice.
   A second instance of the new directions taken by the literature consists of studies taking
the LCP choice as given, and combining it with di erent determinants of pricing to market and
incomplete pass-through. This is the approach we take in this paper. In contrast from previous
contributions, where price stickiness is not linked to price discrimination (see e.g. Monacelli
[2005]), or where nominal rigidities and price discrimination coexist without feeding into each


                                                10
other (see e.g. Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc [2005]), we specify a model building on the in-
tuitive idea that the frequency of price changes by local downstream       rms selling products
to consumers, is bound to a ect the elasticity of demand perceived by upstream producers
of intermediate (tradable inputs or) goods. The novel result of our study is that, looking at
the interactions between nominal and real determinants of price discrimination in an otherwise
standard monetary model, nominal rigidities at the retail level do not necessarily lower the
equilibrium reaction of nal prices to exchange rate movements, thus increasing price inertia.
As mentioned in the Introduction, downstream price rigidities tend to generate strategic substi-
tutability among upstream producers and an overall larger sensitivity of all prices to exchange
rate changes.


3    The model economy

The world economy consists of two countries of equal size, H and F . Each country specializes
in one type of tradable good, produced in a number of di erentiated industries de ned over a
continuum of unit mass. Tradable goods are indexed by h 2 [0; 1] in the Home country and
f 2 [0; 1] in the Foreign country. In each industry, the rm producing the tradable good h (or
f ) is a monopolistic supplier of one good, using labor as the only input to production. These
 rms set prices in local currency units and in a staggered fashion as in Calvo [1983].
    A distinctive feature of our setting is that we model a downstream sector in each country.
Speci cally, we assume that each producer's good h is sold to consumers in many varieties by a
continuum of local rms indexed by rh 2 [0; 1]: These rms buy the h tradable goods, and turn
them into consumer goods | which are not traded across borders | with random productivity.
We will distinguish between two cases: one in which local rms use domestic labor as an input;
the other in which they do not. Similar to upstream producers, also downstream operate under
monopolistic competition and set prices in a staggered fashion as in Calvo [1983].
    By the logic of the Calvo adjustment, local downstream rms buying goods from upstream
producers charge di erent prices to nal users, with a constant fraction of them reoptimizing
prices in each period. In principle, one could assume that upstream rms exercise their monopoly
power by charging individual prices which are speci c to each downstream rm. However, we
 nd it more realistic and convincing to assume that upstream producers are not able to price-


                                               11
discriminate across individual local                rms, but only across groups of them | namely, across
domestic and foreign local rms. So, we assume that upstream producers exercise their monopoly
power and set prices by taking into account the total demand for their product in each market,
at Home and in the Foreign country.
   In what follows, we describe our set up focusing on the Home country, with the understanding
that similar expressions also characterize the Foreign economy | variables referred to Foreign
 rms and households are marked with an asterisk.


3.1     The Household's Problem

3.1.1    Preferences

The representative Home agent maximizes the expected value of her lifetime utility, given by
the following standard functional form:
                                  2                                    1
                                                                                                                 3
                          1                                     Mt+1
                          X           1
                                                                                                   )1
                               t 6 Ct                            Pt                 (1        Lt              7
                  V0 = E        U4                      +                   +                                ;5;                      (1)
                                    1                            1                        1
                                 t=0

where instantaneous utility U is a function of a consumption index, Ct ; leisure, (1 Lt ); and real
                 Mt+1
money balances    Pt .       Households consume both domestically produced and imported goods.
We de ne Ct (h; rh ) as the Home agent's consumption as of time t of the variety rh of the
Home good h; produced and distributed by the rm rh ; similarly, Ct (f; rf ) is the Home agent's
consumption of the variety rf of the good f; produced and distributed by rm rf . For each
good h (or f ), we assume that one nal good variety rh (rf ) is an imperfect substitute for all
other nal good varieties, with constant elasticity of substitution > 1:
                    Z 1                   1
                                                             Z 1                                                              1
                                    1                                                                            1
          Ct (h)        Ct (h; rh ) dr      ;      Ct (f )       Ct (f; rf )                                         dr           ;
                         0                                                          0

Ct (h) is the consumption of (all varieties of) the Home good h; by the Home agent, at time t;
similarly, Ct (f ) is the same agent's consumption of the Foreign good f . We then assume that
the good produced by the h industry is an imperfect substitute for all other goods produced by
the Home industries, with the same constant elasticity of substitution                                           > 1 as between nal
good varieties. Aggregate consumption of Home and Foreign goods by the Home agent is thus
de ned as:
                             Z    1                     1
                                                                            Z       1                                 1
                                               1                                                        1
                CH;t                  Ct (h)       dh       ;        CF;t               Ct (f )             df            ;
                              0                                                 0


                                                                12
   The full consumption basket, Ct , in each country, aggregates Home and Foreign goods ac-
cording to the following standard CES function:
                               h                     i1
                          Ct     a1H CH;t + aF
                                             1
                                                CF;t    ;        < 1,                        (2)

where aH and aF are the weights on the consumption of Home and Foreign traded goods,
                   1
respectively and     is the constant elasticity of substitution between CH;t and CF;t .
                 1

3.1.2    Budget constraints and asset markets

For simplicity, we posit that domestic and international asset markets are complete and that
only domestic residents hold the Home currency, Mt+1 . Households derive income from working,
Wt Lt ; from domestic rms ' pro ts and from previously accumulated units of currency, as well as
from the proceeds from holding state-contingent assets, Bt . They pay non-distortionary (lump-
sum) net taxes T, denominated in Home currency. Households use their disposable income to
consume and invest in state-contingent assets. The individual ow budget constraint for the
representative agent j in the Home country is therefore:
                                Z                                            Z 1
         PH;t CH;t + PF;t CF;t + pbt;t+1 Bt+1 + Mt+1 Wt Lt + Mt + Bt +           (h)dh       (3)
                                 s                                            0
                        Z 1Z 1                    Z 1Z 1
                      +           (h; rh )dhdrh +        (f; rf )df drf + Tt
                         0   0                     0   0

where    (:) denotes the agent's share of pro ts from all rms h and r in the economy. The price
indexes are as follows: PH;t denotes the consumer price of the aggregate Home traded good;
PF;t denotes the consumer price of aggregate Home imports. We will also denote the overall
consumer price index (CPI) by Pt . All these indices are de ned below.
   The household's problem consists of maximizing lifetime utility, de ned by (1), subject to
the constraint (3).


3.2     Production structure and technology

International price discrimination is a key feature of the international economy captured by
our model. In what follows we show that, even if Home and Foreign consumers have identi-
cal constant-elasticity preferences for consumption, vertical interactions between upstream and
downstream rms causes di erences in the elasticity of demand for the h (f ) product at whole-
sale level across national markets. Upstream rms will thus want to charge di erent prices at

                                              13
Home and in the Foreign country. We will focus our analysis on Home rms | optimal pricing
by Foreign rms can be easily derived from it. To distinguish between upstream and downstream
 rms, we will denote variables referred to the former with an upper bar.
   We begin by specifying the technology used by upstream rms producing Home tradables.
These rms employ domestic labor to produce a di erentiated product h according to the fol-
lowing linear production function:
                                          Y (h) = Z L (h) ;

where L (h) is the demand for labor by the producer of the good h and Z is a technology shock
common to all upstream producers in the Home country, which follows a statistical process to
be speci ed below. The letter h will be indi erently referred to an upstream producer selling to
downstream rms rh , or the corresponding `industry.'
   In each industry h, downstream rms rh combine the traded input, bought from upstream
producers, with some local nontraded input. For analytical convenience, in most of our analysis
we do not model the local nontraded input explicitly, but posit that the production function of
 rms rh is linear in the traded input only

                                       Y (h; rh ) = ZX (h; rh )                              (4)

where X (h; rh ) is the demand for tradable good h by rm rh , Z is a random technology compo-
nent that a ects the amount of traded input required to produce the variety rh and distribute
it to consumers. This random shock is country-speci c, and hits symmetrically all national
downstream rms.
   The use of the local input is consequential for our results, to the extent that it is a poor
substitute with X. This case has been made in previous work of ours (see Corsetti and Dedola
2005 and in Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc 2005), in which we have assumed that downstream rms
in an industry h combine the tradable good h with a local input according to a xed-proportion
production function, such as

                               Y (h; rh ) = M in [X (h; rh ) ; ZL(h; rh )]                   (5)

Here, L(h; rh ) is the demand for labor by the downstream rm rh , and the random technology
component Z now a ects the amount of labor required to produce the variety rh and distribute
it to consumers.

                                                   14
   In our previous contributions, we have shown that the above speci cation can generate
endogenous movements in upstream rms' markups and cross-border price discrimination inde-
pendently of nominal price rigidities. In this paper, we make a di erent, but complementary
point. Namely, we show that vertical interactions among upstream and downstream rms can
lead to price discrimination exclusively as a consequence of nominal rigidities. To focus sharply
on the mechanism underlying this new result, throughout our analysis we specify the produc-
tion function of downstream rms as in (4), abstracting from the local nontraded input. For
the sake of comparison, however, in the next sections we will also show analytical results for the
production function (5).


3.3   The problem of downstream rms

Both upstream and downstream rms are subject to nominal rigidities a la Calvo. Hence, at
any time t downstream rms will buy either from a producer h which updates its price in the
same period, or from a producer still charging an old price. Conversely, in each period, upstream
producers updating their price will need to consider that only a fraction of downstream rms
buying their products will also re-optimize in the period. In characterizing optimal pricing
decisions, it is instructive to go over these cases one by one. Let           be the probability that a
downstream rm within the industry h keeps its price xed | in each period a rm rh sets a
new price with probability (1      ). The corresponding probabilities for the upstream producers
will be denoted by    and 1        .
   Consider rst the optimization problem of the downstream rms rh which can reset their
product prices in the current period t: The representative rm rh chooses Pt (h; rh ) to maximize
the expected discounted sum of pro ts:
                     (1                                                                  )
                      X
            (h) = Et      pbt;t+k k (Pt (h; rh )Ct+k (h; rh )   M Ct+k (h)Ct+k (h; rh )) ;
                         k=0

where pbt;t+k is the rm's stochastic nominal discount factor between t and t + k: This rm faces
the following nal demand:

                                           Pt (h; rh )     Pt (h)
                           Ct (h; rh ) =                             CH;t ;
                                            Pt (h)         PH;t

where Pt (h) is the price index of the good (or industry) h, and PH;t is the price index of all Home
goods. The optimal price charged to consumers can then be written in the following standard

                                                    15
form:
                                               1
                                               X
                                          Et         pbt;t+k   kM C
                                                                   t+k (h)Ct+k (h; rh )
                                               k=0
                    Pto (h; rh ) =                    1                                   :                   (6)
                                      1               X
                                                 Et          pbt;t+k k Ct+k (h; rh )
                                                      k=0

where, depending on whether we consider (4) or (5), the rm's marginal cost, M Ct (h), will be
given by either of the following expressions:

                                                            P t (h)
                                     M Ct (h) =
                                                              Zt
                                                                      Wt
                                     M Ct (h) = P t (h) +
                                                                      Zt

where P t (h) is the price of good h charged by the producer in the industry.
   Now, if the downstream rm operates in an industry in which the upstream producer does
not re-optimize its product price during the period, the price P t (h) in the above expression will
coincide with the price charged in the previous period, i.e. P t (h) = P t             1 (h).   Conversely, if the
downstream rm rh operates in an industry h in which the upstream rm has also reset the
price of its product during the same period, the marginal cost will be depending on the new,
optimized price, discussed in the following section. This has the noteworthy implication that
downstream rms in di erent industries will be facing di erent marginal costs even in the face
of common productivity shocks Zt | a key feature of our model which will be important in
determining the characteristics of the optimal monetary policy.


3.4     Price indexes and market clearing

3.4.1    Price indexes

Before getting to the analytical core of our contribution and delving into our numerical ex-
periments, we conclude the presentation of the model by formally de ning the price indexes
repeatedly used in the analysis so far, and writing down the market clearing conditions in the
goods market. In an industry in which the producer updates its price, the price index of the




                                                       16
good h at consumer level is given by:5
                                 Z      1                           1
                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                          1
               Pt (h) =                     Pt (h; rh )       drh           = (1         )Pto (h)1                + Pt     1 (h)
                                                                                                                                1       1
                                                                                                                                                :
                                    0

Denoting with a tilde the prices in an industry in which the producer doesn't update its price,
the price index is:
                                Z       1                           1
                                                                        1
                                                                             h                                                      i       1
                                                         1
               et (h) =
               P                            Pt (h; rh )       drh           = (1         )Peto (h)1                 et
                                                                                                                  + P      1 (h)
                                                                                                                                1       1
                                                                                                                                                :
                                  0

The price index of Home tradables consumed at home thus becomes:
                      Z    1                         1
                                                         1

       PH;t =                  Pt (h)1          dh            =>
                       0
                  h                                     i
   P1H;t      =       (1         )Pt (h)1 + P   et (h)1
                                 h                                                   i           h                                                       i
              = (1              ) (1     )Pto (h)1 + Peto (h)1                           +           (1           )Pt   1 (h)
                                                                                                                             1     et
                                                                                                                                 + P            1 (h)
                                                                                                                                                     1
                                 h                                                   i
              = (1              ) (1     )Pto (h)1 + Peto (h)1                           + P1H;t              1


The price index associated with the consumption basket, Ct ; is:
                                                                                                          1
                                                                            1                1
                                                         Pt = aH PH;t + aF PF;t                               :

       Let Et denote the Home nominal exchange rate, expressed in units of Home currency per
unit of Foreign currency. The real exchange rate is costumarily de ned as the ratio of CPIs'
                                     Et Pt
expressed in the same currency, i.e.       : The terms of trade are instead de ned as the relative
                                      Pt
                                                          PF;t
price of domestic imports in terms of exports, namely           .
                                                        Et PH;t

3.4.2       Equilibrium in the goods market

To characterize the equilibrium conditions in the goods market, we equate supply to demand at
each rm level. Integrating over all downstream rms in a given industry we get:
                                    1                              !        1
                Pt (h)      PH;t      1 C
                                         t                  Pt (h)   PH;t     1
                                                                                Ct
   Y t (h) = aH                            St (h) + (1 aH )                        S (f );
                 PH;t        Pt         Zt                   PH;t     Pt        Zt t
   5
       We drop the index rh in our notation of the optimal nal prices, since in any given industry rms that can
update their price will choose the same optimal one.




                                                                                17
where St (h) denotes industry h's relative price dispersion at the consumer level:
                                                  Z
                                                        Pt (h; rh )
                                 St (h)                                   drh: :
                                                         Pt (h)

Integrating over all industries, aggregate output is:
                                          1                                        1
                                PH;t          1   Ct                       PH;t        1
                                                                                           Ct
                     Y t = aH                        S t + (1      aH )                       S
                                 Pt               Zt                       Pt              Zt t

where the price dispersion term, S t ; is de ned as:
                                          Z
                                                      Pt (h)
                                  St =                             St (h)dh;
                                                      PH;t

Observe that S t captures the relative price dispersion within and across industries. Since S t
and St (h) are bounded below by 1, price dispersion implies a real resource cost.


4     Modelling the sources of local currency price stability: Price
      discrimination and nominal rigidities

In this section we fully characterize pricing to market by upstream                          rms, as a function of
 nal prices. A crucial feature of our model is that the demand price elasticity perceived by
upstream producers is time varying as a function of downstream price in ation. Since results
di er depending on the speci cation of the downstream                       rms' production function, we will
                                                    o
characterize the optimal producer price           P t (h);     and discuss its main properties, looking          rst
at the case of downstream linear (Cobb-Douglas) production, then at the case of downstream
Leontief production.


4.1   The problem of the upstream rms

Consistent with the logic of the Calvo model, we posit that, when upstream producers update
their prices, they do so simultaneously in the Home and in the Foreign market, in the respective
currencies. The maximization problem is then as follows:
                  (1                                                                                                         )
                   X           h                                   i
M axp(h);p (h) Et    pbt;t+k k P t (h)Dt+k (h) + Et P t (h)Dt+k (h)                        M C t+k (h) Dt+k (h) + Dt+k (h)
                   k=0
                                                                                                                             (7)



                                                         18
where the marginal cost of the producer is given by:

                                                                Wt
                                                  M C(h) =         ;
                                                                Zt

and, depending on the production function downstream, the Home and Foreign demands for the
 rm's variety are given by:
                                              Z
                                         1        Pt (h; rh )          Pt (h)
                          Dt (h) =                                                    CH;t drh
                                         Zt        Pt (h)              PH;t
                                              Z                                  !
                                          1       Pt (h; rh )           Pt (h)
                          Dt (h) =                                                     CH;t drh
                                         Zt        Pt (h)                PH;t

in our linear production speci cation, or
                                   Z
                                        Pt (h; rh )                 Pt (h)
                       Dt (h) =                                                      CH;t drh
                                          Pt (h)                    PH;t
                                   Z                                            !
                                        Pt (h; rh )                    Pt (h)
                       Dt (h) =                                                       CH;t drh
                                          Pt (h)                        PH;t

for the case of Leontief production function. In these expressions, Pt (h) and PH;t denote the
price index of industry h and of Home goods, respectively, in the Foreign country, expressed
in Foreign currency. In comparing the two sets of demands above, recall that in the linear
production case (4) the rm's productivity a ect the quantity of tradable good h needed to
satisfy a given nal demand for each variety rh : hence the demand for the monopolist's product
is scaled by productivity.
      For each industry h, we can write the relative price dispersion at the consumer level as:

                                                       Pt (h)
                                 St (h) = (1       )                +      t (h)St 1 ;
                                                       Pt (h)

                Pt (h) 6
where      t (h)   =    : Using this result, we can rewrite the demand faced by each upstream
               Pt 1 (h)
producer as a function of price dispersion. In other words, the producer's demand curve de-
pends on the price dispersion at the consumer level, induced by infrequent price adjustment by
downstream rms.7
  6
      See appendix for details.
  7
      In the Leontief case, for instance, the demand curve can be written as:

                         Dt+k (h) = (1     )Pt+k (h) + Pt+k     1 (h)St+k 1   (h) PH;t+k CH;t+k :




                                                          19
                                                                                                      o
   By the rst order condition of the producer's problem, the optimal price P t (h) in domestic
currency charged to domestic downstream rms is:
                                             1
                                             X     k
                                       Et              pbt;t+k "t+k (h)Dt+k (h)M C t+k (h)
                           o                 k=0
                         P t (h)   =           1                                              ;           (8)
                                               X        k
                                         Et                 pbt;t+k ("t+k (h)   1) Dt+k (h)
                                              k=0

while the price (in foreign currency) charged to downstream rms in the foreign country is:
                                             1
                                             X     k                              M C t+k (h)
                                        Et             pbt;t+k "t+k (h)Dt+k (h)
                           o
                                                                                    Et+k
                                             k=0
                         Pt (h) =               1                                                 :
                                               X        k
                                            Et              pbt;t+k "t+k (h)    1 Dt+k (h)
                                                 k=0

where the elasticities

                                                                @Dt+k (h) P t (h)
                                       "t+k (h) =
                                                                 @P t (h) Dt+k (h)
                                                                @Dt+k (h) P t (h)
                                       "t+k (h) =
                                                                 @P t (h) Dt+k (h)

summarize how the price set by the producer as of t; will a ect the choice of downstream rms
that will have a chance to change their prices in the current period and in the future.
   Now, it is well understood that, when P t (h) and P t (h) are sticky in local currency, exchange
rate movements translate into systematic violation of the law of one price. However, comparing
the expressions for the optimal prices above, it is apparent that the law of one price is bound to be
systematically violated even when the rm has a chance to reset its prices, re ecting di erences
in the two market elasticities " (h) and " (h). In this respect, it is worth emphasizing that in our
economy deviations from the law of one price across markets are not an exclusive implication of
nominal rigidities in local currency. They also depend on the way vertical interactions among
upstream and downstream monopolists a ect optimal pricing by producers, as shown below.


4.2   Demand price elasticities, price variability and strategic interactions

We now characterize the elasticities in (9) for our speci cation in which the downstream rms'
production function is linear in the traded good, as in (4), and discuss its main properties and
implications for pricing. The derivative of the producer's demand with respect to its own price


                                                                 20
is:
                                 k
                                 X
                @Dt+k (h)           @Ct+k (h; rh ) @Pt+k s (h; rh )
                               =
                 @P t (h)          @Pt+k s (h; rh )   @P t (h)
                                    s=0
                                                    k
                                                    X          o                                   o
                                                          s   Pt+k s (h)         CH;t+k    1     @Pt+k  s (h)
                               =          (1    )                                       o                     :
                                                               PH;t+k             Zt+k Pt+k s (h) @P t (h)
                                                    s=0

                                             o (h)
                                           @Pt+k
where the partial derivative          captures the extent to which current and future optimal
                             @P t (h)
                                                                                        o (h)
pricing decision by rms rh are a ected by the current producer pricing decision | here Pt+k
denotes the optimal price set by the downstream rms which will reoptimize in each period t+k;
while facing the traded input price P t (h):
    In the appendix, we show that this derivative is simply equal to the ratio of the two prices
                                   @Pto (h)  P o (h)
themselves; e.g. at time t we have          = t      : Using this fact, the impact on current and
                                   @P t (h)  P t (h)
future demand of a price change by the producer can be simpli ed as follows:8
                                                                        k
                  @Dt+k (h)                             CH;t+k PH;t+k X      s    o
                                =          (1       )                            Pt+k       s (h)
                   @P t (h)                              Zt+k P t (h)
                                                                       s=0
                                                                             k
                                                      CH;t+k PH;t+k     1 X             s
                                                                                                o
                                                                                               Pt+k  s (h)
                                =          (1       )
                                                       Zt+k Pt+k (h) P t (h)                    Pt+k (h)
                                                                                 s=0
                                                                                                                  !
                                           CH;t+k       PH;t+k
                                                             1                                  P (h)
                                                                                             k+1 t+k
                                =                                        St+k (h)                        St   1 (h)   :
                                            Zt+k Pt+k (h) P t (h)                               Pt 1 (h)

                  o
                 P
                 Pt+k
                 k
                      ss (h)
The sum                         in the second line of this expression re ects the fact that, when
          s=0     Pt+k (h)
setting the optimal price as of t, upstream monopolists internalize its e ects on nal demand
in each future period between t and t + k: Observe that in the last line in the above expession,
this sum has been substituted out using the de nition of St+k (h) in the appendix.
          Using again the de nition of St+k (h), the price elasticity of demand at each point in time as
      8                                                                                                          @M Ct+k+s (h)
          We note here that this result is due to the fact that for prices Pt+k reset optimally as of t+k,                     =
                                                                                                                   @P t (h)
  1      M Ct+k+s (h)
       =              ; 8s > 0, and
Zt+k+s      P t (h)

                                          @Ct+k+s (h; rh )        Ct+k+s (h; rh ) @Pt+k (h)
                                                           =                                :
                                             @P t (h)               Pt+k (h)       @P t (h)

See appendix for details.




                                                                  21
perceived by the producer, "t+k (h) becomes:

                                 @Dt+k (h) P t (h)
              "t+k (h) =                                                                                       (9)
                                  @P t (h) Dt+k (h)
                                                                                         !
                                CH;t+k PH;t+k                     k+1
                                                                      Pt+k (h)                  1
                          =                      St+k (h)                      St   1 (h)
                                 Zt+k Pt+k (h)                        Pt 1 (h)               Dt+k (h)
                                0                                     1
                                       k+1 Pt+k (h)     St
                                B                                1 (h) C
                                B1           Pt 1 (h)                 C
                          =     @                                     A
                                               St+k (h)


      This demand elasticity is a function of the producer price P t (h) only indirectly, through the
           o (h) on the nal price level P
impact of Pt+k                            t+k (h): absent downstream nominal rigidities ( = 0),

the price elasticity of the producer would be constant and proportional to that perceived by the
                                                                      P t (h)
downstream rm, | the nal price charged would simply be                        :
                                                                    1 Zt
    In (9), the implications for the demand elasticity of nominal rigidities at the downstream
level are captured by the negative term inside the brackets. An important and novel result is
that the demand price elasticity perceived by upstream rms under sticky prices is time-varying
and, up to rst order9 a decreasing function of the cumulated rate of in ation at the consumer
       Pt+k (h)
level,          . Namely, with positive in ation, such elasticity will be lower than with exible
       Pt 1 (h)
prices (in which case it is constant and equal to ). Any change in the consumer prices within
a speci c h industry | either in response to productivity shocks hitting downstream rms, or
in response to price changes by the upstream rms | modi es the elasticity of the demand
faced by upstream producers in the same industry. A notable implication is that di erences in
national in ation rates will induce di erences in demand price elasticities for a product, creating
an incentive for producers to price-to-market across borders.
      To provide an intuitive account of these results, observe that, from the vantage point of an
upstream producer of tradables h, the marginal revenue from a price change re ects the fact that
only some downstream rms update their prices in any given period. Speci cally, the upstream
monopolist does not know which individual rm rh will be updating its price in the period, but
knows that a fraction 1           of them will do so, while a fraction       will keep their price unchanged.
Because of the latter, the upstream producers will optimally respond to shocks to own marginal
costs by charging a price which is higher than she/he would ideally charge if all downstream
  9
      We show below that up to rst order price dispersion St (h) is equal to 1 around a zero in ation steady state.


                                                         22
producers set new prices.
   This leads to strategic substitutability among producers: namely, a rise in their marginal
costs will lead to an increase in the desired markups by producers. Strategic substitutability in
our model is important because it implies that producer prices will be more reactive to shocks
to their demand conditions and to marginal costs: when vertical interactions among rms with
sticky prices are considered, it may not be necessarily the case that several layers of nominal
rigidities bring about more inertia in prices.
   It is worth stressing that, if monetary policy stabilized consumer prices completely, removing
any within-industry price dispersion for each good h, such policy would make the producer's
demand elasticity and thus its desired markup constant. To wit: in this case, the producer's
demand elasticity would be given by        1        k+1   . Through price stabilization, monetary au-
thorities would therefore eliminate the incentive to price discriminate. However, observe that
the elimination of consumer price variability (and consumer price dispersion) would not make
the producer's markups independent of downstream price rigidities. The steady-state markup
of upstream rms would still be a function of , and equal to                        ; implying that the
                                                                          1
                                                                              1
steady state elasticity is lower than , and equal to
                                                     1
                                       "ss =                 < :
                                                 1

4.3   In ation variability, optimal markups and exchange rate pass-through

To characterize further     rms' equilibrium behavior, we log-linearize expression (8) around a
zero in ation steady state. Using standard procedures, the optimal price charged by updating
upstream producers can be approximated as follows:

                     co (h) = 1          d                 "bt (h)        [ (h);
                                                                           o
                     P t                 M C t (h)                 +   Et P t+1
                                                          "ss 1
where in turn the elasticity as of t is approximately given by

                                        "bt (h) =         bt (h) ;

with bt (h) denoting downstream in ation deviations from steady state in sector h. Since down-
stream in ation changes depend on the nal price set by rms adjusting during the period:

                                      bt (h) = (1          co (h);
                                                          )P t


                                                     23
it is clear that the elasticity "bt (h) will be ultimately a decreasing function of the upstream price.
Using the di erence equation for optimally reset downstream prices,

                                       co (h) = (1
                                       P                       d
                                                              )M C t (h) +              Et Pd
                                                                                            o
                                         t                                                  t+1 (h);

                            d
together with the fact that M           co (h)
                              C t (h) = P                               bt , we can characterize downstream in ation in
                                                                        Z
                                          t

each industry h as
                                                               h                        i
                           bt (h) = (1          ) (1          ) Pco (h)               bt +
                                                                                      Z           Et bt+1 (h) ;
                                                                  t


and thus derive a dynamic expression for the the optimal pricing by upstream rms:
                                                 h                                              i
  co (h) = 1
  P                      Md C   (h) +              (1   ) (1     ) co (h) Z
                                                                   P        bt + Et bt+1 (h)
    t                         t                                      t
                                       "ss 1
             + Et P [ o
                      t+1 (h)
                                          "ss                h                                    i
               1          d
                          M C t (h) +              1           (1    ) (1    )Zbt + Et bt+1 (h)
                                       "ss 1
          =                                        "ss                    2
                                          1               (1    ) 1
                                                "ss 1
                            Et P [o
                                  t+1 (h)
             +        "ss                            2
                1             (1       ) 1
                   "ss 1
               "ss                         2
The term 1           (1        ) 1            in the denominator of the above expression is lower than
             "ss 1
1:10 This means that, as already discussed above, the time varying elasticity due to downstream
nominal rigidities will transpire into a larger response of the optimal price to changes in marginal
costs, relative to the the case in which the upstream price elasticity is constant.
       Now, the price charged to foreign downstream rms by domestic upstream producers will
be:
                                                          "ss                          h                                             i
                   1              d
                                  M C t (h)     Ebt +                     1                  (1        ) (1        ct +
                                                                                                                  )Z      Et ct+1 (h)
do (h) =                                                "ss     1
P t                                                                     "ss                               2
                                                         1                        (1         ) 1
                                                                "ss           1
                                          \
                                       Et P
                                            o
                                            t+1 (h)
                  +         "ss                                 2
                                                                    :
                      1                 (1      ) 1
                          "ss      1
  10
       It is also possible to show that this term will be positive as long as the upstream markup is not too large. A
su cient condition is that
                                               "ss                                4    1
                                                   < 4 ()                >                        :
                                             "ss 1                            4       1 1




                                                                    24
The coe cient multiplying exchange rate deviations Ebt in this expression, which we write for
convenience below
                                                         1
                                               "ss                         2
                                        1                (1       ) 1
                                             "ss     1
measures the structural exchange rate pass-through, as de ned in e.g. Corsetti, Dedola, and
Leduc [2005]. This coe cient highlights the two mechanisms determining how exchange rate
movements are passed through into local prices according to our analysis. On the one hand,
upstream nominal rigidities ( > 0) tend to lower short-run pass-through irrespective of ver-
tical interactions. But, as we noted above, downstream nominal rigidities ( > 0) lower the
denominator in the above expression below 1 | because of strategic substitutability. Thus, the
response of the optimal price to exchange rate changes will be stronger when the elasticity is
time varying due to downstream nominal rigidities, relative to the case of a constant elasticity.
For instance, if upstream prices were fully exible | corresponding to                    = 0 | the structural
pass-through coe cient would be larger than 1 per e ect of the vertical interactions with down-
stream sticky price rms. However, for any given value of ; a su ciently large                     will generally
reduce ERPT below 100 percent in the short run | unless the upstream steady state markup
is unreasonably large.11


4.4       Price rigidities versus local costs (the Leontief technology case)

As already mentioned, in previous work (see Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc [2005]) we have ana-
lyzed a di erent model speci cation, assuming that the production function of the downstream
 rm includes a local input, which is a poor substitute for the traded intermediate goods. We
showed that the demand price elasticity faced by upstream producers is also market speci c in
  11
       Precisely, it can be shown that a su cient condition for the ERPT coe cient to be less than one is that:
                                                         r
                                           1    "ss 1           2 "ss
                                                           1+             1 :
                                                  "ss             "ss 1
                                                             "ss
If it is also assumed that the markup is not too large, e.g.             2 ; which is reasonable for   close to 1,
                                                           "ss 1
then a su cient condition for incomplete ERPT in the short run is:
                                                   p
                                               2     3    0:268
                                                       =         :

Finally, observe that the ERPT coe cient is clearly a nonmonotonic function of the degree of downstream price
rigidity, :




                                                             25
this case (independently of nominal rigidities). The properties of this model are however quite
di erent from the ones discussed so far. In the rest of this subsection, we analyze these di er-
ences within a single analytical framework. Our main conclusion is that the presence of local
inputs (which are weak substitutes for intermediate goods) in downstream production leads to
an attenuation of the main e ect of price stickiness on upstream producers' optimal markups,
without necessarily overturning it.
      When the technology of the downstream rms is as in (5), the derivative of the producer
demand with respect to its price becomes:
                                                k
                                                X           o                                o
               @Dt+k (h)                              s    Pt+k s (h)             CH;t+k @Pt+k    s (h)
                         =        (1        )                                     o                     ;
                @P t (h)                                    PH;t+k               Pt+k s (h) @P t (h)
                                                s=0

This is similar to the expression derived for the linear case, except that the right-hand side is not
scaled by downstream rms' productivity. After some simpli cations (detailed in the appendix),
the derivative of the nal price to the producer price can be shown to be a constant depending
on . Evaluating this derivative at time t we can write:12

                                                    @Pto (h)
                                                             =               :
                                                    @P t (h)             1

Intuitively, the e ect of an increase in the upstream producer price (and thus of the marginal
cost) on the price optimally charged by downstream rms in the same period will be proportional
to the markup charged by the the latter,                         | a clear instance of double marginalization.
                                                             1
 12
   The formula in the text can be derived using the same reasoning as in the appendix, using with the fact that
@M Ct+k (h)
            = 1; and
 @P t (h)

                           @Ct+k (h; rh )                   Pt (h)                     1 @Pt (h)
                                                =                         CH;t+k
                             @P t (h)                       PH;t+k                   Pt (h) @P t (h)
                                                          Ct+k (h; rh ) @Pt (h)
                                                =                                :
                                                            Pt (h)      @P t (h)




                                                              26
       The derivative of current and future demands with respect to the wholesale price becomes:13
                                 2                k
                                                  X            o
           @Dt+k (h)                                    s     Pt+k s (h)                   CH;t+k
                       =                 (1   )                                            o
            @P t (h)                 1                         PH;t+k                     Pt+k s (h)
                                                  s=0
                                                                           k
                                                                           X               o                     1
                                 2                PH;t+k                         s        Pt+k  s (h)
                       =                 CH;t+k     +1        (1       )
                                     1            Pt+k (h)                                 Pt+k (h)
                                                                           s=0
                                                              "                                                                        #
                                 2                PH;t+k                                                       +1
                                                                                              Pt+k (h)
                       =                 CH;t+k     +1            Set+k (h)          k+1
                                                                                                                     Set     1 (h)         ;
                                     1            Pt+k (h)                                    Pt 1 (h)

where we have de ned
                   Z            o (h; r )               1                                    1
                                                                                             X
                               Pt+k     h
         e
         St+k (h)                                           dr = (1              +1
                                                                              )Pt+k (h)             j    o
                                                                                                        Pt+k                   1
                                                                                                               j (h)               :
                                Pt+k (h)
                                                                                             j=0

. The price elasticity of demand at each point in time as perceived by the upstream producer is
then given by:
                                               "                                                                     #
                                2                                                                  +1
                                       P t (h) e                                 Pt+k (h)
                  "t+k (h) =                     St+k (h)              k+1
                                                                                                        Set   1 (h)      ;                     (10)
                                    1 Pt+k (h)                                   Pt 1 (h)

where again, as shown in the appendix, it is true that
                                                                      1
                                                    Pt (h)
                           Set (h) = (1       )                           +      t
                                                                                     +1
                                                                                          (h)Set   1 (h):
                                                    Pt (h)

In contrast to the linear production case, the demand elasticity is now a function of the whole-
sale price P t (h) not only indirectly, through the                    nal price index Pt+k (h); but also directly.
Speci cally, this elasticity re ects three e ects.
       The rst arises from the double marginalization due to the presence of two vertically inte-
grated monopolists and is captured by the term   in (10): absent nominal rigidities ( = 0)
                                               1
and the nontraded input among downstream rms, the price elasticity of the producer would be
constant and equal to that perceived by these rms,                            | the price charged to consumers by all
 rms would simply be             P t (h):
                               1
       The second e ect, arising from nominal rigidities, is captured by the term in brackets in (10)
and has been discussed extensively already in the previous subsection | it links the demand
  13
    The following is due to the fact that for retail prices Pt+k reset as of t + k, it will still be true
     @M Ct+k+s (h)
that               = 1 and
       @P t (h)
                              @Ct+k+s (h; rh )     Ct+k+s (h; rh ) @Pt+k (h)
                                               =                             :
                                  @P t (h)           Pt+k (h)       @P t (h)

  See also the appendix.


                                                              27
elasticity to downstream price in ation and price dispersion among nal producers. Its presence
tends to make the demand elasticity an increasing function of P t (h):
    The third and last e ect arises from the assumption that downstream rms combine the
                                                                         P t (h)
traded and labor inputs in xed proportion and is captured by the term             : absent down-
                                                                       Pt+k (h)
                                                            P t (h)
stream nominal rigidities this ratio would be equal to                      ; as in Corsetti and
                                                                      Wt
                                                            P t (h) +
                                                        1             Zt
Dedola [2005]. However, in contrast to our results above, this last e ect tends to make the
demand elasticity decreasing in P t (h):
   Summing up: our analysis above suggest that price stickiness and local inputs which are
complement to intermediate tradables in nal good production a ect producers' markups in dif-
ferent ways: the former makes the producers' demand elasticity decreasing, the latter increasing,
in the producer price. Under what conditions would one e ect prevail over the other?
   Taking a log-linear approximation to the upstream price and the elasticity, we nd as before
that
                     co (h) = 1              d                    "bt (h)          [ (h);
                                                                                     o
                     P t                     M C t (h)                    +     Et P t+1
                                                                 "ss 1
where the elasticity as of t is now given by:

                                               co (h)
                                     "bt (h) = P         (1 +         co (h):
                                                                     )P
                                                 t                      t


and
                                                             1
                                             "ss =                   :
                                                         1
Relative to our previous analysis, this steady state elasticity depends on , which is de ned as the
steady state share of the upstream product in the downstream rms' costs, with 0 < 1                      < 1.
Since downstream marginal cost can be approximated as

                                 d
                                 M           co (h) + (1
                                   C t (h) = P                        ct
                                                                    ) W       bt ;
                                                                              Z
                                               t


the expression for the optimal upstream price becomes:

co (h) =                d              "bt (h)      [ o
P t          1         M C t (h)               + Et P t+1 (h)
                                      "ss 1
                      2                                                                                                     3
                                      Pco (h) (1 + ) (1       )               co (h) + (1
                                                                              P                ct
                                                                                             ) W    bt
                                                                                                    Z    +         do
                                                                                                                Et Pt+1 (h) 7
                      6d                 t                                      t
        =    1        4M C t (h)                                                                                            5
                                                                                  "ss    1

            +       [
                 Et P
                      o
                      t+1 (h);


                                                        28
or
                             2                                                                                             3
                                            (1 +    ) (1                ) (1      ct
                                                                                ) W             bt +
                                                                                                Z           Et Pd
                                                                                                                o
                              d                                                                                 t+1 (h)
                1            4M C t (h)                                                                                    5
                                                                               "ss      1
     co (h) =
     P t
                                               1        (1 +    ) 1                (1            )
                                          1+
                                                                "ss 1
                                        [
                                     Et P
                                          o
                                          t+1 (h)
                +                                                   :
                         1       (1 + ) 1           (1          )
                    1+
                                        "ss 1
The denominator of the coe cient multiplying marginal costs can now have either sign, i.e. the
time varying elasticity can either magnify or mute the response of the optimal upstream price to
marginal costs. This means that we can have either strategic substitutability (the denominator is
negative, as was in the previous subsection) or strategic complementarity (positive). A su cient
condition for strategic complementarity is:

                                                           1
                                                    <               :
                                                         1+

In other words, the share of local inputs in downstream rms should be su ciently high. Observe
that the above inequality is more likely to hold when                      is low (markups are high), or                  is low,
so that downstream prices are not too sticky.


5     Calibration

This section describes the benchmark calibration for our numerical experiments, which we as-
sume symmetric across countries. We used dynare++ to solve for the optimal monetary policy
and to simulate our di erent economies. In each exercise, we report statistics averaged over 500
simulations of 100 periods each.


5.1    Preferences and production

We posit that the period-by-period utility function has the form already shown by (1), that we
reproduce here for convenience:
                                                                          1
                                                               Mt+1
                           Mt+1       C1                        Pt                   (1         Lt )1
                    U Ct ;      ; Lt = t            +                          +                        ;                   (11)
                            Pt        1                         1                           1


                                                         29
We set       so that in steady state, one third of the time endowment is spent working. In our
benchmark calibration, we assume        equal to    (risk aversion), which we in turn set to 2: Since
the utility function is separable in consumption and real money balances, money demand is
determined residually and does not play any role in our results. We therefore set         arbitrarily
to 0.1.
   We set the constant elasticity of substitution across brands, , so that the markup of down-
stream rms in steady state is 15 percent. Following Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland [1992], we
chose      so that the trade elasticity is 1.5. As regards the weights of domestic and foreign trad-
ables in the consumption basket, ah and af (normalized ah + af = 1) are set such that imports
are 10 percent of aggregate output in steady state, roughly in line with the average ratio for
the U.S. in the last 30 years. We pick the steady state value of Z to ensure that the price of
traded goods accounts for 50 percent of the nal price in steady state. This value corresponds
to the empirical estimates by Burstein, Neves and Rebelo [2003], for the distribution margin
only. In our speci cation, downstream rms can do more than distributing goods to nal users,
suggesting that the value we select is on the conservative side.
   As benchmark, we set the probability that upstream and downstream rms update their
prices to 0.5. This overall frequency of price adjustment is in line with the evidence in Bils and
Klenow [2004] and Nakamura and Steinsson [2007], if sales are treated as price changes.


5.2       Productivity shocks

Let the vector Z      fZ; Z; Z ; Z g represent the sectoral technology shocks in the domestic and
foreign economies. We assume that sectoral disturbances to technology follow a trend-stationary
AR(1) process

                                             0
                                            Z = Z + u;                                          (12)

whereas u has variance-covariance matrix V (u); and        is a 4x4 matrix of coe cients describing
the autocorrelation properties of the shocks, that are the same for both sectoral shocks. Since
we assume a symmetric economic structure across countries, we also impose symmetry on the
autocorrelation and variance-covariance matrices of the above process. Because of lack of sectoral
data on productivity, we posit that sectoral shocks follow a rather conventional process. First,
in line with most of the international business cycle literature | e.g., BKK | we assume that

                                                   30
these shocks are very persistent, and set their autocorrelation to 0.95. Second, the standard
deviation of the innovations is set to 0.007. For simplicity, we set the shock correlation and the
spillovers across countries and sectors to zero.


5.3       Monetary policy

To characterize the optimal monetary policy, we let the planner choose the growth rates of money
in the Home and Foreign economies, to maximize the world welfare subject to the rst-order
conditions for households and rms and the economy-wide resource constraints. We assume that
the planner places equal weights on Home and Foreign welfare, so that world welfare is given by
the following expression:
                                                           V0 + V 0
                                             Welfare =              ;
                                                              2
where V0 and V0 do not take into account utility accruing from real balances in (11). We follow
an approach similar to that in Khan, King, and Wolman [2003] and consider an optimal policy
that has been in place for a long enough time that initial conditions do not matter. When solving
our economies, we assume the presence of scal subsidies, nanced via lump-sum taxation, to
ensure that all prices would equal marginal costs if prices were fully exible.
       In describing our results, we also compare the optimal policy to other well-known policy
rules. We rst consider a Taylor-type rule that sets the short-term nominal interest rate as a
function of the deviations of CPI in ation and real GDP from steady state values:

                                                              ss
                         R t = Rt   1   + (1     )E(   t           ) + (1   )(yt   y ss ):              (13)

We conventionally parameterize the policy rule using the estimates in Lubik and Schorfheide
[2004]:       = 0:84;     = 2:19;       = 0:3: We also consider in ation targeting rules in which the
central bank stabilizes either the in ation rate at the nal or intermediate level, which we label
CPI and GDP in ation targeting, respectively.14
  14
       Our price index of Home intermediates is a CES function of the price of Home intermediates in the Home
market and the price of Home intermediates sold abroad (expressed in Home currency). We set the weights over
those prices to be the same as in the CPI.




                                                       31
6         The response of producers and consumer prices to shocks

In this section, we use our quantitative framework to discuss key properties of our model re-
garding the behavior of prices and markups in response to productivity shocks. Figures 1 and 2
show the impulse responses of prices, markups and in ation | all in percentage deviations from
their steady state values | to productivity shocks, distinguishing between the intermediate and
 nal production sectors. Throughout these exercises we assume that central banks in the two
countries set monetary policy to implement a strict CPI in ation targeting. Similar results can
however be obtained assuming that central banks implement the optimal policy, discussed in
the next section.


6.1         Technology shocks to upstream rms

Figure 1 focuses on the e ects of an unexpected and persistent productivity increase in the Home
tradable goods sector. Consistent with strict in ation targeting, the monetary authorities react
to the shock by expanding the country's monetary stance in line with productivity, causing a
depreciation of the nominal exchange rate | given CPI in ation targeting, the nominal and real
exchange rate move together (see the graph in the lower right corner of Figure 1).
         As shown by Figure 1, upstream producers that update their prices lower them both in the
domestic and the foreign market (see the rst chart on the upper left corner of the gure). The
fall in the home good price is however larger abroad than in the domestic market, in violation
of the law of one price. In the graph, a positive deviation from the law of one price means that
domestic prices are larger than foreign prices.
         The behavior of prices is mirrored by the response of the desired and actual markups of the
upstream Home producers, shown by the fourth and fth graphs of Figure 1. As discussed in
Section 4, downstream nominal rigidities lead to pricing substitutability at the level of upstream
producers. As a result, the desired markup by these producers fall with their prices in either
market, but relatively more in the Foreign one.15 Nonetheless, since prices are sticky in local
currency, the nominal depreciation of the Home exchange rate raises export revenues in the
exporters' own currency: the average markup in the country actually rises.
    15
         Recall that we also show that this result is attenuated when the production function include local labor input,
with a low degree of substitutability with the intermediate tradable goods.



                                                             32
   The impact of the same shock on consumer prices clearly di ers, depending on whether the
upstream monopolist in a particular industry h updates its price, or leaves it unchanged. In
the former case (shown in the second graph of Figure 1), downstream rms face a drop in their
marginal costs. Hence, those rms which can reset prices will lower them, both domestically
and abroad. As we have seen previously, the intermediate good price falls more in the Foreign
country. Thus, Foreign downstream rms decrease their price by more than the domestic ones,
so that deviations from the law of one price have the same sign at both consumer prices' and
producer prices' level.
   Interestingly, our results show that consumer prices fall also in industries in which the up-
stream producers do not update their prices during the period | albeit by a smaller amount
than in the other case (see the third graph of Figure 1). This is so for two reasons. First,
although marginal costs of downstream rms in these industry do not fall in the period, these
 rms nonetheless take into account that the productivity shock is persistent: they thus antici-
pate that their marginal costs are likely to decrease in the future. Second, a lower price helps
these rms respond to increasing competition by rms operating in the other industries, where
the price of intermediate product have already gone down.
   In these industries, the deviations from the law of one price are larger, but of the opposite
sign, relative to the industries in which the upstream price is updated. This is because, for a
constant upstream price, consumer prices decrease on impact by more at Home than abroad.
To wit: in the rst period, the sign of the deviations from the law of one price is positive in the
second graph, negative in the third graph of Figure 1.


6.2   Technology shocks to downstream rms

Figure 2 displays the responses to an unexpected persistent increase in the productivity of Home
downstream rms. As in the previous case, under the assumed strict CPI in ation targeting the
Home monetary authorities react with an expansion, which leads to nominal and real deprecia-
tion of the Home currency (see last graph of Figure 2).
   Recall that downstream technology shocks are also country-speci c: they lower the marginal
costs of downstream       rms at Home, but do not a ect the costs of downstream       rms in the
industry located in the Foreign country. So, in all industries in which the upstream producers
do not update their current price within the period, domestic downstream rms updating their

                                               33
prices will optimally lower them, while downstream rms abroad will keep their prices virtually
unchanged. This is at the root of the deviations from the law of one price shown in the third
graph of Figure 2, which are further magni ed by the fact that monetary authorities react to
the shock by engineering Home currency depreciation.
   More complex is the case of industries in which upstream producers change their prices (sec-
ond graph in the Figure), since the overall e ects of the shock will depend on a number of general
equilibrium e ects. Key to understanding these e ects is the fact that higher productivity by
downstream rms causes an increase in their output, and thus in real domestic consumption.
In our model speci cation, the increase in downstream output does not a ect the labor market
and thus the real wage directly | under the linear production function speci ed above, a higher
downstream output has no direct impact on the demand for labor, since these rms are assumed
not to employ any labor input. However, it does so indirectly: higher domestic consumption is
associated with a positive income e ect, which reduces labor supply and ultimately translates
into a downward shift in hours worked. Given that at the same time the demand for intermediate
products is increasing, the labor market tightens, causing a rise in real wages. Facing higher
labor costs, upstream rms which can reoptimize their prices raise them, thus increasing the
marginal costs of downstream rms. Somewhat surprisingly, as shown in the second graph of
Figure 2, the feedback e ect on consumer prices is positive.
   This transmission mechanism was discussed early on by Friedman, in his celebrated critical
analysis of cost-push in ation (see e.g. Nelson [2007] and references within). In the industries
where upstream producers adjust their prices, they raise them in response to higher costs in
the form of higher nominal wages. Yet, one key factor raising wages is the demand expansion
engineered by monetary policy makers in response to productivity improvement at retail level.
Changes in prices which appear to be motivated by costs consideration, are actually the result
of a demand stimulus, working its way up through the vertical links between downstream and
upstream producers, and ultimately raising the price of scarse production inputs supplied in
competitive markets.
   Observe that domestic upstream producers slightly lower their wholesale prices in foreign
currency. Nonetheless, because of currency depreciation, these prices in Home currency are
higher than the ones charged in the domestic market, again in violation of the law of one price.
Consistently, the desired markup of Home producers increases in the Home market, while falls


                                               34
abroad | in line with the change in prices. The average markup nonetheless falls everywhere
in the economy, per e ect of nominal rigidities.


7     International dimensions of optimal stabilization policy

This section is devoted to the analysis of stabilization policies under the assumption of coopera-
tion between the Home and Foreign monetary authorities and full commitment. In order to shed
light on how policy works in our model, we nd it useful to discuss the problem of stabilizing
economies hit by shocks to upstream or downstream shocks in isolation, and then proceed to
present results for our complete baseline calibration. Thus, results are shown in 3 tables. For a
set of macrovariables, Table 1 and 2 report volatilities conditional on shocks to upstream and
downstream productivity, respectively; Table 3 report results when both shocks are considered.
In each table, the rst column shows result for the exible price benchmark, in which monetary
policy targets a zero rate of CPI in ation at all times; the other columns refer to economies
with price rigidities under di erent policy regimes. Tables 1 and 2 only show results under
the optimal cooperative policy, including a case in which there is no home bias in consumption
expenditure (i.e. aH = aF = 1=2). Table 3, instead, includes the alternative monetary policies
speci ed in Section 5 | CPI in ation targeting, GDP in ation targeting, and the Taylor-type
rule. As we assume subsidies that exactly o set steady-state markups, under the optimal policy
long-run in ation is zero. To facilitate comparison across experiments, we also posit that steady
state in ation is nil when solving the model under the alternative policies.


7.1   Upstream shocks only

Starting from the simplest case, consider rst the problem of stabilizing technology shocks to
upstream production only. As an important benchmark, we rst establish that, if our Home
country were a closed economy, monetary authorities would be able to stabilize completely
upstream marginal costs, and therefore upstream prices, preventing any dispersion in the prices
charged by adjusting and not-adjusting rms. Monetary authorities can do so by matching any
change in upstream marginal costs driven by productivity, with a change in the monetary stance
in the opposite direction, which ultimately moves nominal wages in tandem with productivity.
The speci c reason why such a policy would stabilize all sticky prices (at both producer and


                                               35
consumer level) is that, in our speci cation, uctuations in nominal wages are not consequential
for downstream rms, by virtue of our assumption that these rms employ no labor resources in
producing nal goods. So, downstream marginal costs only change with the intermediate goods'
prices, or with downstream productivity: without shocks to the latter, once upstream prices are
constant in equilibrium, so are downstream prices. Similarly to the standard closed-economy
monetary model, the policy just described would replicate the allocation under exible prices
| this policy is optimal in our environment since we assume that steady-state monopolistic
distortions in production are corrected with scal instruments.16
       The optimality of complete price stabilization, however, does not carry over to an open
economy setting, as shown in Table 1. With an optimal monetary policy in place (second column
of the table), the variability of the CPI is close to, but not zero | domestic and imported goods
prices are actually much more variable than the CPI. Observe that prices and markups in both
countries uctuate much less for domestic goods than for imported goods. This corresponds to
the fact that monetary policymakers concentrate their e orts to reduce the volatility of markups
of domestic producers selling in the domestic markets. The reason has already been laid out in
Section 2.1, but is worth reconsidering here in the framework of our model with staggered price
setting.
       By mirroring the logic of Corsetti and Pesenti [2005], assume an equilibrium where there is
no price dispersion in either domestic market for domestically produced goods: the monetary
authority completely stabilizes the marginal costs of upstream rms, once again matching any
increase in productivity with an appropriate expansion in the Home monetary stance. While do-
mestic goods prices remain constant and identical to each other, at both intermediate and nal
  16
       It is worth stressing that, had we assumed that downstream rms use labor, complete stability of upstream
prices would be incompatible with complete stability of downstream prices. Even if prices of intermediate goods
were held constant, movements in nominal wages in response to endogenous monetary policy changes would ad-
ditionally a ect marginal costs of nal good producers, creating an immediate incentive for these to reset prices
when possible, thus generating price variability at the retail level. As a result, relative to our baseline model spec-
i cation, introducing a labor input in nal good production implies that welfare maximizing monetary authorities
would face a trade-o between stabilization of upstream marginal costs, and downstream price dispersion. They
would therefore tend to react by less to upstream productivity shocks, with the objective of containing price
dispersion at consumer level. As should become clear in the rest of the text, abstracting from labor inputs in
downstream production is helpful in focusing most sharply on the policy trade-o s arising speci cally from vertical
interactions between downstream and upstream rms.


                                                          36
level, any monetary decision a ecting the nominal exchange rate would create both a misalign-
ment of the relative price between domestic and foreign goods, and import price dispersion at
consumer level (since a fraction    of Foreign producers would react to, e.g., Home depreciation,
by ine ciently raising the price they charge to Home downstream rms).
   At the margin, depending on the degree of openness of the economy, it would be optimal
to move away from such outcome. Speci cally, it is e cient to stabilize the marginal costs
of domestic intermediate producers by less, as to stabilize somewhat marginal costs and thus
reduce the incentive to move prices in the import sector. Monetary authorities can raise welfare
by trading-o   lower import price dispersion and misalignment at the consumer level, against
some price dispersion in the Home markets for domestic goods.
   We observe here that optimal Foreign monetary policy would mimic Home monetary policy
in response to Home shocks, for essentially the same reason. For a given Foreign monetary
policy, a Home currency depreciation generates price variability in local currency of Foreign
imports from Home, as Home exporters updating their price will lower them. An expansion
allows the Foreign monetary authorities to contain the variability of import prices, as well as
their misalignment relative to the domestic goods prices, at the cost of some price dispersion in
the domestic market for domestic goods. This is exactly what underlies our numerical results
in Table 1.
   As is well understood in the literature, with LCP, endogenous changes in monetary stance
across countries tend to be positively correlated. In the limiting case in which there is no home
bias in consumption (the case reported in the third column in Table 1), domestic and foreign
goods in the Home and the Foreign consumer price indexes have exactly the same weights.
This implies that, in response to disturbances to upstream productivity, national monetary
policy stances react to the same weighted average of shocks, becoming perfectly correlated in
the optimum. As a result, the nominal exchange rate does not respond to shocks (in the third
column of Table 1, the volatility of the real exchange rate is 0), even if shocks are country-speci c
and uncorrelated | a nding discussed at length by the literature surveyed in Section 2. What
induces optimal exchange rate variability under cooperation is home bias in consumption, which
obviously raises the importance of stabilizing the marginal costs of domestic producers relative
to those of the importers (the case shown in the second column in Table 1). In this respect, our
results generalize the point discussed by Corsetti [2006] to an environment with staggered price


                                                 37
adjustment.
   By comparing the rst and the second column of Table 1, it is apparent that the positive co-
movements in optimal national monetary policies induced by LCP distortions curb the volatility
of the terms of trade, relative to the case of exible prices. With LCP, nominal exchange rate
movements do not help correct international relative prices. The only way in which a nominal
expansion cum exchange rate depreciation can reduce the price of domestic goods sold abroad
is via price adjustment in foreign currency, but by the Calvo mechanism only a subset of rms
can reduce their prices. For all the other rms, the terms of trade actually move in the direction
of an appreciation. In other words, while exchange rate movements induced by a monetary
expansion have nothing to do with expenditure switching e ects, a fall in the relative price of
imports can only materialize at the cost of import price dispersion. This is why, depending
on the relative weight of domestic and imported goods in the CPI, optimal stabilization policy
tends to contain international relative prices and thus terms of trade variability.
   However, observe that in our results the volatility of the real exchange rate, like that of
consumption and hours worked, is higher with nominal rigidities (under the optimal policy),
than with exible prices | the opposite of our results on the terms of trade. We will return on
this important point below.


7.2   Downstream shocks only

Shocks hitting nal good producers substantially modify the monetary policy problem, in at least
two respects. First, in our baseline speci cation without labor input in downstream production,
monetary authorities would never be able to achieve complete stability of nal prices, not even
in a closed-economy environment. In other words, these shocks create policy trade-o s among
competing objective independently of openness. The problem is that complete price stability
at consumer level requires monetary policy to respond to technology shocks downstream. Since
the resulting uctuations in wages (see Section 6.2) induce (ine cient) price dispersion among
upstream rms, it follows that nal producers will face di erent costs of their intermediate input,
depending on which industry they operate in. In this sense, vertical interactions in our model
bring about an important dimension of heterogeneity across rms which should be appropriately
emphasized. Di erently from standard sticky price models, the marginal costs of our downstream
 rms are generally not symmetric, not even when the economy is completely closed to foreign

                                                38
trade, and there are no markup shocks, due e.g. to stochastic preferences.
   Second, since     nal producers di erentiate locally the products they bring to consumers,
downstream shocks add an important element of nontradability to consumer goods. Hence,
even when consumer expenditure is not biased towards domestic goods, consumption baskets
would still be e ectively di erent across countries. When the expenditure weights aH and aF
are identical | a case of no home bias in terms of upstream products | monetary authorities
would e ciently provide the same degree of stabilization across all categories of domestic and
imported goods. Yet, in contrast to the case of upstream disturbances only, the optimal monetary
stance will be su ciently di erent across countries as to induce nominal and real exchange
rate uctuations in response to country-speci c shocks at downstream level. This result is a
generalization of Duarte and Obstfeld [2007], who also stress nontradability as a reason for
nominal exchange rate exibility. However, they include nontradables as a separate sector in
the economy (as they abstract from vertical interactions), and focus on the case of one period
preset prices (hence abstract from forward looking price setting).
   The above discussion is clearly re ected in the results in Table 2. When we focus on down-
stream shocks only, the variability of CPI in ation is not zero, and remains remarkably stable
for di erent degrees of home bias in consumption. What instead varies considerably with the
degree of home bias is the variability of markups across sectors, since home bias shifts the weight
of monetary stabilization away from imported goods. Precisely, observe that in the third col-
umn | the case of no home bias | markups are equally stabilized at the retail level, for both
domestic and foreign goods. In the second column, instead, the markup of nal producers is
much less volatile if they sell domestic goods, than if they sell imported goods.
   Relative to the case of upstream shocks, there are two notable di erences as regards exchange
rate volatility. First, because of nontradability, the real exchange rate is now much more volatile
than the terms of trade, even in the exible price allocation. Second, relative to the exible
price allocation, an economy with nominal rigidities and the optimal policy in place will be
characterized by more volatility in both the real exchange rate and the terms of trade. The fact
that these patterns are quite di erent from those discussed in the previous subsection makes it
clear that optimal monetary policies do not translate into any general prescription about the
relative volatility of these international prices.



                                                     39
7.3   Baseline economy

We now have all the basic elements to analyze our baseline economy with all shocks combined.
Results are shown in Table 3. Observe that the combination of downstream and upstream shocks
raises the volatility in our arti cial economy reasonably close to the data for the US and other
large industrial economies: for instance, the standard deviations of real GDP is (realistically)
around 2 percent, regardless of nominal rigidities.
   Consider rst the exible-price benchmark, shown in the rst column of the table. With
 exible prices, the demand elasticity facing producers, and thus the markups they charge, are
constant; therefore the law of one price holds at the dock (the volatility of deviations from the law
of one price at the dock is correspondingly zero). Nonetheless, the law of one price (cannot and)
does not hold for nal goods: country-speci c productivity shocks hitting the downstream rms
drive a wedge between nal goods' prices across countries (expressed in a common currency). As
a result, and in accord to stylized facts, the real exchange rate is more volatile than the terms
of trade; the correlation between the real (and nominal) exchange rate is high and positive
| despite the fact that upstream and downstream technology shocks are assumed not to be
correlated. Recall that, in our exible price economy, we posit that monetary policy keeps the
CPI constant: consistent with this monetary regime, sectoral in ation rates are more volatile at
producer level than at the nal level, and for imported goods than for domestically produced
goods, respectively. The latter result clearly re ects the low weight of foreign goods in the CPI.
   The second column of Table 3 displays results for our sticky-price economy with the opti-
mal policy in place. In order to reduce ine ciencies due to price stickiness, monetary policy
mitigates uctuations in the major components of consumer price in ation. However, it falls
short of completely stabilizing either the CPI or domestic intermediate prices in ation. Key
to understanding this result are the di erent trade-o s discussed in the text above. First, as
in Corsetti and Pesenti [2005], LCP at upstream level leads benevolent monetary authorities
to attach a positive weight to stabilizing the consumer price of imports, and thus to deviate
from perfect stabilization of the nal prices of domestic goods. Second, downstream technology
shocks prevent perfect stabilization of all consumer prices, because of the heterogeneity of mar-
ginal costs implied by vertical interactions. This e ect is of course worse in an open economy
setting, because of the response of the intermediate price of imports to exchange rate uctua-



                                                 40
tions. Third, the elasticity of the producer's demand curve depends on the industry's dispersion
of nal goods prices, motivating policy emphasis on nal price stabilization. The implications
of these trade-o s for the volatilities of prices and markups, real exchange rates and terms of
trade are discussed below, together with a comparative analysis of the optimal policy relative
to other policy rules.


Prices and markups Because of limited price adjustment, it is not surprising that real vari-
ables generally display more volatility in the sticky-price economy (with the optimal monetary
policy in place), than in the exible-price economy.17 Notable exceptions are the terms of trade
and hours worked. The reduced volatility of the terms of trade is a consequence of LCP at the
intermediate level, as discussed in Section 7.1 above. A reduced volatility of hours worked is
already a feature of optimal monetary policy with downstream shocks only in Table 2, and is
essentially a consequences of our assumption that downstream rms do not employ labor.
       What is most interesting, instead, is the very large discrepancy in volatilities of producers'
and distributors' average markups, which are constant in the                     exible-price allocation. The
markup of domestically produced goods is two and a half times as volatile at the upstream level
as at the downstream level. This is remarkable in light of the fact that, in our experiments, we
assume the same degree of nominal rigidities at either level. The volatility di erential re ects the
real components of markup movements in producers' prices, arising from vertical interactions.
Conversely, the markup of imported goods is more volatile at the downstream level than at the
upstream level | almost twice as much. Such di erential re ects the fact that optimal policy
attaches a large weight to stabilizing domestically produced goods at the retail level | the bulk
of households' consumption.
       We should stress here that uctuations in markups translate into ine cient deviations in the
law of one price, both at the border and at the consumer level. Observe that the volatility of
deviations from the law of one price in nal prices is quite similar to the one in the economy with
  17
       The volatility di erential between our economies with and without nominal rigidities is by no means uniform
across sectors. Namely, for domestically produced goods, the ratio in volatility of upstream and downstream prices
is 4 in the exible price allocation, but it falls down to 2.5 with nominal rigidities. A similar drop can be found in
the ratio of volatility of imports prices to domestic goods prices. Conversely, the volatility of the producer price
of imported goods, though lower than in the exible price economy, is now twice that of domestically produced
goods.



                                                         41
 exible prices, notwithstanding that, per e ect of the exchange rate movements, the markups
of Home downstream rms selling imported goods have the highest volatility.


Real exchange rates and terms of trade A notable international dimension of the optimal
policy in Table 3 is that the real exchange rate is more volatile in the economy with nominal
frictions than under exible prices, while the terms of trade is less volatile, re ecting the e ects
of LCP and nontradability discussed above. These ndings clearly caution against suggestions
to drastically curb the volatility of nominal and real exchange rates. For instance, they caution
against the strong policy prescription derived by by Devereux and Engel [2007], who argue that
under pervasive LCP the optimal stabilization policy should reduce the variability of the real
exchange rate signi cantly below that of the terms of trade. In these authors' view, the fact that
we observe the opposite pattern in the data suggests that policymakers around the world fail to
stabilize currency movements e ciently. As we argued above, the problem with this and similar
views is that, while there are good theoretical reasons to expect optimal policies under LCP to
contain the volatility of the terms of trade, these reasons cannot be mechanically applied to the
real exchange rate, whose volatility is bound to depend on a number of structural features of
the economy.18


Simple rules The last three columns of Table 3 report results for alternative policy rules,
namely, CPI in ation targeting, GDP in ation targeting and a standard Taylor rule. Compared
to the optimal policy, these alternative simple rules bring about noticeably larger volatility in
most real variables, particularly in the markups and the deviations from the law of one price for
both consumer prices and prices at the dock.
       Focus rst on the strict CPI in ation targeting regime, presented in the third column of
Table 3: such monetary policy regime leads to more volatility in the upstream prices of all
goods (imported and domestically produced). Relative to the optimal policy, the economy
displays higher volatility of markups, terms of trade and the real exchange rate. This is so
because complete stabilization of headline consumer price in ation brings about suboptimally
  18
       As discussed above, in our model the optimal ranking of volatility between the real exchange rate and the
terms of trade depends, among other things, on the relative degree of price stickiness among upstream and
downstream producers. If producer prices are assumed to be completely exible, the real exchange rate becomes
less volatile than the terms of trade | in line with the case discussed by Devereux and Engel [2007].


                                                        42
large movements in sectoral (i.e. domestic and imported goods) in ation rates at retail level,
which ultimately a ect the desired markups by upstream producers.
    Likewise, stabilizing the prices of domestically produced goods | the case dubbed GDP
in ation targeting in the fourth column of Table 3 | also leads to too much volatility in sectoral
in ation rates, especially in in ation of imported goods at the border as well as at the consumer
level. Interestingly, consumption and real GDP are less volatile than under the optimal policy;
but this is achieved by generating more volatility in all other real variables, especially in hours
worked and in the terms of trade, because of the suboptimally low weight attached to stabilizing
export and import goods prices.
    Finally, a Taylor rule (following a quite standard parameterization) improves on the strict
CPI in ation target, by producing less volatility in consumption and hours. However, relative
to the optimal policy, both the CPI and its individual components are too volatile, since too
much importance is attached to output stabilization. As a result, the volatility of consumption
is excessive, that of hours is too low.


8    Concluding remarks

The literature in international economics and open macro has so far pursued two distinct expla-
nations of the observed stability of import prices in local currency. According to one modeling
strategy, this is the result of optimal markup adjustment by monopolistic rms, which optimize
pro ts through price discrimination across national markets. In this case, market segmenta-
tion is attributed to real factors. According to an alternative modeling strategy, local-currency
price-stability re ects nominal rigidities, which imply suboptimal variations in rms pro ts in
response to shocks. By considering vertically integrated rms, our paper emphasizes that a rigid
distinction between these two approaches is unwarranted, since optimal markup adjustments and
nominal frictions are likely to act as intertwined factors in causing stable import prices in local
currency. Speci cally, we build a model where, because of market-speci c nominal rigidities
at the downstream level, di erent dynamics in nal prices provide an incentive for upstream
producers to price discriminate across countries, exacerbating the distortions from monopoly
power. At the same time, the use of local nontradable inputs by rms selling goods to nal
users mutes the response of nal prices to exchange rate movements.


                                                43
    There are at least three potentially important implications of our ndings for policymaking.
First, by creating price discrimination at the border, consumer price movements feed back to
deviations from the law of one price across markets. The transmission mechanism from consumer
price in ation to price discrimination provides monetary authorities with an additional reason
to stabilize nal prices. In this respect, our analysis sheds light on one possible reason why the
progressive stabilization of in ation in the last decade may have contributed to the observed
fall in exchange-rate pass-through. By reducing movements in consumer prices, policymakers
indirectly a ect the demand elasticity faced by upstream producers, reducing opportunities for
exercising monopoly power through price discrimination.
    Yet, complete CPI stabilization will never be desirable in our economies, because of both
international and domestic policy trade-o s. Speci cally, in addition to the international di-
mensions of monetary policy already discussed in the literature, we show that, with vertical
interactions among industries adjusting prices in a staggered fashion, domestic price stability is
actually unfeasible. This is due to the fact that nominal rigidities inducing staggered pricing by
upstream producers, inherently lead to cost heterogeneity among downstream rms.
    Finally, as shown by the literature, nominal rigidities in local currency induce positive co-
movements in the optimal monetary stance across countries, which tend to curb the volatility of
the terms of trade. However, our results make it clear that, at an optimum, the real exchange
rate can be more or less volatile than the terms of trade, depending on a number of structural
features of the economy, like home bias in expenditure and local components of marginal costs
in consumer goods. In this sense, the empirical regularity that real exchange rates are typically
more volatile than the terms of trade does not automatically suggest that policymakers fall short
of stabilizing exchange rates e ciently.


9       Appendix

In this appendix we provide details on the derivation of a few results used extensively in the
text.




                                               44
9.1   Price dispersion

We can write the within-industry price dispersion of consumer prices as:
                                               Z
                                                  Pt (h; rh )
                            St (h)                               drh:
                                                    Pt (h)
                                                    1
                                                    X
                                           = Pt (h)     (1    ) j Pt j (h)
                                                        j=0

                                                              Pt (h)
                                           = (1         )                        +     t (h)St 1 (h)
                                                              Pt (h)

Similarly, we can express the across-industry dispersion in consumer prices as follows:


                 Z
                      Pt (h)
       St =                            St (h)dh
                      PH;t
                 Z                                                               Z
                      Pt (h)                          Pt (h)                           Pt (h)
             =                   (1               )                    dh +                                 t 1 (h)St 1 (h)dh
                      PH;t                            Pt (h)                           PH;t
                         Z                                Z
                             Pt (h)                               Pt (h)
             = (1      )                            dh +                                t (h)St 1 dh
                             PH;t                                 PH;t
                         "                                                       !     #
                                            Pt (h)                     Pet (h)
             = (1      ) (1            )                    +                              +     H;t S t 1
                                            PH;t                        PH;t

9.2   The derivative of the optimal downstream price with respect to upstream
      prices
                      @Pto (h)  P o (h)
We now show that               = t      . First, take the derivative
                      @P t (h)  P t (h)
                 8          1                                                                                                           9
                 >          X                       @M Ct+k (h)                 @Ct+k (h; rh )                                          >
                 >
                 >     Et         pbt;t+k     k                 Ct+k (h; rh ) +                M Ct+k (h)                               >
                                                                                                                                        >
                 >
                 >                                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                        >
                 >
                 >                                   @P t (h)                     @P t (h)                                              >
                                                                                                                                        >
                 >
                 >
                            k=0
                                                                                                                                +       >
                                                                                                                                        >
                 >
                 >                                            1
                                                              X                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                        >
                 >
                 >                                                               kC                                                     >
                                                                                                                                        >
                 >
                 >                                      Et           pbt;t+k       t+k (h; rh )                                         >
                                                                                                                                        >
@Pt (h)          <                                                                                                                      =
         =              "        1
                                                               k=0                     #"        1
                                                                                                                                    #       ;
                 1>              X                                                               X                                      >
@P t (h)          >
                  >         Et         pbt;t+k k Ct+k (h; rh )M Ct+k (h)                    Et         pbt;t+k   k @Ct+k (h; rh )       >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  >
                  >                                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  >
                  >                                                                                                  @P t (h)           >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  >
                  >
                                 k=0
                                                        "
                                                                                                 k=0
                                                                                                       #2                               >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  >
                  >                                              1                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  >
                  >                                              X                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  >
                  >                                         Et         pbt;t+k       kC
                                                                                       t+k (h; rh )
                                                                                                                                        >
                                                                                                                                        >
                  :                                                                                                                     ;
                                                                 k=0




                                                                 45
               @M Ct+k (h)    1     M Ct+k (h)
Noting that                =      =            ; and
                @P t (h)     Zt+k    P t (h)
                         @Ct+k (h; rh )                Pt (h)                  1 @Pt (h)
                                             =                      CH;t+k
                           @P t (h)                    PH;t+k                Pt (h) @P t (h)
                                                     Ct+k (h; rh ) @Pt (h)
                                             =                             ;
                                                        Pt (h) @P t (h)
we obtain
  @Pt (h)
          =
 @P t (h)         1
8              1                                                                    1                                                        9
>     1       X                                             @Pt (h) 1              X                                                         >
>
>         E       p          k
                               C    (h; r  )M C    (h)                        E        pbt;t+k k Ct+k (h; rh )M Ct+k (h)                     >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>           t       bt;t+k      t+k      h     t+k
                                                                      P   (h)
                                                                                 t                                                           >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
> tP  (h)                                                   @P  t (h)   t                                                                    >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>
              k=0                                                                  k=0
                                                                                                                         +                   >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                                X1                                                                                          >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                                             k                                                                              >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                             Et     pbt;t+k Ct+k (h; rh )                                                                   >
                                                                                                                                             >
<                                                                                                                                            =
           "      1
                                                 k=0      #"                              1
                                                                                                                    #                            ;
>                X                                                 @P   (h)     1        X                                                   >
>
>             Et       pbt;t+k k Ct+k (h; rh )M Ct+k (h)
                                                                      t
                                                                                      Et     pbt;t+k k Ct+k (h; rh )                         >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                                                            P   (h)                                                         >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                                                  @P t (h)    t                                                             >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>
                 k=0
                                              "                                    #2
                                                                                         k=0                                                 >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                                   1                                                                                        >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                                  X                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                             >
>
>                                               Et     pbt;t+k k Ct+k (h; rh )                                                               >
                                                                                                                                             >
:                                                                                                                                            ;
                                                        k=0

which after further simpli cation becomes
                                @Pt (h)            Pt (h)          @Pt (h)    @Pt (h)
                                            =                               +
                                @P t (h)           P t (h)         @P t (h)   @P t (h)
                                                 Pt (h)
                                            =            :
                                                 P t (h)
                                             @Pto (h)
     The result in Section 4.4 that                   =                 in the Leontief case could be derived in a
                                             @P t (h)              1
similar way.
     Finally, in the derivation of (10) in the same section we used the following property of
Set+k (h):
                                                    Z          o (h; r )          1                             1
                                                                                                                X
                                                              Pt+k     h
                                     Set+k (h)                                        dr = (1          +1
                                                                                                    )Pt+k (h)             j    o
                                                                                                                              Pt+k   j (h)
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                               Pt+k (h)
                                                                                                                j=0
                   k
                   X                                                                     1
                                                                                         X
(1        +1
       )Pt+k (h)         j    o
                             Pt+k   j (h)
                                            1
                                                 = Set+k (h)           (1       +1
                                                                             )Pt+k (h)          j
                                                                                                    Pt+k   j (h)
                                                                                                                      1

                   j=0                                                                 j=k+1
                                                                                +1                    X 1
                                                                             P (h) +1
                                                 = Set+k (h)           (1   ) t+k      P t 1 (h)  k+1      j
                                                                                                             Pt j 1 (h)                 1
                                                                             Pt +1
                                                                                 1 (h)                 j=0
                                                                                          +1
                                                                        k+1 Pt+k (h)
                                                 = Set+k (h)                                 Set 1 (h):
                                                                             Pt 1 (h)


                                                              46
References

 [1] Bacchetta Philippe and Eric van Wincoop [2005]. \A theory of the currency denomination
    of international trade," Journal of International Economics 67, 295-319.

 [2] Bacchetta Philippe and Eric van Wincoop [2003]. \Why do consumer prices react less than
    import prices to exchange rates?" Journal of the European Economic Association,Papers
    and Proceedings 1, 662-670.

 [3] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland [1992]. \International Real
    Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy 100, 745-75.

 [4] Benigno, G. and Benigno, P. [2003]. \Price stability in open economy," Review of Economic
    Studies 70, 743{64.

 [5] Betts, C. and Devereux, M. [2000]. \Exchange rate dynamics in a model of pricing to
    market," Journal of International Economics 50, 215{44.

 [6] Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow [2004]. \Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947-85.

 [7] Burstein, Ariel T., Jo~ao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo [2003]. \Distribution Costs and Real Ex-
    change Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations," Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 1189-1214.

 [8] Burstein, Ariel T., Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo [2006]. \Large Devaluations and
    the Real Exchange Rate," Journal of Political Economy.

 [9] Calvo, Guillermo A. [1983]. \Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 383-98.

[10] Campa, Jose. and Linda Goldberg [2005]. \Exchange rate pass through into import prices,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics 87, 679{90.

[11] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gal , Mark Gertler [2002]. \A simple framework for international
    policy analysis," Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 879{904.



                                              47
[12] Corsetti, Giancarlo [2006]. \Openness and the case for exible exchange rates," Research
    in Economics 60, 1{21.

[13] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola [2005]. \A macroeconomic model of international price
    discrimination," Journal of International Economics 67, 129{56

[14] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc [2007], \International Risk Sharing
    and the Transmission of Productivity Shocks," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[15] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc [2005], \High exchange-rate volatility
    and low pass-through in business cycle models," Journal of Monetary Economics, forth-
    coming.

[16] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti [2001]. \Welfare and macroeconomic interdepen-
    dence," Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 421{46.

[17] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti [2005]. \International dimension of optimal monetary
    policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 281{305.

[18] Devereux, Micheal B. and Charles Engel [2003]. \Monetary policy in open economy revis-
    ited: price setting and exchange rate exibility," Review of Economic Studies 70, 765{83.

[19] Devereux, Michael B. and Charles Engel [2007]. \Expenditure Switching vs. Real Exchange
    Rate Stabilization: Competing Objectives for Exchange Rate Policy," Journal of Monetary
    Economics, forthcoming.

[20] Devereux, Micheal B., Charles Engel, and Peter E. Storgaard [2004]. \Endogenous ex-
    change rate pass-through when nominal prices are set in advance," Journal of International
    Economics 63, 263{91.

[21] Dornbusch, R. [1987]. \Exchange rates and prices," American Economic Review 77, 93{106.

[22] Margarida Duarte and Maurice Obstfeld [2007]. \Monetary policy in the open economy
    revisited: The case for exchange-rate exibility restored," Journal of International Money
    and Finance, forthcoming.

[23] Engel, Charles [2003]. \Expenditure switching and exchange rate policy," NBER Macro-
    economics Annual 2002 17, 231{72.

                                              48
[24] Engel, Charles [2006], \Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-Through, Optimal Indexing
    to Exchange Rates, and Optimal Choice of Currency for Export pricing," Journal of the
    European Economics Association 4, December, 1249-1260.

[25] Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers [1996]. \How Wide Is the Border?" American Economic
    Review 86, 1112-25.

[26] Frankel, Je rey, David Parsley, and Shang-Jin Wei [2004]. \Slow pass-through around the
    world: A new import for developing countries?" mimeo, Harvard University.

[27] Friberg, Richard [1998]. \In which currency should exporters set their prices?" Journal of
    International Economics 45, 59-76.

[28] Goldberg, Linda and Cedric Tille [2005]. \Macroeconomic Interdependence and the Inter-
    national Role of the Dollar," mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[29] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Michael M. Knetter. [1997]. \Goods prices and exchange rates:
    What have we learned?" Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1243-72.

[30] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Verboven, F. [2001]. \The evolution of price dispersion in the
    European car market," Review of Economic Studies 68, 811{48.

[31] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Rebecca Hellerstein [2007]. \A framework for identifying the
    sources of local-currency price stability with empirical application," mimeo, Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York.

[32] Hellerstein, Rebecca [2005]. \A Decomposition of the Sources of Incomplete Cross-Border
    Transmission: The Case of Beer," mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[33] Khan, Aubhik, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman [2003]. \Optimal monetary
    policy," Review of Economic Studies 70, 825-60.

[34] Lubik, Thomas and Frank Schorfheide [2004]. \Testing for indeterminacy: An application
    to US monetary policy," American Economic Review, 94, 190-217.

[35] Lubik, Thomas. and Frank Schorfheide [2006]. \A bayesian look at new open economy
    macroeconomics," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005 20, 313{66.


                                              49
[36] Monacelli, Tommaso [2005]. \Monetary policy in a low pass-through environment," Journal
    of Money Credit and Banking 37, 1047-1066.

[37] Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson [2007]. \Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of
    Menu Cost Models," mimeo, Harvard University.

[38] Nelson, Edward [2007]. \Milton Friedman and U.S. monetary history: 1961-2006," Federal
    Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May/June, 89(3), pp. 153-82.

[39] Obstfeld, Maurice [2002]. \In ation-targeting, exchange rate pass-through, and volatility,"
    American Economic Review 92, 102{7.

[40] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo [1995]. Exchange rate dynamics redux," Journal of
    Political Economics 102, 624{60.

[41] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo [2000]. \New directions for stochastic open economy
    models," Journal of International Economics, 50, 117-154.

[42] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters [2002]. \Openness, imperfect exchange rate pass-through
    and monetary policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 947-81.

[43] Sutherland, Alan [2005]. \Incomplete Pass-Through and the Welfare E ects of Exchange
    Rate Variability," Journal of International Economics 65, 375-99.

[44] Taylor, John [2000]. \Low in ation, pass-through, and the pricing power of rms," European
    Economic Review 39, 195-214.

[45] Woodford, Michael [2003]. Interest and prices, Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University
    Press.




                                              50
Table 1. Volatility Under Optimal Policy: Upstream Shocks Only (in percent)
                                                     Economies
                                         With Home Bias     Without Home Bias

                                       Flexible   Optimal        Optimal
            Standard deviation
                                       Prices     Policy         Policy

     In ation Rates
      CPI                                 0        0.01             0

        Domestic nal goods              0.19       0.11           0.25

        Imported nal goods              0.74       0.43           0.25

      Domestic intermediate prices      0.19       0.19           0.50

      Import intermediate prices        0.74       0.87           0.50

      Export intermediate prices        0.74       0.87           0.50

     International Prices
      Real exchange rate (CPI based)    1.38       1.62             0

      Terms of trade                    2.30       2.10           2.06

     Deviations from the LOP
      Home goods at producer level        0        0.57             0

      Home goods at consumer level        0        0.39             0

     Home Markups
      Domestic intermediate goods         0        0.06           0.17

      Exported intermediate goods         0        0.26           0.17

      Domestic nal goods                  0        0.24           0.65

      Imported nal goods                  0        1.12           0.65

     Quantities
      Home consumption                  0.87       0.90           0.81

      Home hours                        0.41       0.43           0.47

      Real GDP                          1.42       1.43           1.54




                                           51
Table 2. Volatility Under Optimal Policy: Downstream Shocks Only (in percent)
                                                      Economies
                                          With Home Bias     Without Home Bias

                                        Flexible   Optimal        Optimal
             Standard deviation
                                        Prices     Policy         Policy

      In ation Rates
       CPI                                 0        0.12           0.13

         Domestic nal goods              0.02       0.13           0.12

         Imported nal goods              0.09       0.11           0.12

       Domestic intermediate prices      0.69       0.38           0.39

       Import intermediate prices        0.77       0.44           0.39

       Export intermediate prices        0.77       0.44           0.39

      International Prices
       Real exchange rate (CPI based)    2.62       2.91           2.75

       Terms of trade                    0.27       0.72           0.78

      Deviations from the LOP
       Home goods at producer level        0        0.27           0.29

       Home goods at consumer level      2.46       2.68           2.66

      Home Markups
       Domestic intermediate goods         0        0.58           0.57

       Exported intermediate goods         0        0.56           0.57

       Domestic nal goods                  0        0.04           0.04

       Imported nal goods                  0        0.11           0.04

      Quantities
       Home consumption                  0.99       1.08           1.05

       Home hours                        0.51       0.47           0.42

       Real GDP                          1.21       1.30           1.46




                                            52
Table 3. Volatility Under Alternative Policies: Baseline calibration (in percent)
                                                          Policies
                                 Flexible   Optimal   CPI In ation   GDP In ation   Taylor
      Standard deviation
                                 Prices     Policy     Targeting      Targeting     Rule

In ation Rates
CPI                                 0        0.12          0             0.41        0.38

  Domestic nal goods              0.19       0.17         0.11           0.41        0.43

  Imported nal goods              0.75       0.45         0.44           0.64        0.48

Domestic intermediate prices      0.71       0.49         0.95            0          0.51

Import intermediate prices        1.09       0.99         1.13           1.04        0.76

Export intermediate prices        1.09       0.99         1.13           1.04        0.76

International Prices
Real exchange rate (CPI based)    2.97       3.35         3.78           3.14        3.62

Terms of trade                    2.31       2.21         2.55           2.26        2.04

Deviations from the LOP
Home goods at producer level        0        0.63         0.78           1.41        1.21

Home goods at consumer level      2.47       2.71         3.14           2.76        3.19

Home Markups
Domestic intermediate goods         0        0.60         1.06           0.87        0.82

Exported intermediate goods         0        0.63         0.96           0.90        0.89

Domestic nal goods                  0        0.25         0.61           0.59        0.72

Imported nal goods                  0        1.13         1.24           1.38        0.97

Quantities
Home consumption                  1.39       1.47         1.58           1.44        1.57

Home hours                        0.61       0.60         0.61           0.62        0.54

Real GDP                          1.93       2.00         1.98           1.90        1.98




                                            53
                Figure 1. Productivity Shock to Home Upstream Production

           New producer prices of the Home good                   New consumer prices of Home goods in updating industries
0.5                                                            0.5


  0
                                                                 0

-0.5

                                                               -0.5
                                   At home
 -1
                                   Abroad
                                   Deviations from LOP
-1.5                                                            -1
       0        5           10            15             20           0        5            10            15               20

New consumer prices of Home goods in non-updating industries                  Home producer markup at home
0.2                                                            0.1


  0                                                              0


-0.2                                                           -0.1


-0.4                                                           -0.2
                                                                                                         Desired markup
                                                                                                         Actual markup
-0.6                                                           -0.3
       0        5           10            15             20           0        5            10            15               20

               Home producer markup abroad                                           Inflation and RER
0.5                                                            0.6
                                                                                                           CPI inflation
                                                                                                           GDP inflation
  0                                                            0.4
                                                                                                           RER

-0.5                                                           0.2


 -1                                                              0
                                        Desired markup
                                        Actual markup
-1.5                                                           -0.2
       0        5           10            15             20           0        5            10            15               20
                Figure 2. Productivity Shock to Home Downstream Production
            New producer prices of the Home good                    New consumer prices of Home goods in updating industries
 1.5                                                             0.5


   1                                                               0


 0.5                                                             -0.5


   0                                                              -1


 -0.5                                                            -1.5
        0        5           10            15               20          0        5            10            15               20

 New consumer prices of Home goods in non-updating industries                   Home producer markup at home
 0.5                                                             0.5

   0
                                                                   0
 -0.5
                                                                 -0.5
   -1
                                  At Home
                                                                  -1
 -1.5                             Abroad                                                                   Desired markup
                                  Deviations from the LOP                                                  Actual markup
   -2                                                            -1.5
        0        5           10            15               20          0        5            10            15               20

                Home producer markup abroad                                            Inflation and RER
0.05                                                               2
                                                                                                             CPI inflation
                                                                 1.5                                         GDP inflation
   0
                                                                                                             RER
                                                                   1
-0.05
                                                                 0.5
 -0.1
                                         Desired markup            0
                                         Actual markup
-0.15                                                            -0.5
        0        5           10            15               20          0        5            10            15               20
