                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        STILL THE ECONOMY, STUPID:
              ECONOMIC VOTING IN THE 2004 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                                       Jeffrey S. DeSimone
                                       Courtney LaFountain

                                       Working Paper 13549
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13549


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jeffrey S. DeSimone and Courtney LaFountain. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Still the Economy, Stupid: Economic Voting in the 2004 Presidential Election
Jeffrey S. DeSimone and Courtney LaFountain
NBER Working Paper No. 13549
October 2007
JEL No. H0

                                               ABSTRACT

Given President Bush's popularity among relatively poor rural residents and lack thereof among wealthier
urban dwellers in the 2004 presidential election, analysts have suggested that voters contradicted their
economic self-interests. We investigate whether this conventional wisdom implied an absence of economic
voting. Using exit poll data, we estimate whether a change in previous four-year financial status affected
the propensity to vote for Bush. The main econometric concern is that underlying preferences for
Bush might dictate financial status change responses. Beyond income and several other demographic
variables, therefore, the regressions hold constant indicators for state and congressional district, religious
affiliation, political philosophy and party, and Iraq war support. Even further controlling for approval
of Bush's job performance, economic voting is statistically and quantitatively significant. Effects are
asymmetric, with status worsening hurting Bush more than status improvement helped, and persist
even among subgroups that provided particularly strong or weak support for Bush.


Jeffrey S. DeSimone
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Arlington
701 S. West St.
Arlington, TX 76019
and NBER
jdesimone@uta.edu

Courtney LaFountain
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Arlington
701 S. West St.
Arlington, TX 76019
cllafountain@uta.edu
I.     Introduction

       The conventional wisdom among political analysts following the 2004 presidential

election was that the state of the economy played little role in the outcome. Many other issues

not directly related to voters’ economic well-being seemed to polarize supporters and detractors

of President George W. Bush, with most of the latter group voting for Democratic candidate

John Kerry. Among other considerations, voters debated the ability of the candidates to provide

direction for the war in Iraq that had been ongoing for over a year and a half, defend the country

from further terrorist attacks in the wake of 9/11, and offer solutions to the possible insolvency

of Medicare and Social Security as the earliest baby boom cohort approached retirement. In

addition, initiatives banning gay marriage were on the ballots of 11 states.

       This last factor likely contributed to “moral values” being the issue most frequently cited

among 6,503 respondents to the 2004 National Election Pool exit poll as that most relevant for

determining which candidate received their vote (National Election Pool, 2004). One theory

among commentators was that the decisive factor in Bush’s reelection was unexpectedly high

participation among relatively poor rural residents who disproportionately voted for Bush as the

candidate whose policies best reflected their own values. In combination with opposing support

of Kerry by many financially well-off urban residents, this suggests that many voters

contradicted their economic self-interests, given that the candidates’ economic policies reflected

the traditional relative favoritism of the financially better-off by Republicans.

       These circumstances do not necessarily imply that economic conditions were irrelevant to

Bush’s reelection. The economy was named the most important voting determinant by 22.5% of

the above exit poll respondents, ranking behind only the 23.3% who listed moral values and

ahead of the 19.3% who chose terrorism and the 16.3% who selected Iraq. In the 16 months




                                                  1
prior to the election, the seasonally adjusted national unemployment rate had declined from 6.3%

to 5.4%, the lowest level since the month after 9/11. The literature on economic voting, which

shows that recent economic performance is a major predictor of whether incumbents (or their

political parties) win presidential elections, implies that some voters might have given Bush

credit for the economic upswing simply by virtue of it occurring during the latter stages of his

term in office.

       This paper investigates whether the anecdotal evidence that economic factors were

counterintuitively related with voter choice translated to an absence of economic voting. In a

more widely distributed version of the exit poll referenced above, we capture economic voting

using information regarding whether one’s family financial situation is better, worse, or about

the same as four years ago. This type of variable typically reflects “pocketbook” or “egocentric”

voting (Campbell et al., 1960), a particular type of economic voting in which individuals focus

on their own specific financial situation to evaluate the incumbent (or more generally his or her

party). We use this measure in lieu of proxies for regional or national economic conditions,

which are relevant if voters are “sociotropic,” meaning that their evaluations of the incumbent

are based on macroeconomic fluctuations (Kinder and Kiewiet, 1979). As a result, we do not

distinguish between egocentric and sociotropic voting. Furthermore, we cannot say whether

voters, who may use past changes in their personal financial situation to forecast future changes,

are retrospective or prospective, i.e. backward- or forward-looking (Downs, 1957).

       Our estimates of economic voting come from regressing an indicator of voting for Bush,

as opposed to any other candidate, on an indicator for whether financial status improved over the

last four years and another for whether it worsened. The main econometric concern with using

this egocentric voting type of explanatory variable is the inherent possibility of bias from




                                                 2
unobserved heterogeneity. Specifically, Bush supporters might be more likely, ceteris paribus, to

report economic improvements as an expression or rationalization of their support, while for

reciprocal reasons Bush detractors might be more likely to report economic declines. If voter

preferences are in this manner correlated with reported economic welfare changes, estimates of

economic voting will be overstated, so that econometric estimates will be disposed towards

showing economic voting even in its absence.

       We empirically address this issue by including controls that are particularly likely to

proxy for voter preferences and therefore absorb their spurious link with reported changes in

economic well-being. Beyond standard demographic characteristics, the regressions hold

constant family income so that economic voting effects are identified from income changes

rather than levels, which could be correlated with attitudes toward economic policies specific to

the two major political parties. Moreover, we control for political philosophy and party to

account for opinions that determine voting decisions but are at least partially invariant to time

and not specific to the candidates under consideration. Also, estimates are conditional on an Iraq

war approval rating, which further reflects fundamental political views that might contaminate

economic status responses and constitutes an explicitly time-varying confounding factor.

       Most importantly, to directly yet parsimoniously account for underlying preferences that

influence both votes and financial situation assessments, we enter into the regressions the rating

that respondents assign to Bush’s job performance. The occurrence of economic voting would

imply that the change in a voter’s economic situation directly affects how the voter evaluates the

success of the incumbent’s first term. Inclusion of the Bush approval measure will hence absorb

some of whatever economic voting effects do exist, rendering conservative the resulting




                                                 3
estimates of economic voting. Indeed, the magnitudes of the economic voting coefficients fall

considerably upon entering the job approval controls.

       However, even in the complete specification, economic voting is highly significant and

quantitatively relevant. Effects are asymmetric, with economic improvements helping Bush

significantly less than declines hurt him. Additionally, they persist even for subgroups that

predominantly support Bush, including rural residents, the upper income, Christians, political

conservatives, Republicans, and those who approve of Bush’s job performance.



II.    Related Literature

       Economic voting is based on the idea that voters rely, at least in part, on past economic

performance to evaluate the incumbent (or his/her party) relative to alternative candidates.

Aggregate data support the notion that in presidential and congressional elections, the incumbent

gets credit for good economic times but is blamed for bad ones (Kramer 1971, 1983; Fair 1978;

Kinder and Kiewiet 1981; Peltzman 1990; Eisenberg and Ketcham 2004; Leigh and Wolfers

2006). The positive effect of economic upswings on incumbent party vote shares, furthermore,

is typically smaller in magnitude than the negative effect of economic downturns (Bloom and

Price 1975, Claggett 1986).

       Individual survey data also suggest that voters reward incumbents or their parties for

good economic times and punish them for bad ones. Specifically, individual voting outcomes

vary with indicators of recent changes in personal financial situation, after controlling for other

explanatory factors (Fiorina, 1978, 1981; Kinder and Kiewiet, 1979; Kiewiet, 1981; Lewis-Beck,

1988; Markus, 1988, 1992; Alvarez and Nagler, 1997; Gomez and Wilson, 2001; Nadeau and

Lewis-Beck, 2001; Jordahl, 2006). Personal financial situation improvement is typically




                                                  4
associated with voting for the incumbent, and vice versa, although the magnitude and statistical

significance of this association varies across elections and countries. Notably, voters tend to be

more retrospective than prospective, particularly if an incumbent is on the ballot (Lanoue, 1994;

Nadeau and Lewis-Beck, 2001).

       To account for the possibility that latent preferences towards an incumbent candidate

influence the voter’s assessment of recent personal financial situation changes, the above studies

typically include the voter’s political ideology, party or both in their economic voting equations.

However, our results suggest that these variables are unlikely to fully capture the spurious

correlation between voter approval of a particular candidate and the voting choice. We

contribute to knowledge regarding economic voting by demonstrating that egocentric voting

occurs in the 2004 presidential election even among voters who express the same degree of

approval for President Bush’s job performance. To our knowledge, only Fiorina (1981), in his

analysis of presidential elections in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, implements an analogous

strategy. Fiorina (1981) also shows, though, that egocentric voting effects are not stable across

elections. Thus, the importance of economic voting, particularly of the egocentric variety, in the

2004 presidential election had remained an open question in the existing literature.

       Studies of economic voting in survey data have typically imposed the condition of effect

symmetry, i.e. that the beneficial impact on the incumbent vote share of improving financial

conditions is equivalent in magnitude to the harmful impact of worsening conditions. Only

Fiorina (1978, 1981) appears to have allowed for asymmetric effects. Yet, as mentioned above,

several studies of aggregate data conclude that economic voting effects are asymmetric. Since

Fiorina (1978, 1981) finds that egocentric voting effects vary across elections, it is unclear a

priori whether the 2004 presidential election will exhibit similar asymmetry. In this respect, we




                                                  5
further contribute to the economic voting literature by allowing for the possibility that the

negative impact on the likelihood that voters select Bush of diminishing financial resources is

larger (or smaller) than the positive impact of increasing financial resources.



III.   Data and Empirical Strategy

       We study economic voting in 2004 exit poll data from the National Election Pool

(National Election Pool, 2004), a collaboration of ABC News, the Associated Press, CBS News,

CNN, Fox News and NBC News. Data for 50 states and the District of Columbia were collected

through interviews conducted on Election Day, November 7, 2004, as voters left their polling

places. A probability sample of precincts within each state was selected to represent geographic

and party-specific voting diversity; within each precinct, voters were chosen throughout the day

at a rate that gave all voters the same chance of being interviewed. From 22–31 October,

telephone interviews were performed in 12 states with large populations of absentee and early

voters (Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Michigan, Nevada, New Mexico, North

Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Washington) and in Oregon, where voting is done entirely by

mail. These samples were selected using random-digit dialing, with one individual selected at

random within each household. The Oregon sample was a dual design that also used registration

lists in a way that ultimately represented every voter with a land-line telephone only once. Our

analysis sample consists of 58,740 observations, as further documented below.

       The regression model used to estimate the impact of (egocentric) economic voting is

               vote _ bush = β 0 + β1 fin _ better + β 2 fin _ worse + Xβ 3 + u .

Although this is a binary response model, we estimate it by OLS so that the marginal effects are

easily interpretable. Probit and logit models yield identical inferences and marginal effects that



                                                   6
are somewhat larger using mean explanatory variable values, as we subsequently show for the

probit case. We use sample weights and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.

       The dependent variable, vote_bush, is an indicator of whether the respondent voted for

President Bush. Because anti-Bush economic voting might entail a vote for someone other than

primary challenger John Kerry, the sample includes 825 respondents who voted for a candidate

other than Bush or Kerry, although we later show that their omission does not alter the results.

       The explanatory variables we use to test for economic voting are fin_better and

fin_worse. These are indicators constructed from the question, “Compared to four years ago, is

your family's financial situation better today, worse today or about the same?” Relative to the

base group of voters whose economic status has remained unchanged during Bush’s first term,

therefore, coefficients β1 and β2 measure, respectively, how much more likely respondents are to

vote for Bush when their economic status has improved or worsened. The economic voting

hypothesis predicts β1 > 0 and β2 < 0, i.e. those faring better than four years ago will reward

Bush with their votes while those faring worse will punish Bush by voting for another candidate.

       The vector X contains many additional voting determinants, all of which are also binary

indicators. We begin by controlling for three plausibly exogenous demographic characteristics,

gender, age and race. Age is reported as being within one of nine groups: 18–24, 25–29, 30–39,

40–44, 45–49, 50–59, 60–64, 65–74, or 75 and over. Race is categorized as either white, black,

Hispanic/Latino, Asian or other.

       Next, we hold constant two types of geographic variables in order to alleviate

heterogeneity arising if living in areas that heavily support or reject Bush produces peer effects

on voting behavior. First, we add congressional district fixed effects, so that the economic

voting coefficients are identified within congressional districts (which are themselves within




                                                 7
states). All of the 435 U.S. congressional districts are sampled except for 27 of 53 in California,

16 of 32 in Texas, 8 of 29 in New York, and one each in Georgia (of 13), Illinois (of 19),

Maryland (of 8), Michigan (of 15), Ohio (of 18), and Washington (of 9).1 The 4,677 participants

interviewed by phone, including all Oregon residents, are grouped into state-specific residual

categories because their congressional districts are unobserved. Second, we include indicators

for urbanization level, which varies considerably even within many congressional districts.

Respondents are reported as living in cities with populations over 500,000, between 50,000 and

500,000 or between 10,000 and 50,000, a rural area, or a suburb, with the latter defined as being

within a metropolitan statistical area but outside the central city.

         The exit poll reports categorical information on when respondents made their voting

decision. We convert this into an indicator of whether voters had chosen the candidate for whom

they voted within the last month or before that. Inclusion of this variable is warranted if the

behavior of relatively late deciders is more or less reflective of economic voting for reasons

stemming from omitted correlates of the decision timing.

         Even conditional on the factors listed thus far, and assuming there is no reverse causation

running in the direction from the voting decision to reported financial situation change, the

possibility remains that the economic voting estimates are biased by the opinions polled

individuals have regarding the President. In particular, individuals who voted for Bush might be

disposed to report economic status improvements simply because they believe that the first term

of his presidency was successful. Conversely, voters who prefer Kerry or an alternative

candidate might assess their economic status as having declined purely because they think Bush




1
 Omitted districts tend to be components of multi-district urban areas, but some, particularly in California, New
York and Texas, constitute rural areas.


                                                          8
was ineffective as president. To address this more directly than do the controls already outlined,

we include three additional sets of explanatory variables.

       One is income level, manifested by a set of indicators for eight categories of total family

income in 2003: under $15,000, $15,000–29,999, $30,000–49,999, $50,000–74,999, $75,000–

99,999, $100,000–149,999, $150,000–199,999, and $200,000 or more. Separately from the

impact of a change in income, the level of income could be related to candidate preference.

Specifically, because of his representatively Republican policies regarding taxes, business and

other economic factors, individuals with higher income are expected, ceteris paribus, to favor

Bush. Economic voting coefficients are hence identified only within these narrow ranges of

income, and level effects are largely netted out.

       A second set of exit poll variables that more directly reflect candidate preferences is

religious affiliation and political philosophy and party. Religion choices are Protestant, Catholic,

Mormon, other Christian, Jewish, Muslim, something else or none. Respondents can also report

whether they consider themselves liberal, moderate or conservative on most political matters,

and whether they usually think of themselves as Democrat, Republican, Independent or

something else. One could imagine that being Christian, conservative or Republican reflects

core ideals that make voters who possess them inclined to further support the candidate who

shares these characteristics and ideals, i.e. Bush, by rating their financial situation as having

improved during his term. The opposite could just as well occur for voters with antithetical

preferences. Accounting for these traits is thus a straightforward way to address the type of

omitted variable bias that concerns us.

       A limitation of these measures, though, is that they are largely time-invariant. Religious

affiliations are often transmitted within families from generation to generation, and recent




                                                    9
evidence suggests that even political beliefs are at least partially hard-wired cognitively (Amodio

et al., 2007). Particularly in the 2004 election, which took place in the wake of both an

unprecedented terrorist attack on U.S. soil and an economic downturn that followed an unusually

long period of record low unemployment, voters might have been susceptible to contradicting

their traditional patterns. Put differently, attitudes regarding particular candidates do not

necessarily match those towards the philosophies they hold, and this sort of divergence seems

even more prone to have occurred in 2004. As evidence, nearly a fifth of respondents decided

for whom to vote only within the preceding month, and 15 percent of poll respondents reported

being Moderate and neither Republican nor Democrat.

       To address this deficiency, we include constructs of two variables that directly capture

approval of the incumbent and a major event that occurred during his first term. Specifically,

survey participants were asked whether they strongly approve, somewhat approve, somewhat

disapprove or strongly disapprove of the way Bush was handling his job as president and of the

decision to go to war with Iraq. In our most complete empirical specification, we include

indicators for three of the four categories for approval of both the President and the Iraq war.

We argue that, if anything, this specification provides a conservative estimate of the prevalence

of economic voting, i.e. significance of the financial situation variables in this model constitutes

strong evidence that economic voting took place in the 2004 election.

       The statement above contradicts the ambiguity inherent in our “kitchen-sink” style

approach to controlling for unobserved heterogeneity by directly entering into the regression

proxies for specific omitted factors. On the other hand, the Bush approval variable is the most

direct measure possible of the exact unobservable that might cause problems for our estimates,

loyalty (or disdain) towards the President that potentially influences the perceived change in




                                                 10
financial situation net of whatever change actually occurred. Moreover, approval of the

incumbent is presumably the intermediate variable through which at least some economic voting

operates: voters financially worse off since the beginning of the current term are expected to vote

against the incumbent precisely because their loss of welfare reflects poorly on presidential job

performance. Thus, the Bush approval variable almost certainly absorbs part of the causal

component to economic voting.

       We concede that by its discrete nature, the Bush approval measure, though a

parsimonious summarization of the heterogeneity that prospectively biases our estimates, might

not fully reflect preferences that could impact financial situation change responses. Offsetting

this drawback is that it records both moderate and strong preferences towards Bush rather than

simply reflecting endorsement or rejection. Furthermore, inclusion of the Iraq war approval

indicators provides a supplementary control for analogous preferences, given that the war,

especially by the time of the election, was seen primarily as a reflection of Bush rather than his

administration or Congress. Beyond this, the Iraq, party, philosophy, and income variables

could, albeit to a much lesser degree than the Bush approval variables, respond to perceived

financial status changes and thus by their inclusion act to attenuate estimated economic voting

effects. In our view, therefore, a statistical link between becoming financially better or worse off

in the last four years and the probability of voting for Bush in the specification containing all

documented explanatory factors would provide convincing evidence of economic voting.

       Appendix A lists all analysis variables, other than the congressional district indicators.

The left two columns display row-specific sample means, calculated using sample weights.

Column 1 shows the proportion of respondents satisfying the condition given in the row heading,

while column 2 shows the proportion of such respondents who voted for President Bush. The




                                                 11
full sample contains the 58,740 poll participants, out of 77,006 interviewed, that have complete

information on all included variables.2 Just over 51 percent of participants voted for Bush, and a

slightly greater fraction reported being better off compared to four years ago than reported being

worse off. The sample is disproportionately female, prime working age, white, suburban, early-

deciders, middle-income and Christian. Frequency of representation is substantially higher for

conservatives than liberals, yet virtually equal for Republicans and Democrats.

         Unconditionally, a pattern consistent with economic voting is readily apparent: while

almost exactly fifty percent of voters with an unchanged financial situation opt for President

Bush, four-fifths of those whose financial situation has improved but only one-sixth of those

whose situation has worsened do so. Beyond this, groups more likely to vote for Bush include

males, whites, Christians, and those ages 30–74, not living in cities with population 50,000 or

more, deciding before the last month, and with family incomes of at least $30,000. As expected,

most conservatives and Republicans voted for Bush while most liberals and Democrats did not.

A majority of moderates and those who are neither Republican nor Democrat voted for a

candidate other than Bush.

         The proportion of voters who approved of Iraq and President Bush’s job performance is

each 53 percent, although these groups are not perfectly overlapping. Perhaps not surprisingly,

whether or not one approves of Iraq or Bush is a much stronger predictor of the voting outcome

than is the distinction between somewhat and strongly approving of either, and voting prevalence

by Iraq approval category is quite similar to that by Bush approval category. These facts suggest

that Iraq approval is highly correlated with latent candidate preferences that prospectively induce

2
  Information on financial situation changes is missing for 9,434 observations, i.e. over half of the 18,266 that are
dropped. Remaining omissions occur because of unreported information on, in order, the voting decision (611
observations), gender, age, race or urban residence (1,515 observations), family income (4,018 observations),
religion (773 observations), political philosophy or party (1,416 observations), Iraq war approval (309 observations)
and Bush job approval (190 observations).


                                                         12
the spurious appearance of economic voting, and thus might serve as a proxy for such

preferences that is reasonable but more exogenous than is Bush approval.



IV.    Results

       Table 1 contains the main results of the analysis. Each column reflects a separate

sample-weighted regression of the binary “voted for Bush” measure on a constant and the sets of

variables indicated in the lower panel. Parentheses contain absolute values of heteroskedasticity-

adjusted t statistics. The test of effect symmetry is simply the test for whether the two financial

situation coefficients are equal in absolute value, i.e. the negative impact of being worse off after

the Bush administration equals the positive impact of being better off, with each column showing

the corresponding F statistic and p-value (in brackets).

       The right-hand side of the column 1 specification includes only the two financial

situation indicators and thus echoes the analogous information from column 1 of appendix A.

The unconditional economic voting effects are huge: compared to those experiencing no change

in financial situation during the first term, a vote for Bush is 30.5 percentage points more likely

among respondents whose financial situation improved and 32.4 points less likely among those

whose situation worsened. At the sample proportion of 51.1 percent who voted for Bush, this

translates to semi-elasticities of 59.7% and 63.4%, respectively. The standard errors are

sufficiently small to not only produce extremely large t statistics, but also to reject at the 10

percent level the hypothesis of coefficient symmetry, even though the absolute difference

between them represents less than one-fifteenth of their magnitudes. This rejection, given the

relative coefficient sizes, implies that financial deterioration takes away from Bush support more

than financial betterment adds to it, an implication we discuss further below. By themselves, the




                                                  13
economic voting variables explain almost 25% of the sample voting variation. The perception of

having become economically better or worse off is thus a powerful predictor of how one voted.

On the flip side, the magnitudes of the coefficients and t statistics seem much too large to

reasonably reflect causal economic voting effects.

       Column 2 adds to the right-hand side the indicators for gender, age and race. These

factors explain another five percent of the variation in voting and reduce the economic voting

effects by 5–10%. The resulting coefficients differ in magnitude by only .005 and symmetry is

consequently no longer rejected.

       Columns 3 and 4 insert geographic controls. In column 3, holding constant the

urbanization level indicators leaves the results virtually unchanged. Notably, adding

congressional district indicators in column 4, upon which economic voting effects are identified

only within state-specific congressional districts, explains another four percent of the variation in

voting but has little impact on the financial situation coefficients. In heavily populated areas, a

congressional district can be an individual county or even just part of a county. Although we do

not directly investigate the level of aggregation in economic fluctuations to which voting

responds, therefore, this result is consistent with that from Eisenberg and Ketcham (2004)

regarding national economic conditions being more relevant for economic voting than county-

level conditions. Symmetry is again rejected at 10 percent, because the minimal ensuing

reduction in economic voting effects is almost entirely restricted to that from being better off.

       Estimates remain similar in columns 5 and 6. For column 5 this simply means that voters

who considered themselves better or worse off after President Bush’s first term did not make

their decisions to support or reject Bush, respectively, systematically early or late. The

invariance of the coefficients to adding the family income indicators in column 6 is much more




                                                 14
striking. It implies that the impact of changing economic circumstances on voting occurs

entirely within narrowly-defined categories for income level. Moreover, controlling for income

level explains essentially no additional variation in voting outcomes, even before holding

constant, in columns 7–12, the variables we suspect will most control for the unobserved

heterogeneity that might create spurious evidence of economic voting. As we show later, the

situation is quite different when the financial situation and income indicators are entered in the

reverse order: even in the fully saturated model, estimated income level effects depend very

much on whether the financial situation indicators are included.

       Columns 7–9 add, in inverse order of their expected impact on both the financial situation

coefficients and the vote, the three factors that we interpret as essentially fixed proxies for

political preferences. In column 7, the religion indicators have a minor but perceptible impact,

reducing the economic voting effects by 4–6% and explaining 2.5 percentage points of remaining

voting variation. The political philosophy indicators have a much larger impact in column 8,

decreasing the coefficients by another 17–25% and accounting for an additional 10 points of the

residual deviation in voting outcomes. And in column 9, the effect of the political party

indicators is even more substantial, as their inclusion brings about a further 30–40% drop in

parameter size and raises R-squared by another 13 points. All told, then, three groups that

heavily support Bush, Christians, conservatives and Republicans, are liable to report financial

situation improvements, while three factions on the other end of the political spectrum, non-

Christians, liberals and Democrats, are prone to perceive declines in their economic situations. If

first term economic policies directly benefited Bush supporters and hurt Bush detractors,

inclusion of these political preference measures results in understatement of economic voting,

because some of the effect of financial situation changes are falsely attributed to the preference




                                                  15
factors. More likely, though, Bush loyalists simply tend to report economic improvements as a

show of support or because they are more optimistic about the equivalent economic change,

while the reverse is true for Bush critics.

        Importantly, however, economic voting effects, though diminished in magnitude, remain

highly significant and large. Becoming better off increases the probability of voting for Bush by

23%, while becoming worse off lowers that probability by 32%. In addition, the gap between

the financial situation coefficients has risen to 4.1 points, i.e. one-third the size of the smaller

coefficient and more than eight times the size of their standard errors. Consequently, the

coefficient symmetry hypothesis is now soundly rejected: Bush is punished considerably more

by those doing worse since he took office than he is rewarded by those doing better.

        The final step in table 1 is to enter the two strongest preference controls, the indicators of

Iraq war and Bush job performance approval. Columns 10 and 11 add each separately, without

the other, and column 12 adds both. Assuming minimal attenuation occurs as a result of

economic voting directly impacting attitudes towards Iraq, the column 10 model, which includes

Iraq approval but not Bush approval, might informally be thought to provide a conservative

upper bound for the true economic voting effect. The invasion of Iraq was clearly an important

first term event that influenced the opinion many voters had towards Bush’s job performance, as

evidenced by the categorical versions of the Iraq and Bush approval variables (i.e. categories

numbered 1–4, with 1 = strong approval, etc.) having a sample correlation of 0.82. However,

views on Iraq seem sufficiently deep-seated to be largely outside the influence of personal

financial gain or loss for most voters. We interpret the column 10 estimate as only an “informal”

upper bound because preferences regarding other first-term Bush administration issues (e.g. gay

marriage, terrorism apart from its perceived relationship to Iraq) are not explicitly held constant.




                                                   16
Yet, one might simultaneously think of this upper bound as “conservative” because any of the

political preference factors added in columns 7–10 could in principle respond to economic

situation changes.

       Meanwhile, given the inherent collinearity of Bush approval with the decision whether or

not to vote for Bush, as reflected in the regression of the vote indicator on only the Bush

approval variables having an R-squared of 0.77 (not shown), we consider the estimate in column

12, which controls for both Bush and Iraq approval, to be a strong test of the economic voting

hypothesis. Given that the Bush approval indicators are a flexible way to control for exactly the

type of heterogeneity that could artificially inflate the estimated economic voting effects, yet

seem likely to soak up some of the true economic voting effects, significance of the financial

situation variables in the model controlling for these as well as the Iraq approval indicators

would seem to represent convincing evidence that economic voting does indeed occur.

       Indeed, the financial situation coefficients are larger in column 10 than 12, with those in

column 11, which holds constant the indicators for Bush approval but not Iraq approval, having

intermediate values. The column 10 “upper bound” estimates, though substantially smaller than

those in the initial columns, are still quite large. Even conditional on political preferences and

attitudes on Iraq war policy, financial improvements during Bush’s first term increase the

likelihood of voting for Bush by 9.6%, while financial declines lower that likelihood by 17.2%.

More importantly, our column 12 “lower bound” estimates, though somewhat diminished even

from those in column 10, are still highly significant and quantitatively meaningful. Adding to

the above controls our “ultimate” heterogeneity proxy, the Bush approval indicators, an

improved economic situation raises the propensity to vote for Bush by 3.5% while a worsened




                                                 17
situation lowers that propensity by 7.6%. Once again, to us this signifies persuasive evidence of

a causal economic voting effect.

       One way to affirm the quantitative importance of the column 12 coefficients is to

simulate the effect of a “reasonable” change in reported financial situation. An ordered

categorical version of the financial situation measure, with categories 1 = worse off, 2 = neither

and 3 = better off, has a weighted standard deviation of 0.78. Almost exactly one-third of the

weighted sample perceived themselves as better off. The supposition that 78% of the better off

voters had instead responded that they were neither better nor worse off hence simulates a one-

third standard deviation change in this variable In column 12, this minor modification translates

to a reduction in the proportion of votes for Bush by 0.78 · 0.018 = 0.014. Assuming from the

analogous population figure that 98% of these votes went to Kerry, this would have shifted the

overall popular vote to Kerry by a 49.7% to 49.3% margin. The predicted vote shift would be

even greater if we instead assumed some of the financial situation change involved more voters

becoming worse off, used the column 10 or 11 estimates, or simulated a larger change.

       The column 12 R-squared means that the voting determinants for which we control

account for more than four-fifths of the observed voting pattern. The implication that little

residual variation remains to be potentially explained by omitted correlates of financial situation

change is encouraging for our desired causal interpretation of the economic voting estimates.

However, as mentioned above, an auxiliary regression in which the Bush approval indicators are

the only included right hand side variables yields an R-squared of 0.77. Since the financial

situation variables and, as we document shortly, many other factors subsequently enter the

regression significantly but only explain another four percentage points of the variation in voting

outcomes, presumably the scope persists for other voting determinants to do so as well. Yet, in




                                                18
an unreported regression in which the Bush and Iraq approval indicators are the only additional

included variables, the coefficients of the financial situation indicators are 0.028 and –0.049, i.e.

close to their column 12 values, and these are arguably already conservative because of reverse

causation from financial situation to Bush approval.

       The other result from columns 10–12 in table 1 is the very highly significant asymmetry

in economic voting effects: the incumbent has much more to lose from voters perceiving a loss in

economic welfare during his administration than he has to gain from the opposite. Because Bush

received just over one-half of the vote, this asymmetry persists when evaluated in terms of

proportions voting for or against Bush. This finding is consistent with the aforementioned

conclusions from aggregate data that economic downturns hurt the incumbent party, but

economic upswings do not help it (Bloom and Price 1975, Claggett 1986). A plausible

explanation is that economic voting implies expectations of improved personal financial

situations; incumbents are not rewarded nearly as much for fulfilling those expectations as they

are punished for not doing so. Alternatively, voters may credit themselves for improvements in

their financial situations, but blame the government when things go wrong. Either way, factors

in this specific election that might have augmented such behavior include the ideological nature

of issues that seemed to be at the voting margin for many (including Iraq, terrorism and gay

marriage) and that Bush’s approval ratings had been on a downward trajectory heading into the

election. Moreover, Amodio et al. (2007) find that liberals tend to exhibit behavior that is more

flexible (or indecisive) than that of conservatives. For all these reasons, Bush supporters might

have been a relatively more rigid group in their political opinions than were his detractors.

       Column 3 of Appendix A shows the full set of estimates from the regression of column

12 in table 1. These mostly reflect the relationships apparent from the earlier cross-tabulations.




                                                 19
Groups more likely to vote for Bush include respondents age 30 and above, compared to those

age 18–24; whites, compared to blacks and Hispanics; those making their decision prior to the

last month; Christians relative to the non-religious; and the non-religious relative to Muslims and

Jews. Even controlling for Iraq and Bush approval, voting propensities differ by 6–7 percent for

liberals and conservatives compared to moderates and by 18–19 percent for Republicans and

Democrats compared to others. The voting difference between those who strongly approve and

strongly disapprove of Iraq policy is comparable to that between Republicans and Democrats,

with much smaller but still significant discrepancies between those who feel strongly and less

strongly one way or the other. The huge effects of Bush disapproval, even compared to those for

political party and Iraq approval (and while controlling for those factors), reiterate the

importance of job performance rating as a determinant of the vote and thus a control for

unobserved heterogeneity. Results that contradict those predicted by the summary statistics

include males and residents of mid-sized cities being more likely to vote for Bush than females

and residents of large cities, respectively.

       Column 4 of Appendix A mimics column 3, except that the right hand side excludes the

two financial situation indicators that are the focus of the analysis. We do this to highlight the

effect on voting of family income, the only factor for which coefficients are notably different in

columns 3 and 4. In column 3, when financial situation change is held constant, the voting

outcome is unrelated to family income. None of the income indicators are significant at 10

percent, and the F-statistic for their joint significance is 0.81 (p = 0.58). However, with the

financial situation indicators excluded in column 4, family income becomes an important voting

determinant. Voting for Bush is more likely by nearly three percent among respondents with

family incomes of $50,000–149,000 and six percent among those with incomes above $150,000,




                                                 20
and the set of income indicators is jointly significant with an F-statistic of 3.29 (p = 0.002).

Thus, the conventional wisdom that economic status did not affect voting behavior is true but

misleading: income level did not matter conditional on the change in status, which very much

did. Column 4 is also misleading in the sense that column 3 shows it would be incorrect to

conclude that voters made decisions based on the impact of policies that have income level-

specific effects, i.e. higher income voters favoring Bush because of lower income tax rates.

       Finally, table 2 shows results for alternative specifications (panels A.– B.) and samples

(panels C.–P.). Columns 1–2 and 3–4 pertain to the specifications from columns 10 and 12,

respectively, of table 1, with odd (even) numbered columns displaying estimates for becoming

better (worse) off. Panel A. shows that weighting the data does not drive the results other than to

produce smaller coefficients for financial improvement, even though Bush actually received

fewer votes than did Kerry in the unweighted sample. In panel B., conclusions are unchanged

when a probit model is used to account for the discrete nature of the dependent variable.

However, probit marginal effects, evaluated at the explanatory variable means, are much larger

than are those from OLS. This is a function of the dependent variable mean being very close to

0.5, so that small probit coefficient changes translate to large changes in probability, and

provides another sense in which the OLS estimates that include the approval indicators are

conservative. Panel C. indicates that removing the 825 respondents who voted for a candidate

other than Bush or Kerry makes no difference to the analysis.

       Panels D.–P. list economic voting effects for stratified samples. A theme that emerges is

that doing better (worse) financially has little effect among voters that heavily (dis)favor Bush, in

that effect sizes tend to be proportionate to the size of the group that might change its vote in

response to economic situation changes. For example, in column 1 of panel P., the effect of




                                                 21
becoming better off is only 0.008 among those who approve of Bush, but this represents a sizable

fraction, i.e. 10%, of the few in that group who did not vote for Bush. Overall, financial situation

coefficients are always significant at the 5% level in columns 1 and 2, and are only occasionally

insignificant at the 10% level in columns 3 and 4. In this latter specification that holds constant

Bush approval, when one of the two financial situation coefficients is not significant at 5%, the

other is always highly significant. This means that even controlling for Bush approval, economic

voting effects persist even among groups that exhibit very strong or weak support for Bush.



V.     Conclusion

       Our analysis has found what we view as strong evidence of economic voting in the 2004

presidential election. Holding constant attitudes towards President Bush and his Iraq war policy

as well as political party and philosophy, religious affiliation, family income, congressional

district and several additional personal characteristics, becoming financially better off during

Bush’s first term raised the likelihood of voting for Bush by 3.5% while becoming worse off

lowered that likelihood by 7.6%. Simply omitting the controls for opinions on Bush’s job

performance yields analogous effects of 9.6% and 17.2%, respectively. These results hold up

even among voters who strongly supported or rejected Bush. Moreover, the harm to Bush from

experiencing an economic decline was statistically larger than the benefit he enjoyed from an

economic improvement. We conclude that in spite of conventional wisdom to the contrary,

economic voting, particularly of the egocentric variety, was still quite important.

       A limitation of our study is that if our strategy indeed provides, as we believe, a strong

test for economic voting, it might inherently not provide the most precise point estimates. If

becoming financially worse off prompted voters to both disapprove of Bush’s job performance




                                                 22
and vote against Bush, or vice versa for becoming better off, then the effect of economic voting

is partially absorbed by the coefficients on the Bush approval indicators. On the flip side, it is

impossible to argue, without achieving an R-squared of unity, that our strategy eliminates the

influence of all further potentially confounding factors. Although many factors work in our

favor, including the reverse causation issue above, it is not totally inconceivable that a voting

determinant we cannot observe is correlated with reported financial situation change.

       One question begged by our results is the extent to which the egocentric economic voting

we have uncovered reflects responses to changes in local or national economic conditions. As

noted above, the invariance of the financial situation coefficients to the inclusion of

congressional district indicators suggests that the effects captured by our analysis do not vary by

localities. Our data, though merely cross sectional, allow for a more direct test of the impact that

economic conditions have on voting. In particular, the percentage of state voters opting for Bush

would seem to be a parsimonious proxy for state-level factors that might spuriously correlate

state-level economic conditions and voting decisions. Preliminary results from DeSimone and

LaFountain (2007) show that larger increases in the state unemployment rate during Bush’s first

term reduce the propensity to vote for Bush, and this effect is relatively robust to holding

constant ecocentric economic voting of the type estimated here.




                                                 23
References

Alvarez, R. Michael and Jonathan Nagler, “Economics, Entitlements and Social Issues: Voter
Choice in the 1996 Presidential Election,” California Institute of Technology Social Science
Working Paper 1021, October 1997.

Amodio, David M., John T. Jost, Sarah L. Master and Cindy M. Yee, “Neurocognitive Correlates
of Liberalism and Conservatism,” Nature Neuroscience, 9 September 2007, doi:10.1038/nn1979.

Bloom, Howard S. and H. Douglas Price, “Voter Response to Short-run Economic Conditions:
The Asymmetric Effect of Prosperity and Recession,” American Political Science Review, 69,
December 1975, 1266–1276.

Campbell, A., P.E. Converse, W.E. Miller and D.E. Stokes, The American Voter, Wiley: New
York, 1960.

Claggett, William, “A Reexamination of the Asymmetry Hypothesis: Economic Expansions,
Contractions and Congressional Elections,” Western Political Quarterly, 39(4), December 1986,
623–633.

DeSimone, Jeff and Courtney LaFountain, “Local Economic Conditions and the 2004
Presidential Election,” Working paper, 2007.

Downs, Anthony, An Economic Theory of Democracy, Harper & Row: New York, 1957.

Eisenberg, Daniel and Jonathan Ketcham, “Economic Voting in U.S. Presidential Elections:
Who Blames Whom for What,” Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1), Article 19, 2004.

Fair, Ray, “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 60, May 1978, 159–173.

Fiorina, Morris P., “Economic Retrospective Voting in American National Elections: A Micro-
Analysis,” American Journal of Political Science, 22, May 1978, 426–443.

Fiorina, Morris P., Retrospective Voting in American National Elections, Yale University Press:
New Haven, 1981.

Gomez, Brad T. and J. Matthew Wilson, “Political Sophistication and Economic Voting in the
American Electorate: A Theory of Heterogeneous Attribution,” American Journal of Political
Science, 45(4), October 2001, 899–914.

Jordahl, Henrick, “An Economic Analysis of Voting in Sweden,” Public Choice, 127, 2006,
251–273.

Kiewiet, D. Roderick, “Policy-Oriented Voting in Response to Economic Issues,” American
Political Science Review, 75(2), June 1981, 448–459.



                                              24
Kinder, Donald R. and D. Roderick Kiewiet, “Economic Discontent and Political Behavior: The
Role of Personal Grievances and Collective Economic Judgments in Congressional Voting,”
American Journal of Political Science, 23, August 1979, 495–517.

Kinder, Donald R. and D. Roderick Kiewiet, “Sociotropic Politics: The American Case,” British
Journal of Political Science, 11, 1981, 129–61.

Kramer, Gerald H, “Short Run Fluctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896–1964,” American
Political Science Review, 65, March 1971, 131–143.

Kramer, Gerald H., “The Ecological Fallacy Revisited: Aggregate versus Individual-level
Evidence on Economics and Elections and Sociotropic Voting,” American Political Science
Review, 77, March 1983, 99–111.

Leigh, Andrew and Justin Wolfers, “Competing Approaches to Forecasting Elections: Economic
Models, Opinion Polling and Prediction Markets,” The Economic Record, 82(258), September
2006, 325–340.

Lewis-Beck, Martin S., Economics and Elections: The Major Western Democracies, University
of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, 1988.

Markus, Gregory B., “The Impact of Personal and National Economic Conditions on the
Presidential Vote: A Pooled Cross-Sectional Analysis,” American Journal of Political Science,
32(1), February 1988, 137–154.

Markus, Gregory B., “The Impact of Personal and National Economic Conditions on Presidential
Voting, 1956-1988,” American Journal of Political Science, 36(3), August 1992, 829–834.

Nadeau, Richard and Michael S. Lewis-Beck, “National Economic Voting in U.S. Presidential
Elections,” Journal of Politics, 63(1), February 2001, 159–181.

National Election Pool, National Election Pool General Election Exit Polls (ICPSR computer
file), Somerville, NJ: Edison Media Research & New York, NY: Mitofsky International, 2004

Peltzman, Sam, “How Efficient is the Voting Market,” Journal of Law and Economics, 33, April
1990, 27–63.




                                              25
                                                      Table 1: Economic voting effects (n = 58,740)

                                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)
Financial situation               .305        .289       .288       .271       .269       .273       .257       .194        .120       .049       .026       .018
better than 4 years ago          (49.5)      (47.9)     (48.1)     (46.0)     (45.4)     (45.8)     (43.8)     (35.3)      (24.6)     (12.2)     (7.75)     (5.66)

Financial situation              –.324       –.294      –.294      –.290      –.290      –.293      –.282      –.235       –.161      –.088      –.044      –.039
worse than 4 years ago           (51.3)      (47.2)     (47.3)     (47.3)     (47.3)     (47.4)     (46.3)     (40.9)      (31.8)     (19.8)     (11.7)     (10.6)

Test of effect symmetry           2.91        0.26       0.23       3.16       4.11       3.62       6.15       19.9        26.8       33.7       11.1       15.3
                                 [.088]      [.613]     [.634]     [.076]     [.043]     [.057]     [.013]     [.000]      [.000]     [.000]     [.001]     [.000]

R-squared                         .243        .292       .299       .338       .339       .341       .366       .467        .601       .716       .805       .813
Includes indicators for:
Gender, age and race               No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Urbanization                       No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Congressional district             No         No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Decided in last month              No         No         No         No         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Family income                      No         No         No         No         No         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Religion                           No         No         No         No         No         No          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Political philosophy               No         No         No         No         No         No          No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Political party                    No         No         No         No         No         No          No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Iraq approval                      No         No         No         No         No         No          No         No         No         Yes        No         Yes
Bush approval                      No         No         No         No         No         No          No         No         No         No         Yes        Yes

Coefficients are from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the respondent voted for Bush, and are relative to the omitted
category “financial situation is about the same as four years ago.” Parentheses contain absolute values of heteroskedasticity-adjusted t statistics. F statistics for
the hypothesis that the two financial situation coefficients are equal in absolute value are shown for tests of effect symmetry, with p-values given in brackets.
Row headings reflect sets of indicator variables as listed in Appendix A.




                                                                                  26
        Table 2: Economic voting effects in alternative specifications and samples

     Bush approval included?                                 No                     Yes
     Financial situation is:                        Better        Worse    Better         Worse
     Specification/sample                             (1)           (2)      (3)            (4)
A.   Unweighted                                      .058         –.086     .024          –.038
     (n = 58,740; 49.0% voted for Bush)             (19.5)        (27.5)   (9.88)         (14.5)
B.   Probit marginal effects                         .131         –.218     .065          –.148
     (n = 58,740; 51.1% voted for Bush)             (11.1)        (18.1)   (4.77)         (10.3)
C.   Voted for Bush or Kerry                         .050         –.088     .019          –.038
     (n = 57,915; 51.6% voted for Bush)             (12.4)        (19.7)   (5.80)         (10.4)
D.   Female                                          .050         –.089     .021          –.040
     (n = 31,698; 49.0% voted for Bush)             (9.30)        (16.0)   (4.70)         (8.36)
     Male                                            .048         –.087     .014          –.040
     (n = 27,042; 53.4% voted for Bush)             (8.03)        (12.6)   (3.12)         (7.09)
E.   Age 18–24                                       .030         –.086    –.002          –.041
     (n = 6,423; 41.2% voted for Bush)              (2.26)        (7.27)   (0.15)         (4.34)
     Age 25–44                                       .066         –.078     .031          –.040
     (n = 24,041; 52.2% voted for Bush)             (10.3)        (10.5)   (5.90)         (6.17)
     Age 45–64                                       .045         –.094     .015          –.038
     (n = 22,309; 52.4% voted for Bush)             (7.00)        (13.7)   (3.27)         (6.79)
     Age 65+                                         .032         –.089     .012          –.041
     (n = 5,967; 51.2% voted for Bush)              (2.84)        (7.35)   (1.36)         (4.20)
F.   White                                           .044         –.100     .013          –.044
     (n = 47,606; 57.9% voted for Bush)             (10.8)        (19.3)   (4.00)         (10.5)
     Nonwhite                                        .073         –.055     .041          –.026
     (n = 11,134; 25.6% voted for Bush)             (5.81)        (6.26)   (3.96)         (3.42)
G.   City with population 50,000+                    .052         –.067     .028          –.029
     (n = 16,940; 42.7% voted for Bush)             (6.74)        (8.87)   (4.42)         (4.56)
     Suburb                                          .055         –.084     .016          –.038
     (n = 21,583; 52.3% voted for Bush)             (8.68)        (11.8)   (3.19)         (6.74)
     Rural area or city with population < 50,000     .039         –.120     .013          –.052
     (n = 20,217; 58.9% voted for Bush)             (5.85)        (14.4)   (2.60)         (7.37)
H.   Northeast                                       .054         –.083     .021          –.035
     (n = 9,403; 43.4% voted for Bush)              (5.06)        (7.79)   (2.51)         (3.92)
     Midwest                                         .049         –.085     .015          –.036
     (n = 15,454; 51.1% voted for Bush)             (6.70)        (10.4)   (2.61)         (5.45)
     South                                           .048         –.102     .020          –.050
     (n = 19,014; 56.0% voted for Bush)             (7.75)        (14.1)   (4.00)         (8.13)
     West                                            .044         –.075     .014          –.032
     (n = 14,869; 49.7% voted for Bush)             (4.68)        (7.06)   (1.85)         (3.76)
I.   States that Bush won                            .048         –.101     .021          –.050
     (n = 36,468; 56.7% voted for Bush)             (10.2)        (17.6)   (5.38)         (10.2)
     States that Kerry won                           .051         –.075     .016          –.029
     (n = 22,272; 44.8% voted for Bush)             (7.54)        (11.1)   (2.93)         (5.24)



                                              27
     Table 2 (continued): Economic voting effects in alternative specifications and samples

       Bush approval included?                                              No                        Yes
       Financial situation is:                                     Better        Worse       Better         Worse
       Specification/sample                                          (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)
J.     Decided prior to last month                                  .036         –.075        .010          –.026
       (n = 46,633; 52.9% voted for Bush)                          (9.32)        (16.6)      (3.30)         (7.21)
       Decided in last month                                        .102         –.122        .056          –.078
       (n = 12,107; 43.2% voted for Bush)                          (8.01)        (10.2)      (5.04)         (7.48)
K.     Family income less than $30,000                              .027         –.100        .002          –.052
       (n = 13,441; 40.6% voted for Bush)                          (2.73)        (12.0)      (0.28)         (7.28)
       Family income $30,000–99,999                                 .056         –.093        .022          –.041
       (n = 35,047; 53.3% voted for Bush)                          (11.0)        (15.8)      (5.37)         (8.45)
       Family income $100,000 or more                               .045         –.055        .017          –.019
       (n = 10,252; 55.9% voted for Bush)                          (5.25)        (4.81)      (2.59)         (2.16)
L.     Protestant or Catholic                                       .041         –.092        .011          –.036
       (n = 32,242; 57.5% voted for Bush)                          (8.05)        (14.3)      (2.70)         (7.00)
       Other Christian                                              .059         –.112        .029          –.061
       (n = 14,738; 55.3% voted for Bush)                          (7.91)        (12.2)      (4.51)         (7.62)
       Other religion                                               .075         –.040        .041          –.012
       (n = 5,301; 24.3% voted for Bush)                           (4.81)        (3.93)      (3.56)         (1.40)
       No religion                                                  .062         –.054        .031          –.029
       (n = 6,459; 28.4% voted for Bush)                           (4.41)        (4.83)      (2.74)         (3.06)
M.     Liberal                                                      .073         –.026        .037          –.014
       (n = 12,571; 13.8% voted for Bush)                          (7.10)        (4.22)      (4.31)         (2.53)
       Moderate                                                     .068         –.098        .026          –.040
       (n = 27,141; 44.0% voted for Bush)                          (9.99)        (14.9)      (4.76)         (7.21)
       Conservative                                                 .017         –.109        .006          –.054
       (n = 19,028; 83.3% voted for Bush)                          (3.48)        (10.4)      (1.45)         (6.66)
N.     Republican                                                   .013         –.095        .001          –.036
       (n = 21,039; 92.8% voted for Bush)                          (3.14)        (8.49)      (0.18)         (3.88)
       Democrat                                                     .081         –.050        .040          –.029
       (n = 21,996; 11.9% voted for Bush)                          (8.52)        (9.86)      (5.11)         (6.68)
       Neither Democrat nor Republican                              .070         –.096        .034          –.037
       (n = 15,705; 46.3% voted for Bush)                          (7.83)        (10.5)      (4.71)         (5.06)
O.     Approve of Iraq war                                          .028         –.166        .006          –.079
       (n = 30,593; 86.4% voted for Bush)                          (6.33)        (17.0)      (1.78)         (10.1)
       Disapprove of Iraq war                                       .063         –.036        .030          –.014
       (n = 28,147; 10.5% voted for Bush)                          (7.79)        (8.01)      (4.46)         (3.57)
P.     Approve of Bush’s handling of job                            .008         –.083        .007          –.082
       (n = 30,119; 92.0% voted for Bush)                          (2.17)        (9.36)      (1.83)         (9.27)
       Disapprove of Bush’s handling of job                         .025         –.018        .022          –.012
       (n = 28,621; 4.9% voted for Bush)                           (3.66)        (5.15)      (3.38)         (3.37)
Regressions have the specifications (panels A and B) or include only the subsamples (panels C through P) indicated
in the row heading. The models for columns 1–2 correspond to column 10 of table 1, while those for columns 3–4
correspond to column 12 of table 1. Parentheses contain absolute values of heteroskedasticity-adjusted t statistics.



                                                         28
           Appendix A: Variable means and full model OLS estimates (n = 58,740)

Variable                                              Voted     OLS estimates: controls for
                                              Mean   for Bush   financial situation change?
                                                                    Yes              No
                                               (1)     (2)          (3)              (4)
Voted for Bush                                .511
Financial situation better than 4 years ago   .336    .804       .018 (5.7)
Financial situation same as 4 years ago       .382    .499
Financial situation worse than 4 years ago    .282    .175      –.039 (10.6)
Female                                        .525    .490
Male                                          .475    .534      –.013 (5.1)    –.013 (4.9)
Age 18–24                                     .100    .412
Age 25–29                                     .087    .449       .003 (0.5)     .005 (0.8)
Age 30–39                                     .190    .530       .022 (4.1)     .022 (4.2)
Age 40–44                                     .117    .565       .026 (4.5)     .025 (4.3)
Age 45–49                                     .118    .530       .022 (3.8)     .019 (3.3)
Age 50–59                                     .190    .512       .029 (5.4)     .026 (4.8)
Age 60–64                                     .078    .544       .036 (5.6)     .033 (5.2)
Age 65–74                                     .081    .532       .032 (4.9)     .030 (4.6)
Age 75 and over                               .040    .470       .021 (2.7)     .022 (2.8)
White                                         .787    .579
Black                                         .109    .131      –.047 (8.0)    –.048 (8.1)
Hispanic                                      .069    .388      –.041 (5.7)    –.040 (5.7)
Asian                                         .016    .365      –.019 (1.3)    –.020 (1.3)
Other race                                    .020    .402      –.002 (0.2)    –.003 (0.3)
City with population over 500,000             .107    .341
City with population 50,000–500,000           .195    .475      –.017 (1.8)    –.020 (2.1)
Suburb                                        .447    .523      .002 (0.3)     –.000 (0.0)
City with population 10,000–49,999            .085    .582      –.006 (0.6)    –.009 (0.9)
Rural area                                    .166    .592      –.002 (0.2)    –.004 (0.5)
Decided before last month                     .811    .529
Decided within last month                     .189    .432      –.027 (6.0)    –.028 (6.1)
Family income less than $15,000               .075    .364
Family income $15,000–29,999                  .141    .428      .001 (0.2)      .004 (0.6)
Family income $30,000–49,999                  .221    .502      .002 (0.4)      .008 (1.3)
Family income $50,000–74,999                  .227    .551      .004 (0.7)      .013 (2.2)
Family income $75,000–99,999                  .143    .552      .002 (0.4)      .014 (2.3)
Family income $100,000–149,999                .114    .540      –.000 (0.1)     .014 (2.1)
Family income $150,000–199,999                .040    .568      .012 (1.5)      .028 (3.4)
Family income $200,000 or more                .040    .604      .011 (1.4)      .029 (3.5)




                                              29
    Appendix A (continued): Variable means and full model OLS estimates (n = 58,740)

 Variable                                                             Voted        OLS estimates: controls for
                                                         Mean        for Bush      financial situation change?
                                                                                       Yes              No
                                                           (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
 Protestant                                               .319          .629        .013 (2.6)       .014 (2.6)
 Catholic                                                 .256          .508        .008 (1.5)       .008 (1.4)
 Mormon                                                   .020          .771        .036 (2.7)       .036 (2.7)
 Other Christian                                          .214          .533        .020 (3.7)       .020 (3.7)
 Jewish                                                   .027          .211       –.018 (2.0)      –.018 (1.9)
 Muslim                                                   .006          .121       –.042 (2.2)      –.042 (2.2)
 Other religion                                           .058          .269       –.003 (0.5)      –.003 (0.5)
 No religion                                              .100          .284
 Liberal                                                  .206          .138        –.030 (7.9)       –.029 (7.5)
 Moderate                                                 .456          .440
 Conservative                                             .338          .833        .035 (10.1)       .036 (10.4)
 Democrat                                                 .369          .119       –.096 (21.9)      –.098 (22.1)
 Republican                                               .376          .928        .090 (19.5)       .092 (20.1)
 Neither Democrat nor Republican                          .255          .463
 Strongly approve war with Iraq                           .294          .947
 Somewhat approve war with Iraq                           .240          .762        –.029 (7.3)       –.032 (7.9)
 Somewhat disapprove war with Iraq                        .156          .232       –.151 (19.7)      –.156 (20.3)
 Strongly disapprove war with Iraq                        .310          .042       –.173 (21.9)      –.181 (22.7)
 Strongly approve Bush performance                        .325          .964
 Somewhat approve Bush performance                        .205          .852        –.017 (3.6)       –.021 (4.6)
 Somewhat disapprove Bush performance                     .124          .154       –.535 (54.2)      –.546 (55.7)
 Strongly disapprove Bush performance                     .346          .012       –.606 (65.1)      –.623 (67.9)
 Constant                                                   1                       .864 (72.8)       .865 (73.6)
All variables are binary indicators. Column 1 shows the proportion of respondents characterized by the row
heading, column 2 shows the proportion characterized by the row heading that voted for Bush, and columns 3 and 4
show coefficients and absolute values of heteroskedasticity-adjusted t statistics (in parentheses) from OLS
regression of whether the respondent voted for Bush on the variables listed and congressional district fixed effects,
with financial situation indicators excluded from the column 4 specification. All parameters in the table were
calculated using sample weights.




                                                         30
