                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WAS POSTWAR SUBURBANIZATION "WHITE FLIGHT"? EVIDENCE FROM
                       THE BLACK MIGRATION

                                         Leah Platt Boustan

                                        Working Paper 13543
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13543


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




I appreciate helpful suggestions from Edward Glaeser (editor), two anonymous referees, my dissertation
committee (Claudia Goldin, Caroline Hoxby, Lawrence Katz and Robert A. Margo), and numerous
colleagues at UCLA. I enjoyed productive conversations with Lee Alston, David Clingingsmith, William
J. Collins, Carola Frydman, Christopher Jencks, Jesse Rothstein, Albert Saiz and Raven Saks. I received
useful comments from seminar participants at the All-UC Conference for Labor Economics, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the KALER group at UCLA, New York University’s Wagner School
of Public Service, the Society of Labor Economists, the University of British Columbia, UC-Berkeley’s
Goldman School of Public Policy, the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the Wharton
School. Michael Haines generously shared some of the data used in this study. Financial support was
provided by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship and the Multi-disciplinary
Program on Inequality and Social Policy at Harvard University. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Leah Platt Boustan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Was Postwar Suburbanization "White Flight"? Evidence from the Black Migration
Leah Platt Boustan
NBER Working Paper No. 13543
October 2007, Revised June 2009
JEL No. J61,N12,R23

                                               ABSTRACT

Residential segregation by jurisdiction generates disparities in public services and education. The distinctive
American pattern – in which blacks live in cities and whites in suburbs – was enhanced by a large
black migration from the rural South. I show that whites responded to this black influx by leaving
cities and rule out an indirect effect on housing prices as a sole cause. I instrument for changes in black
population by using local economic conditions to predict black migration from southern states and
assigning predicted flows to northern cities according to established settlement patterns. The best causal
estimates imply that each black arrival led to 2.7 white departures.


Leah Platt Boustan
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                          April 2009


I. Introduction

        American metropolitan areas are segregated by race, both by neighborhood and across

jurisdiction lines. In 1980, after a century of suburbanization, 72 percent of metropolitan blacks

lived in central cities, compared to 33 percent of metropolitan whites. Because many public

goods are locally financed, segregation between the central city and the suburbs can generate

disparities in access to education and other public services (Benabou, 1996; Bayer, McMillan

and Rueben, 2005). These local disparities have motivated large policy changes over the past

fifty years, including school finance equalization plans within states and federal expenditures on

education.

        Racial segregation by jurisdiction has historical roots in two population flows: black

migration from the rural South and white relocation from central cities to the suburban ring. Both

flows peaked during World War II and the subsequent decades. Between 1940 and 1970, four

million black migrants left the South, increasing the black population share in northern and

western cities from four percent in 1940 to 16 percent in 1970. Over the same period, the median

non-southern city lost ten percent of its white population.

        This paper shows that white departures from central cities were, in part, a response to

black in-migration.1 In every decade, cities that received a larger flow of black migrants also lost

a larger number of white residents. Figure 1 provides an initial look at the relationship between

black arrivals and white departures in non-southern cities over the 1950s. The slope of the

regression line through these points suggests that each black arrival was associated with two

white departures.



1
 An extensive literature argues that white households have a preference for white neighbors. See Ellen (1999),
Crowder (2000), Emerson, Chai and Yancey (2001) and the references contained therein. Boustan (2007) shows that
demand for urban residence is also affected by city-wide demographics.


                                                                                                             1
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                         April 2009


        The relationship between black arrivals and white departures provides suggestive

evidence of “white flight,” a process by which white households left central cities to avoid living

in racially diverse neighborhoods or jurisdictions. However, the correlation between black

arrivals and white departures could also be driven by the potentially endogenous location

decisions of southern black migrants. If whites left particular northern cities for other reasons

(for example, due to the construction of a new interstate highway), migrants may have been

attracted by lower housing prices left in the wake of white departures (Gabriel, Shack-Marquez

and Wascher, 1992; Saiz, 2007).2 Alternatively, migrants may have flocked to areas with high

wages or centrally-located manufacturing jobs, factors that also underlie the demand for

suburban residence (Margo, 1992; Steinnes, 1977; Thurston and Yezer, 1994).

        I employ an instrumental variables procedure to address these potential alternatives. The

instrument makes use of the fact that black migrants from given southern states clustered in

particular northern cities. As a result, northern cities received exogenous flows of black migrants

when their traditional southern sending states underwent agricultural and economic change. In

particular, I use variation in local agricultural conditions to predict black out-migration from

southern states and assign these predicted migrant flows to northern cities using settlement

patterns established by an earlier wave of black migration. These predicted changes in black

population serve as an instrument for actual black in-migration.

        After adjusting for migrant location choices, I estimate that each black arrival was

associated with 2.7 white departures. The median city, which had 200,000 white residents,

absorbed 19,000 black migrants over this period. My estimates imply that these arrivals

prompted the departure of 52,000 white residents, resulting in a 17 percent net decline in the


2
 Gamm (1999) argues that black migrants were attracted to the Dorchester and Roxbury neighborhoods of Boston
by the decline in housing prices following a wave of Jewish suburbanization.


                                                                                                               2
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                  April 2009


urban population. While primarily driven by household mobility, I find that the decline in white

population is also partly due to a reduction in the size of remaining white households.

        Observing white departures in response to black arrivals is not sufficient evidence to

demonstrate the presence of white flight. White departures may be prompted by the fact that

black migrants bid up the price of city housing units. In a simple spatial model, I demonstrate

that if white households have no distaste for racial diversity, each black arrival will lead to one

white departure with no long-run effect on housing prices. In contrast, if white households have a

distaste for racial diversity, black migration will be associated with more than one white

departure for every black arrival, declining urban population and, in some cases, falling housing

prices. I show that in otherwise declining areas, black migration leads to an increase in the

vacancy rate and an associated decline in housing prices. In growing areas, black migration

instead slows the rate of new home construction, leading to a smaller housing stock with no

effect on housing prices.

        Early studies of urban population loss suggest that households left cities to escape

mounting urban problems, including a rising crime rate, fiscal mismanagement, and a growing

concentration of racial minorities and the poor (Bradford and Kelejian, 1973; Guterbock, 1976;

Frey, 1979; Marshall, 1979; Grubb, 1982; Mills and Price, 1984; Mieszkowski and Mills, 1993).

These papers find mixed evidence for the relationship between urban racial diversity and

suburbanization in 1960 or 1970 cross sections. Recent studies put more emphasis on

transportation improvements, including the automobile and new road building, which reduce the

time cost of commuting from bedroom communities (LeRoy and Sonstelie, 1983; Baum-Snow,




                                                                                                      3
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                April 2009


2007; Kopecky and Suen, 2007).3 The decline in urban population following the typical black in-

migration found here is equivalent to Baum-Snow’s (2007) estimates of the decline in urban

population after the construction of one new highway through the central city.

         This paper documents that black arrivals reduced the overall demand for city residence in

the mid-twentieth century, leading to white out-migration and, in some cases, falling housing

prices. However, the mechanisms by which cities lost their luster are less clear. Because poverty

and race are highly correlated, I cannot distinguish here between a distaste for the race or the

income level of southern arrivals. Moreover, with a metropolitan area-level analysis, I cannot

separate changes to local neighborhoods and school from changes to city-wide characteristics,

including the property tax rate and local spending priorities. Card, Mas and Rothstein (2008)

demonstrate that neighborhoods can “tip” from white to minority areas after reaching a critical

minority share. However, because cities were highly segregated by neighborhood, few

neighborhoods fell into the range in which they would be at risk to tip. I find that, at most, 20

percent of the estimated white departures can be traced to neighborhoods in the tipping range.

Exploring other mechanisms for white departures is a fruitful area for future research.



II. White Flight in a Simple Spatial Model

         In the postwar period, black migrants settled disproportionately in central cities. This

section illustrates potential channels by which black arrivals may have affected both the number

of white residents and housing prices in receiving cities. The model demonstrates that, as long as

housing supply is not perfectly elastic, some white departures will occur even without a distaste



3
  An exception is Cullen and Levitt (1998) which studies the relationship between crime rates in the central city and
suburbanization. Historians continue to emphasize the connection between racial diversity and suburbanization
(Jackson, 1985; Sugrue, 1996; Meyer, 2000).


                                                                                                                    4
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                   April 2009


for racial diversity due to the effect of new arrivals on housing prices.4 However, if whites have

some distaste for living near blacks, black migration will be associated with declining urban

population and, in some cases, falling housing prices.

         Consider a central city in the North with a given number of white households. With free

mobility, utility in this city cannot fall below u, the utility level for a white household in the

suburban ring of the city’s own metropolitan area and in other metropolitan areas around the

country. Household utility can be written:

                                     U (p, b, z) = u                                                              (1)

U is decreasing both in the price of housing (p) and (weakly) in the share of the city residents

that are black (b = B/(B+W), where B and W are the number of black and white households,

respectively). z is a demand shifter representing either local amenities or productivity. The price

of housing is a function of the number of households in the city, N (N= W + B). The sensitivity

of price to the number of households is determined by φ, the price elasticity of housing supply.

         Initially, all blacks live in the South. Blacks will migrate to the North if their utility level

in the northern city is higher than some reservation southern utility. Southern utility s is

determined by the wage rate in southern agriculture (w), which is decreasing in number of blacks

in South. The utility function of a black household in the North is identical to that of a white

household, except that black utility may be increasing in the number of blacks in the city:


                                     U (p, b, z) = s(w)                                                           (2)


         The price elasticity of housing supply (φ) is determined by the decisions of a profit

maximizing construction sector. For prices below construction cost (c), each unit built yields


4
 A distaste for racial diversity could arise either directly from racist attitudes or indirectly from concerns about local
amenities such as crime rates or school quality.


                                                                                                                        5
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                  April 2009


negative profits. In this region, firms will not build new units and the housing supply elasticity is

zero. In the simplest case, housing supply will be perfectly elastic at price equal to construction

cost. Alternatively, we could imagine that the city rations building permits. To build an

additional unit, firms must incur a lobbying cost L(N), which is increasing in the size of the city.

In this case, housing supply elasticity will be positive but not infinite at prices above construction

cost. This kinked supply curve generates an asymmetric response to changes in demand:

increasing demand leads to new construction but declining demand does not lead to an

(immediate) reduction in the housing stock (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005).

        The city is in spatial equilibrium when all white and black residents weakly prefer their

own location over the alternatives and when firms in the construction sector earn zero profits.

Spatial equilibrium determines a city housing price p*, which will be equal to or below

construction costs, and the share of the city residents who are black (b*).

        How will the city respond to an influx of black arrivals? Consider a decline in southern

wages following mechanization in the agricultural sector, prompting black migration to the city.

This case corresponds to the instrument for black migration described in the next section, which

relies on exogenous variation in southern agricultural conditions. When s falls, black migrants

move to the city. Migration continues until the southern wage rises sufficiently to make blacks

indifferent between the South and the North. The city’s construction sector responds to the new

arrivals. If housing supply is perfectly elastic at prices above construction costs, firms will build

new units until prices return to p* = c and no white households will leave the city. If housing

supply is less than perfectly elastic, housing prices will increase somewhat with black in-

migration, encouraging some white households to leave the city in response.




                                                                                                        6
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                April 2009


         How many whites will leave the city in this scenario? To begin with, assume that whites

have no distaste for black residents (U'b = 0). According to equation 1, spatial equilibrium for

white households will only be restored when city prices return to p*. Given that prices are a

function of the total number of households in the city, this relationship holds when each black

arrival displaces exactly one white resident. From this reasoning, we can conclude that: If whites

exhibit no distaste for racial diversity (and housing supply is not perfectly elastic), black

migration to a central city will lead to: (a) exactly one white departure for every black arrival

and (b) no long-run change in city housing prices.

         Black migration increases both housing prices and the black population share in the city.

If white households dislike racial diversity (U'b < 0), black migration will prompt more white

departures than in the previous case. This decline in city population will lead housing prices to

fall below construction costs. The housing stock will decline at some rate λ until prices

eventually return to p*.5 From this reasoning, we can conclude that: If whites exhibit a distaste

for racial diversity, black migration to a central city will lead to: (a) more than one white

departure for every black arrival and (b) a short-run decline in city housing prices.

         Define λ as the (exogenous) speed with which city housing prices return to p*, either

through depreciation of the existing housing stock or a slowdown in new construction. In cities

that are otherwise expanding, the housing stock can easily decline (in a relative sense) through a

slowing of the rate of new construction. That is, expanding cities are characterized by a high λ.

However, in cities that are otherwise shrinking, a decline must occur through a slower process of

the depreciation of the existing housing stock. This distinction generates an additional prediction:

In declining areas, white departures will be coupled with a high vacancy rate and falling prices,

5
 In the meantime, low housing prices in the city will induce additional black migration which, in turn, will prompt
more white departures. The city will not tip from all white to all black because the loss of black population from the
South will increase southern wages, eventually bringing migration to a halt.


                                                                                                                     7
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                              April 2009


whereas in growing areas, white departures will lead to a decline in the rate of new construction

and housing prices will remain at construction costs.

        The model suggests a set of empirical relationships to be explored in the data. First, white

departures from the central city will respond to the number of black arrivals – rather than the

percentage change in the black population. However, spatial equilibrium for white households

indicates that housing prices will respond to the black share of the city’s population, rather than

by the number of black arrivals. If the number of white departures with every black arrival is

statistically greater than one, we can rule out housing prices as a sole cause of the white outflow.

        Thus far, I have considered how the urban equilibrium is affected by black migration

pushed from the South by a decline in southern wages. However, changes to the northern city

itself may also attract black migrants. An increase in northern productivity (z) could

simultaneously attract black migrants and encourage some white households to move to

suburbs.6 This process could generate a spurious correlation between these two population flows.

Alternatively, if whites leave the city for any other reason (modeled as an increase in u), housing

prices may fall, encouraging black in-migration from the South. In this case, an association

between black arrivals and white departures would not be driven by white racism but rather by

black location choice (reverse causality). The spatial model helps to demonstrate the importance

of focusing on southern conditions as a source of exogenous variation in black population growth

in the North. In next section, I introduce an instrument for black migration using factors that

exogenously change the utility of southern blacks.




6
  A productivity-driven increase in wages may encourage some white households to move to the suburbs. Living in
the suburbs involves a tradeoff between the price of housing services and the distance to work. An increase in
income will prompt households to move to the suburbs as long as the elasticity of housing services with respect to
income is greater than the income elasticity of the opportunity cost of time (Becker, 1965).


                                                                                                                     8
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                              April 2009


III. Using southern black migration to instrument for black arrivals to northern cities

A. Historical context and conceptual approach

        Rural blacks were attracted northward by economic opportunities in the manufacturing

and service sectors. The demand-pull component of this migrant flow is undoubtedly correlated

with economic conditions in destination cities. Southern push factors can be used to create an

instrument for changes in urban diversity in the North. I use local economic conditions to predict

black migrant flows from each southern state. These local factors are unlikely to be correlated

with aspects of the northern economy. I assign predicted flows to northern destinations using

settlement patterns established by an earlier wave of black migration.7 The predicted black

population in a northern city are used to instrument for the actual black population.

        Key to this procedure is the fact that blacks leaving particular southern states settled in

certain northern cities. These settlement patterns were highly persistent, in part due to the

stability of train routes and community networks.8 Much of the variation in source/destination

pairs occurs between regions, with migrants simply moving due North – say, from the

Mississippi Delta to industrial cities in the Midwest. However, there is also considerable

variation within regions. Consider the case of Alabama and Mississippi, two neighboring, cotton-

producing states in the traditional “black belt.” Figure 2 displays the share of northern black

migrants from these two states that settled in various cities between 1935-40. Migration from

Mississippi to the North was overwhelmingly concentrated in two destinations, Chicago and St.

Louis. Detroit received the largest flow from Alabama, followed by Chicago and Cleveland.




7
  The first wave of black migration was prompted by growth in industrial employment during World War I and the
imposition of strict immigration quotas in 1924, which slowed migration from Europe (Collins, 1997).
8
  Carrington, Detragiache, and Viswanath (1996) model this type of chain migration as a reduction in the uncertainty
costs of migration.


                                                                                                                  9
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                               April 2009


         The difference in migration patterns between these neighboring states is consistent with

disparities in their railroad infrastructure, which were in place long before 1940. The black

population in Mississippi was clustered along the Mississippi river, a region served by only one

inter-state railroad (the Illinois Central), whose main hubs were St. Louis and Chicago. In

contrast, the large cities in Alabama, Mobile and Birmingham, were each served by two major

railroads – the Gulf, Mobile, and Ohio railroad, which connected to the Illinois Central network

in St. Louis, and the Alabama Great Southern Railroad, which brought riders east to Cleveland

and Detroit.9



B. Building an instrument from historical data

         The instrument for northern black population is made up of two components: predicted

migrant flows from southern states and the settlement pattern established by blacks leaving these

states in an earlier wave of migration. To predict black migration from a southern state, I start by

estimating net black migration rates at the county level as a function of agricultural and industrial

conditions:


                           mig_ratect-t+10 = α + γ(push factors)ct + εct                                      (3)


I use county characteristics at the beginning of a decade to predict migration over the subsequent

ten-year period because contemporaneous changes in southern economic conditions could be a

response to, rather than a cause of, migration (Fligstein, 1981). For instance, planters may scale




9
  Grossman (1989, p. 99) writes that “the first [migrant from Mississippi] to leave for Chicago probably chose the
city because of its position at the head of the Illinois Central.” A map of rail links from the South c. 1915 can be
found at http://alabamamaps.ua.edu/historicalmaps/railroads/. See Grossman (1989, p. 66-119) and Gottlieb (1987,
p. 39-62) for a broader discussion of the role of train routes and information networks in black migration.


                                                                                                                    10
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                              April 2009


back cotton production as agricultural wages rise with out-migration. I also present results using

only 1940 county characteristics to predict migration in each of the three following decades.

        Table 1 contains coefficients from the regression of net migration rates on county

characteristics.10 The results from this exercise coincide with predictions from southern

economic history. A county’s cotton share strongly predicts black out-migration in the 1940s, as

the planting and weeding components of cotton production were mechanized, and again in the

1960s, when a viable cotton harvester diffused throughout the South – but not in the 1950s

(Grove and Heinicke, 2003, 2005).11 A ten percentage point increase in the share of land planted

in cotton predicts six additional out-migrants per 100 black residents in the 1940s and five

additional out-migrants in the 1960s. In contrast, agricultural counties in tobacco-growing states,

which were slow to mechanize, lost black population only in the 1960s (Wright, 1986). Counties

that received federal funds for war-related industry in the 1940s attracted black migrants, though

the effect of this war-time spending dissipated by the 1950s. The discovery of major oil fields

and the expansion of natural gas attracted black entrants to mining counties in Oklahoma and

Texas in the 1940s and 1950s.

        I generate a predicted migration flow from each county by multiplying the fitted

migration rate by the county’s initial black population. These predicted flows are aggregated to

the state level (pred_migst) and allocated to northern cities according to the settlement patterns of

blacks who left the state between 1935-40. Let wns be the share of blacks who left state s after



10
   Source details are contained in the Data Appendix and the associated summary statistics are presented in
Appendix Table 1.
11
   Federal cotton policy may have spurred the first wave of cotton mechanization in the late 1930s and 1940s. The
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) of 1933 encouraged cotton growers to leave fields fallow, a burden they often
imposed on their tenants. This policy inadvertently increased the average size of cotton farms, thus providing an
incentive to invest in high fixed cost capital goods. See Fligstein (1981, p. 137-151), Whatley (1983), and Wright
(1986, p. 226-238). Correspondingly, tenancy rates are an important predictor of out-migration in the 1940s, when
the traditional sharecropping system was giving way to wage labor arrangements (Alston, 1981).


                                                                                                                 11
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                 April 2009


1935 and reside in city n in 1940.12 The number of black migrants predicted to arrive in city n at

time t is thus the sum over the 14 southern states of migrants leaving state s and settling in city n:


                           pred_mignt =      Σs=1…14   (wns · pred_migst)                                       (4)

I use this predicted in-flow to advance a city’s black population forward from 1940, with the

predicted black population serving as the instrument for the actual population.

         Card (2001), Lewis (2005), and Doms and Lewis (2006) use a similar approach to study

the effect of immigration on local labor markets.13 One important difference, however, is that

these papers allocate the actual inflow of immigrants to cities rather than predicting the inflow

from a set of local push factors. As a result, the method assumes that the “total number of

immigrants from a given source country who enter the United States is independent of….demand

conditions in any particular city” (Card 2001, p. 43). However, given that migrants cluster, a

positive economic shock in a destination city could stimulate additional migration flows from

source areas. I present results using both actual and predicted migration flows.



IV. The causal relationship between black arrivals and white departures from central cities

A. Data and Estimation Framework

         I compile a dataset of population and household counts from 1940 to 1970 in 70 large

metropolitan areas (SMSAs) in the North and West.14 Stacking data from the four Census years,

I begin by estimating the relationship between the number of non-black (“white”) residents

12
   The 1940 Census is the first to collect systematic data on internal migration. Aggregate mobility tables are
available by race for 53 cities in the sample. The mobility data provide the city and state of residence in 1935 for
residents of a given city in 1940.
13
   In a related approach, Munshi (2003) uses rainfall in Mexican villages as an instrument for the size of different
migrant networks in the United States.
14
   I exclude the South because the vast majority of black migrants into southern cities came from the surrounding
state, making it difficult to separate changes in urban diversity from periods of local economic change. Sample
selection is discussed in more detail in the Data Appendix.


                                                                                                                       12
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                           April 2009


(W_CITY) and the number of black residents (B_CITY) in the central city of these metropolitan

areas (m):


        W_CITYmrt = αm + β1(B_CITYmrt) + γ1(POP_METROmrt) + υrt + εmrt                                    (5)


where t and r indicate Census decades and regions respectively.15 υrt are Census region by

decade fixed effects.16 β1 is thus estimated from changes in black population within a city over

time, compared to other cities in the region. I control for the size of the metropolitan area

(POP_METRO) because growing areas will attract a large flow of both black and white in-

migrants. The instrument discussed above is only available for 53 of the sample cities.

        Earlier work on the role of race in the suburbanization process compares cross-sections of

cities with different black population shares at a point in time. The benefit of a panel is twofold:

first, the size of a city’s black population may be correlated with fixed aspects of an area’s

industrial base, transportation network, or housing stock. Such characteristics may also

encourage suburban development, leading to a spurious correlation in the cross section. Second,

the size of central cities – in land area – relative to their metropolitan areas varies widely. While

this variation can obscure comparisons of suburbanization across metropolitan areas, city size is

largely unchanging within a metropolitan area over time.

        Cities can expand in land area over time by annexing nearby unincorporated land (or, less

commonly, neighboring suburbs). My preferred measure of the central city fixes city boundaries

according to their 1940 definition, foreclosing the possibility of an endogenous annexation



15
   While the model relates the number of white households to the number of black households in a central city, I
begin by estimating the relationship between black and white population for two reasons. First, the instrument
generates variation at the individual, rather than the household, level. Secondly, I am unable to correct the
households counts for possibly endogenous annexation. Table 3 contains household-level results in OLS.
16
   I combine the Western and Mountain Census regions and the New England and Mid Atlantic Census regions into
Western and Northeastern regions, respectively.


                                                                                                                13
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                April 2009


response to changes in racial diversity (Austin, 1999; Alesina, Baqir and Hoxby, 2004).17 The

Data Appendix discusses alternative definitions of the central city and assesses the robustness of

the results to the choice of measure. Summary statistics are presented in Appendix Table 2. The

mean city is 9.2 percent black and is located in a metropolitan area with 1.3 million residents, 41

percent of whom live in the city itself.



B. First-stage results

         The stability of migrant settlement patterns generates a strong association between actual

changes in black population and changes due to predicted black in-migration alone. The first

column of Table 2 reports results from a series of first-stage regressions. In the first row, the

instrument is generated by allocating actual southern flows to the North akin to Card (2001) and

others. The subsequent rows use predicted migrant flows based on southern push factors. Not

surprisingly, the relationship between actual and simulated changes in black population is

stronger when assigning actual rather than predicted migrant flows. Each predicted black arrival

is associated with 4.4 actual new black residents when assigning real migrant flows (row 1) and

3.5 new black residents when assigning predicted migrant flows (row 2). The coefficient is

highly significant in both cases. The magnitudes suggest that, over a decade, each migrant arrival

leads to the equivalent of one new black household (assuming the mean household size of 3.5

residents) in the central city, a process that presumably occurs through family formation and

child bearing in the North.

         Figure 3 graphs the first stage relationship using predicted migrant flows in the 1950s,

again controlling for region fixed effects and metropolitan area growth. Larger positive


17
  Only five cities in the sample annexed enough territory to expand their populations by at least five percent. These
are: Phoenix, AZ; Fresno, Sacramento and San Bernardino, CA; and Wichita, KS.


                                                                                                                   14
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                               April 2009


deviations from the regression line correspond to cities like Baltimore, MD that experienced

more black population growth than would be predicted by migration from their typical sending

states, perhaps due to positive economic shocks that attracted arrivals from new source areas.

The reverse is true of cities like St. Louis, MO that fall below the regression line. In general, the

positive relationship between actual and predicted black population growth is strong and is not

driven by any obvious outliers.



C. Second stage results

         The remainder of Table 2 conducts the IV analysis. If migrant location choice were

driving the correlation between black arrivals and white departures, the IV estimates should be

smaller (less negative) than OLS. A comparison between columns 2 and 3 reveals that the IV

point estimates are never markedly different from their OLS counterparts. If anything, the IV

coefficients are slightly more negative than OLS, suggesting that black migrants avoided cities

that were otherwise losing white population. Interestingly, the results are nearly identical

whether I use actual or predicted migrant flows to generate the instrument.18

         If economic shocks are serially correlated, migrants’ destination choices in the late 1930s

may be related to local economic conditions in subsequent decade(s). The third row presents IV

results for 1950-1970, leaving a full decade between the pre- and post-periods. The fourth row

uses 1940 county characteristics to predict out-migration from the South in every decade to avoid

changes in the southern economy that could be a response to, rather than a cause of, migration.

The results are similar in both cases.



18
  While intra-state migration will net out when aggregating actual county-level migration to the state level, the same
may not be true with predicted migration. Thus, the predicted state aggregates may erroneously include and assign to
the North some internal migrants.


                                                                                                                  15
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                 April 2009


        There is no evidence that the correlation between black arrivals and white departures

from central cities is due to the endogenous location choices of black migrants. Even after

constraining black migrants to follow settlements patterns established in the 1930s, I find that

each black entrant leads to 2.3-3.0 white departures. The final two rows of Table 2 examines the

long-run implications of black migration for urban population growth. I estimate the relationship

between the sixty-year change in the black and non-black population of central cities from 1940

to 2000, instrumenting for changes in the black population with migration from 1940 to 1970. In

the long run, each black arrival leads to only one non-black departure and, therefore, has no

effect on the overall urban population. Over time, some non-black residents without a distaste for

racial diversity may have been attracted to these central cities by lower housing prices. The last

row of Table 2 shows that the foreign-born, whose numbers have increased greatly since 1970,

have contributed to this trend. Each black arrival increased the number of white foreign-born

residents in these central city by 0.2 persons, accounting for around 20 percent of the long-run

renewal of urban population.

        Thus far, I have examined the relationship between black and white residents in central

cities, while the model focused on households. The population and household effects could be

different if black and white households are systematically different in size. Table 3 contains OLS

regressions relating the number of white households in the central city and the average size of

remaining white households to black household entry. The arrival of one black household led to

the departure of 1.6 white households; we can statistically rule out a displacement rate of one-

for-one. Black arrivals also led to a reduction in the size of remaining white households, perhaps

because larger households with children were more concerned about racial diversity. However,




                                                                                                   16
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                   April 2009


the change in household composition is small, resulting in the departure of 0.13 white residents

for every new black arrival.19

         Black in-migration led to a net reduction in the number of households in receiving cities.

This decline could either result in vacancies in the existing housing stock or a decline in the

housing stock itself as units depreciate and/or fewer new units are built. The model predicts that

in otherwise declining areas, white departures will be coupled with a high vacancy rate and

falling prices, whereas in growing areas, white departures will lead to a decline in the rate of new

construction and housing prices will remain at construction costs. The second and third column

separate the sample into low- and high-growth metropolitan areas (above or below the median

growth rate of 58 percent from 1940-70). Consistent with this prediction, the arrival of 1,000

black households into a high growth area, which results in a net decline of 800 households, leads

to 750 fewer housing units being built and only 50 units standing vacant. In contrast, 1,000 new

black households in a low growth areas (a net decline of 700 households) is associated with 500

additional vacancies. I will show a similar pattern with respect to housing prices below.



D. Assessing the quantitative role of white flight

         The estimated number of white departures for every black arrival allows us to calculate

the likely effect of black migration on urban population loss. Let’s begin with an extreme

thought experiment: what if the four million black migrants had not left the South during this

period? The median northern and western city received 19,000 black migrants from 1940 to

1970. The estimated response implies that 52,000 whites left the city as a result, translating into a

27 percent decline in the city’s white population and a 17 percent decline in the total urban

19
  The arrival of 1,000 black households (= 3,500 residents) leads to -0.003 fewer residents in the average white
household. In the typical city, this decline in household size translates into the loss of 448 residents. These figures
imply that each new black resident results in the loss of 0.13 white residents.


                                                                                                                          17
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                               April 2009


population. To put this magnitude into context, consider that Baum-Snow (2007) estimates that

the construction of one new interstate highway through a central city leads to a similar 16 percent

decline in urban population.

         While this “no-migration” counterfactual is large, it is not entirely out of sample. The

effect of shutting off the flow of black migrants is equivalent to imposing the growth rate of

Pittsburgh’s black population rather than that of Detroit’s black population on the typical city

(150 versus 440 percent). If instead one considers the difference in the black inflow between

Detroit and Chicago (440 versus 400 percent), the median city would have experienced an eight

percent decline in its white population.20

         Can the estimated response to the black migration be wholly explained by the “tipping”

of certain neighborhoods from majority white to majority black (Schelling, 1971)? In 1970,

Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008) estimate that neighborhoods tipped after reaching a 9-12

percent minority share. The estimated tipping point has increased over time, so the tipping point

in 1950 might have been as low as, say, five percent. To assess the quantitative importance of

this phenomenon, imagine that, in 1940, before the war-time migration, no neighborhood in

sample metropolitan areas had yet reached the tipping point. By 1950, 5.8 percent of Census

tracts in sample cities fell within the candidate range (five to 12 percent black). Card, Mas, and

Rothstein document that neighborhoods directly above the tipping point lose 10-16 percent of

their white population over the next decade relative to neighborhoods directly below. Let’s take

the case of the median city with 200,000 white residents who received 6,000 black arrivals over

the 1940s. If all candidate neighborhoods lost 16 percent of their white population over the next

20
  Some blacks were attracted to the North by the availability of manufacturing work. If blacks had not filled these
positions, others may have. One possibility is that blacks would have been replaced by Mexicans through an
expansion of the Bracero guest worker program into urban areas. The white response to this alternative set of
migrants is unknown.



                                                                                                                  18
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                    April 2009


decade, this would translate into the departure of 1,856 white residents (= 200,000 · 0.058 · 0.16).

The estimates suggest that a total of 16,200 white residents would have left the city in response

to these black arrivals. 6,000 of these departures may be in direct response to higher housing

prices. At most 20 percent of the remainder can be explained by neighborhood tipping

(=1,856/10,200). The remaining departures may have been in response to more continuous shifts

in neighborhood composition or to changes in city-wide attributes.



V. The effect of racial diversity on housing prices

        Thus far, I have shown that each black arrival to a central city at mid-century prompted

more than one white departure. This pattern suggests that white mobility was not only a response

to higher housing prices but also reflected a distaste for racial diversity. I can test this

proposition directly by looking for a negative association between the black population share in

the central city and the price of urban housing, again using the southern push instrument to

predict black arrivals.

        Aggregate data on housing values are available from 1950 to 1970. For these years, I

estimate:


PRICE_CITYmrt = αm + β2(PERB_CITYmrt) + γ2(PRICE_METRO)mrt + Γ′Xmrt + υrt + εmrt                    (6)


where PERB_CITY measures the city’s black population share. β2 estimates the effect of urban

diversity on the prices of city housing relative to metropolitan area-wide trends. The vector Xmrt

contains average housing quality measures, including the median number of rooms in city

housing units, the share of units that are in detached, single-family structures and the share of

units that were built in the previous ten years.




                                                                                                    19
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                               April 2009


         Table 4 examines the relationship between the black population share and the mean value

of owner-occupied housing in the central city. The first column of Table 4 contains the basic

specification, while the second adds housing quality controls for the Census of Housing. In both

cases, an increase in the black population share of the central city reduces housing prices. In the

raw data, a 10 percentage point increase in the black population share is associated with a six

percent decline in housing prices. 20 percent of this decline can be explained by a limited set of

housing quality controls. It is unlikely that the observed price decline was driven by lower prices

paid by new black arrivals. Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor (1999) show that, in this period, blacks

actually paid more than whites for equivalent housing units, perhaps because blacks faced a

supply constraint created by white households unwilling to sell to black buyers.

         Again, one may be concerned that black migrants were attracted to areas with falling

housing prices. In contrast, instrumenting with predicted migrant flows augments the negative

relationship between racial diversity and urban housing prices (compare columns 2 and 3).21 If

anything, black migrants seem to be attracted to cities with higher wages or amenities that

translate into higher city housing prices.

         Falling housing prices together with the decline in urban population is suggestive of a

drop in the demand for cities that experience black in-migration. However, we would not expect

housing prices to fall in all cities. In otherwise declining cities, falling demand may lead some

existing units to stand vacant and housing prices to fall. In growing cities, a decline in urban

demand may instead slow the rate of new construction until housing prices return to construction

costs. As before, I split the sample by the rate of metropolitan area growth from 1940-70.

Consistent with this reasoning, I find that increasing racial diversity has no effect on housing

21
  To instrument for the black population share, I use the city’s population in 1940 as the denominator of the
predicted black population share in all years to prevent a mechanical correlation arising between the instrument and
the endogenous black population share.


                                                                                                                  20
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                 April 2009


prices in growing cities, where, as we have already seen, the net decline in urban households

resulted in fewer housing units being built (Table 3). In declining areas, by contrast, increasing

racial diversity is associated with falling housing prices alongside a higher vacancy rate.



VI. Conclusion

        Black migration from the rural South to industrial cities in the North and West coincided

with the development of postwar suburbs. Did black migrants happen to arrive in cities at the

wrong time, just as suburbanization got underway? Or was their arrival an important explanation

for suburban growth? This paper shows that cities that received more black migrants from 1940

to 1970 lost a greater number of white residents. I rule out explanations for this pattern based on

the endogenous location decisions of black migrants or the effect of migration on urban housing

prices alone. My estimates suggest that the change in racial diversity associated with black

migration resulted in a 17 percent decline in urban population.

        An ancillary goal of the paper has been to develop an instrument for changes in urban

diversity in American cities over time. The instrument exploits shocks to southern industry and

agriculture and the persistence of black migration patterns between southern states and northern

cities. This method has many additional applications to questions in urban and public economics

as well as to the economic history of American cities in the 20th century.

        While this paper quantifies the relationship between black arrivals and white departures

from postwar cities, it has less to say about the mechanisms by which racial diversity affected the

demand for urban residence. Some white residents were undoubtedly concerned about the

changing racial and socio-economic composition of their immediate neighborhoods. However,

many others lived in all-white enclaves far from burgeoning black ghettos. These residents may




                                                                                                     21
Leah Platt Boustan                                                              April 2009


have been motivated by changes in local policy accompanying a shift in the racial and socio-

economic composition of the urban electorate. The desegregation of public schools in the 1960s

and 1970s provided another reason to leave the city. Exploring these mechanisms offers a

promising direction for future research.




                                                                                               22
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                           April 2009


                                               Data Appendix

Northern Data

Sample selection: The sample includes all non-southern SMSAs that: (1) were anchored by one
or more of the l00 largest cities in 1940 or (2) had at least 250,000 residents by 1970. Only two
SMSAs that meet the first criterion fall short of the later population benchmark (Bridgeport, CT
and New Bedford, MA). The second criterion adds 10 metropolitan areas to the sample,
including growing western cities (e.g., Phoenix, AZ) and smaller areas in Pennsylvania, Ohio
and upstate New York (e.g., Harrisburg, PA). Excluding these 10 areas has no discernable effect
on the main results (compare a coefficient of -2.110 (s.e. = 0.548) to the coefficient of interest in
Table 2, column 2). For consistency, I apply the 1970 county-based definition of a metropolitan
area in every year. I use the New England County Metropolitan Area (NECMA) classifications
for the New England region to avoid divided counties.

Changes in city boundaries through annexation: City boundaries can expand through the
annexation of neighboring territory (Jackson, 1985, p. 138-156; Dye, 1964). The direction of any
bias created by annexation activity is unknown. Austin (1999) argues that politicians in
diversifying cities have a stronger incentive to annex neighboring land in order to retain a
majority-white electorate. In contrast, Alesina, Baqir and Hoxby (2004) find that racial diversity
reduces the number of successful school district consolidations, particularly in states that require
both districts to agree to consolidate.

To adjust for annexation, I create a parallel set of population counts that define central cities
according to their 1940 borders. That is, I reassign residents who would have lived in the
suburban ring if not for annexation back to the suburbs.22 Each measure involves a tradeoff.
Counts based on actual borders might conceal patterns of individual mobility erased by
annexation activity. However, counts based on consistent borders will misclassify moves from
annexed city territory to the suburbs as suburb-to-suburb moves.

The tables in the paper are based on the fixed border population counts. Using actual city
boundaries instead produces an estimate of 2.317 (s.e. = 0.609) white departures for every black
arrival. This coefficient is qualitatively similar to the comparable estimate in the second column
of Table 1.

Southern Data

Net black migration rates by county: Black migration rates are approximated from population
counts in race-sex-age cohorts in two Censuses, adjusted by national survival ratios (Gardner and
Cohen, 1971; Bowles, et al., 1990). That is, the actual population in a cohort in county c at time t
is compared to a predicted population count determined by multiplying that cohort’s population
at time t-10 by the national survival ratio. The difference between the actual and predicted
population counts are attributed to in- or out-migration. Even when measured by race, the
national survival ratio may understate mortality in the South leading to an over-estimate of out-

22
  The Census Bureau estimated the number of individuals drawn into the central city through annexation from block
level data (Bogue, 1953; US Census, 1960, 1970).


                                                                                                              23
Leah Platt Boustan                                                               April 2009


migration (Fishback, Horrace and Kantor, 2005). As long as this bias is not systematically
related to economic factors across counties, it should simply attenuate the coefficients.

Agricultural data by county: All southern county-level variables are drawn from the electronic
County and City Data Books, with the exception of cotton acreage. Information on cotton
acreage is available electronically for some states at the National Agricultural Statistical
Service’s historical data website (http://www.usda.gov/nass/pubs/histdata.htm) and for others at
the website of the Population and Environment in the US Great Plains project of the ICPSR
(http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/PLAINS/). The remainder were collected by hand from the
Censuses of Agriculture.




                                                                                               24
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                    April 2009


                                            Bibliography

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and Caroline Hoxby. “Political Jurisdictions in Heterogeneous
        Communities.” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 2004, pp. 348-396.

Alston, Lee J. “Tenure Choice in Southern Agriculture, 1930-1960.” Explorations in Economic History,
        18, 1981, pp. 211-232.

Austin, D. Andrew. “Politics vs. Economics: Evidence from Municipal Annexation.” Journal of Urban
        Economics, 45, 1999, pp. 501-532.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      122(2), 2007, pp. 775-805.

Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, and Kim S. Reuben. “Residential Segregation in General Equilibrium.”
        NBER Working Paper No. 11095. January, 2005.

Benabou, Roland. “Equity and Efficiency in Human Capital Investments: The Local Connection.” Review
      of Economic Studies, 63(2), April 1996, pp. 237-264.

Bogue, Donald J. Population Growth in Standard Metropolitan Areas, 1900-1950. Washington, D.C.:
       Housing and Home Finance Agency, 1953.

Boustan, Leah Platt. “Escape from the City? The Role of Race, Income, and Local Public Goods in
       Postwar Suburbanization.” NBER Working Paper 13311, August 2007.

Bowles, Gladys K., James D. Tarver, Calvin L. Beale, and Everette S. Lee. Net Migration of the
       Population by Age, Sex, and Race, 1950-1970 [computer file]. ICPSR ed., Study no. 8493, 1990.

Bradford, David F. and Harry H. Kelejian. “An Econometric Model of the Flight to the Suburbs.” Journal
       of Political Economy. 81(3), 1973, pp. 566-589.

Card, David. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Market Impacts of Higher
       Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), 2001, pp. 22-64.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein. “Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 2008, pp. 177-218.

Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath. “Migration with Endogenous Moving
        Costs.” American Economic Review, 86(4), 1996, pp. 909-30.

Collins, William J. “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black Migration.”
         Journal of Economic History, 57(3), Sept., 1997, pp. 607-632.

Crowder, Kyle. “The Racial Context of White Mobility: An Individual-Level Assessment of the White
      Flight Hypothesis.” Social Science Research, 29, pp. 223-57.

Cullen, Julie Berry and Steven D. Levitt. “Crime, Urban Flight, and the Consequences for Cities.” Review
        of Economics and Statistics, 81(2), 1999, pp. 159-169.




                                                                                                      25
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                     April 2009


Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser and Jacob Vigdor. “The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto.”
        Journal of Political Economy. 107(3), 1999, pp. 455-506.

Doms, Mark and Ethan Lewis. “Labor Supply and Personal Computer Adoption.” Federal Reserve Bank
      of Philadelphia, Working Paper 06-10, June 2006.

Dye, Thomas R. “Urban Political Integration: Conditions Associated with Annexation In American
       Cities.” Midwest Journal of Political Science. 8(4), 1964, pp. 430-446.

Ellen, Ingrid Gould. Sharing America’s Neighborhoods: The Prospects for Stable Racial Integration.
         Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000.

Emerson, Michael O., Karen J. Chai and George Yancey. “Does Race Matter in Residential Segregation?
      Exploring the Preferences of White Americans.” American Sociological Review, 66(6), 2001, pp.
      922-935.

Fishback, Price, William Horrace and Shawn Kantor. “The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility
       During the Great Depression.” Explorations in Economic History, 43(2), 2006, pp. 179-222.

Fligstein, Neil. Going North: Migration of Blacks and Whites from the South, 1900-1950. New York:
         Academic Press, 1981.

Frey, William H. “Central City White Flight: Racial and Nonracial Causes.” American Sociological
       Review. 44(3), 1979, pp. 425-448.

Gabriel, Stuart A., Janice Shack-Marquez and William L. Wascher. “Regional House-Price Dispersion
        and Interregional Migration.” Journal of Housing Economics, 2, 1992, pp. 235-256.

Gamm, Gerald H. Urban Exodus: Why the Jews Left Boston and the Catholics Stayed. Cambridge:
      Harvard University Press, 1999.

Gardner, John and William Cohen. County Level Demographic Characteristics of the Population of the
       United States: 1930-1950 [computer file]. Compiled by University of Chicago Center for Urban
       Studies. ICPSR ed, Study no. 0020, 1971.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko. “Urban Decline and Durable Housing.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 113(2), 2005, pp. 345-375.

Gottlieb, Peter. Making Their Own Way: Southern Blacks’ Migration to Pittsburgh: 1916-30. Urbana:
        University of Illinois Press, 1987.

Great Plains Research Project, Population and Environment in the U.S. Great Plains (web site), Inter-
        University Consortium for Political and Social Research, September 2005,
        <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/PLAINS/>.

Grossman, James R. Land of Hope: Chicago, Black Southerners, and the Great Migration. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Grove, Wayne A. and Craig Heinicke, “Better Opportunities or Worse? The Demise of Cotton Harvest
       Labor, 1949-1964.” Journal of Economic History, 63(3), 2003, pp. 736-767.



                                                                                                        26
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                      April 2009


Grove, Wayne A. and Craig Heinicke, “Labor Markets, Regional Diversity, and Cotton Harvest
       Mechanization in the Post-World War II United States,” Social Science History, 29(2), 2005, pp.
       269-297.

Grubb, W. Norton. “The Flight to the Suburbs of Population and Employment, 1960-1970.” Journal of
       Urban Economics, 11, 1982, pp. 348-367.

Guterbock, Thomas M. “The Push Hypothesis: Minority Presence, Crime, and Urban Deconcentration.”
       The Changing Face of the Suburbs, ed. Barry Schwartz. Chicago: The University of Chicago
       Press, 1976, pp. 137-161.

Jackson, Kenneth T. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. New York: Oxford
       University Press, 1985.

Kopecky, Karen and Ming Hong Suen. “A Quantitative Analysis of Suburbanization and the Diffusion of
      the Automobile.” Manuscript, 2007.

LeRoy, Stephen and John Sonstelie. “Paradise Lost and Regained: Transportation Innovation, Income and
       Residential Location.” Journal of Urban Economics, 13, 1983, pp. 67-89.

Lewis, Ethan. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique.” Federal Reserve Bank of
        Philadelphia, Working Paper 05-08, May 2005.

Margo, Robert A. “Explaining the Postwar Suburbanization of Population in the United States: The Role
       of Income.” Journal of Urban Economics, 31(.), 1992, pp. 301-310.

Marshall, Harvey. “White Movement to the Suburbs: A Comparison of Explanations.” American
       Sociological Review. 44(6), 1979, pp. 975-994.

Meyer, Stephen Grant. As Long As They Don’t Move Next Door: Segregation and Racial Conflict in
       American Neighborhoods. New York: Rowman and Littlefield, Inc, 2000.

Mills, Edwin S. and Richard Price. “Metropolitan Suburbanization and Central City Problems.” Journal
        of Urban Economics. 15(.), 1984, pp. 1-17.

Munshi, Kaivan. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the US Labor Market.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, p. 549-599.

National Agricultural Statistical Service, Historical Data (website), U.S. Department of Agriculture,
       Sept., 15, 2005, <http://www.usda.gov/nass/pubs/histdata.htm>.

Saiz, Albert. “Immigration and Housing Rents in American Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics. 61,
        2007, pp. 345-371.

Steinnes, Donald N. “Causality and Intraurban Location.” Journal of Urban Economics. 4(1), 1977, pp.
        69-79.

Thurston, Lawrence and Anthony M. J. Yezer. “Causality in the Suburbanization of Population and
       Employment.” Journal of Urban Economics. 35, 1994, pp. 105-118.




                                                                                                        27
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                    April 2009


U.S. Bureau of the Census. 16th Censuses of the United States: 1940, Internal Migration, 1935-40.
       Washington: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 18th and 19th Censuses of the United States: 1960, and 1970,
       Geographic Mobility for Metropolitan Areas. Washington: Government Printing Office.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. County and City Data Book, Consolidated File: City/County Data, 1947-
       1977. ICPSR Study No. 7735-7736.

Whatley, Warren. “Labor for the Picking: The New Deal in the South.” Journal of Economic History,
       43(4), 1983, pp. 905-929.

Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the Civil War. New
        York: Basic Books, 1986




                                                                                                    28
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                                    April 2009




                                      Figure 1: Change in black and white population in central city, 1950-60


                                                                             150000



                                                                             100000



                                                                              50000
       Change in white population




                                                                                  0
                                    -50000   -40000   -30000   -20000    -10000        0   10000     20000   30000   40000   50000


                                                                              -50000



                                                                             -100000



                                                                             -150000



                                                                             -200000
                                                                        Change in black population


                       Notes: Each point in the scatter diagram represents the residual change in a city’s black and white
                       population after controlling for region fixed effects and changes in the metropolitan area’s population over
                       the decade. The slope of a regression line through these points is -2.010 (s.e. = 0.291). While the four
                       largest cities – Chicago, IL; Detroit, MI; Los Angeles, CA; and New York City, NY – are omitted for
                       reasons of scale, they fall close to the regression line. With these cities included, the slope is -2.465 (s.e. =
                       0.132).




                                                                                                                                      29
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                               April 2009


                       Figure 2: Top destinations of northern black migrants
                              from Alabama and Mississippi, 1935-40


                                                   Alabama    Mississippi

   0.1

  0.09

  0.08

  0.07

  0.06

  0.05

  0.04

  0.03

  0.02

  0.01

     0
         Chicago, IL   St. Louis,   Detroit, MI      Los      Cleveland,    New York,   Pittsburgh,    Other
                          MO                      Angeles, CA    OH           NY             PA       northern
                                                                                                       cities

   Notes: Data on migration flows are calculated from aggregate mobility tables from the 1940 Census (US
   Bureau of Census, Internal Migration, 1935-40).




                                                                                                                 30
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                                                                 April 2009


      Figure 3: First stage, Predicted versus actual change in black population, 1950-60



                                                                                50000


                                                                                40000
      Actual change in black population to central city




                                                                   Baltimore, MD 30000


                                                                                20000

                                                                                                                   St. Louis, MO
                                                                                10000


                                                                                    0
                                                          -10000   -5000                 0            5000              10000              15000
                                                                                -10000


                                                                                -20000


                                                                                -30000


                                                                                -40000


                                                                                -50000

                                                                      Predicted change in black population to central city


                                           Notes: The sample includes the 53 SMSAs with available mobility counts by race in 1940 (without the four
                                           largest cities for reasons of scale). The predicted change in black population is calculated by assigning
                                           predicted migration flows from southern states to northern cities using 1935-40 settlement patterns. See
                                           Section III.B. for a detailed description of the instrument’s construction. The slope of a regression line
                                           through these points is 3.187 (s.e. = 0.419).




                                                                                                                                                   31
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                            April 2009




     Table 1: Determinants of net black migration rates by southern county, 1940-1970

                                              1940-50                     1950-60                    1960-70
Share land planted in cotton                  -63.575                      -9.695                    -49.886
                                              (13.519)                     (7.064)                   (19.863)

Share farmers as tenants                      -73.290                     -22.836                     -76.232
                                              (31.404)                    (15.778)                    (46.834)

Share agriculture                              96.909                    -144.440                    159.350
                                              (27.776)                   (100.353)                   (47.875)

=1 if tobacco state                            20.390                     -60.438                     45.501
                                              (26.614)                    (58.781)                   (20.783)

Sh agriculture · (=1 tobacco)                -119.379                     185.865                    -230.003
                                              (49.753)                   (169.730)                    (81.407)

Share mining                                   16.750                     -63.233                      59.030
                                              (82.892)                    (36.631)                    (73.275)

=1 if oil state                                58.331                      8.919                      21.538
                                              (11.040)                    (7.680)                    (12.750)

Share mining · (=1 if oil state)              146.970                    267.268                     -126.308
                                              (182.76)                   (78.670)                    (98.638)

$ in defense pc, 1940-45                      19.806                       2.151                       2.720
                                              (7.042)                     (4.077)                     (8.566)

Constant                                       16.377                     40.695                      -2.801
                                              (14.330)                   (33.557)                    (11.489)

N                                               1378                       1352                        1350
Notes: See Data Appendix for source details. Appendix Table 1 contains summary statistics. The dependent variable
for each regression is the net black migration rate by southern county.




                                                                                                              32
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                              April 2009


                                             Table 2:
                     Black migration to central cities and white population loss

 Dependent variable:                              Actual black                  White population in city
                                                population in city

 Instrument type                                     First stage                OLS                      IV
 Assign actual migrants                                4.442                   -2.099                  -2.365
                                                      (0.652)                  (0.549)                 (0.805)

 Assign predicted migrants, 1940-70                     3.466                  -2.099                  -2.627
                                                       (0.671)                 (0.549)                 (0.782)

 Assign predicted migrants, 1950-70                     4.488                  -2.278                  -2.983
                                                       (0.968)                 (0.604)                 (0.768)

 Predict with 1940 variables, 1950-70                   4.365                  -2.278                  -3.085
                                                       (0.799)                 (0.604)                 (0.708)

 Long-run changes, 1940-2000                            6.800                  -0.771                  -1.050
                                                       (0.421)                 (0.166)                 (0.199)

 Long-run changes, White foreign-                        ---                    0.264                  0.169
 born population in the city                                                   (0.066)                (0.078)
 Notes: Standard errors are clustered by SMSA and reported in parentheses. Standard errors are bootstrapped when
 using the generated instrument (rows 2-6). The sample includes 53 SMSAs with published 1935-40 mobility counts
 by race from 1940-1970 (N = 212) or 1950-1970 (N = 159). The instrument in the first row assigns actual migration
 flows out of southern states to northern cities according to the 1935-40 settlement patterns. The instrument in the
 second through sixth rows assign predicted migration flows. Section III.B. contains a detailed description of the
 instrument’s construction. The fourth row uses county characteristics from 1940 to predict out-migration in the
 1950s and 1960s. The fifth (sixth) row estimates the relationship between the change in white (foreign-born white)
 and black populations in the central city from 1940 to 2000.




                                                                                                                 33
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                            April 2009


                                         Table 3:
    Black households, white households and the number of housing units in central cities

                            Coefficient on # of black households (in 1,000s)
Dependent variables                  Full sample         Low growth metro                 High growth metro
1. # white households                 -1602.495              -1715.816                        -1790.906
                                       (178.513)              (271.964)                        (433.305)

2. White household size                  -0.003                     -0.0009                     -0.004
                                        (0.0007)                    (0.0006)                    (0.001)
                                     (448 residents)             (164 residents)            (475 residents)

3. # housing units                       -559.562                   -202.652                    -747.981
                                         (211.192)                  (237.212)                   (414.455)

4. # of vacant units                      46.192                     513.163                     47.328
                                         (168.318)                   (61.391)                   (24.982)

N                                           280                        140                         140
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by SMSA and are reported in parentheses. The number of black and white
households and the number of housing units are from the Census of Housing for relevant years. The second and third
columns split the sample by the metropolitan area growth rate from 1940 to 1970 (median = 58 percent). In the
second row, household size is translated into the number of white residents lost using the average number of white
households (149,400, 182,200 and 118,750 in the three columns respectively).




                                                                                                               34
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                              April 2009


                                         Table 4:
    Black population share and the value of owner-occupied housing in the city, 1950-70


                                                   OLS                     IV            Low             High
                                                                                        growth          growth
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
Black population share in city           -0.610          -0.470         -0.689          -0.618           0.030
                                         (0.227)         (0.194)        (0.108)         (0.266)         (0.295)

Housing controls                           N               Y               Y               Y                  Y
N                                         159             159             159              99                102
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by SMSA and are reported in parentheses. Housing quality controls include the
median number of rooms, the share of housing units that are in detached, single-family buildings and the share of
housing units that were built in the previous ten years. The fourth and fifth columns split the sample by the
metropolitan area growth rate from 1940 to 1970 (median = 58 percent).




                                                                                                                   35
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                              April 2009




                                        Appendix Table 1:
                     Summary statistics for 1940-1960, 1350 southern counties

                                         Mean                Std. Dev.               Min                 Max
Net black migration rate                 1.811               147.253                 -100                4400

Share land in cotton                     0.329                 0.397                   0                     1

Share farmers as tenant                  0.312                 0.195                   0                0.942

Share LF in agriculture                  0.335                 0.183                0.001               0.885

Share LF in mining                       0.028                 0.074                   0                0.818

$ defense pc, 1940-45                    0.162                 0.599                   0                9.025
Note: See Data Appendix for source details. Spending on defense contracts in current dollars.




                                                                                                                 36
Leah Platt Boustan                                                                               April 2009


                                     Appendix Table 2:
            Summary statistics for 1940-1970, 70 non-southern metropolitan areas

                                                      Mean                         Standard Deviation
    Population
    Whites in city                                   457,107                              919,030

    ∆ whites in city                                 -16,158                              100,509

    Blacks in city                                   70,877                               182,963

    ∆ blacks in city                                 28,209                               68,553

    Share black                                       0.092                                0.093

    Total in SMSA                                   1,289,456                            3,238,178

    Instrument
    Predicted black population                       48,834                               102,440

    Predicted ∆ black                                 5,703                               12,687

    Households
    Whites in city                                   149,491                              295,826

    ∆ whites in city                                 10,232                               34,177

     Blacks in city                                  20,552                               54,172

    ∆ blacks in city                                  8,440                               22,097

    Vacant units                                      7,724                               16,429
    Notes: Statistics are presented for the 70 SMSAs in the North or West that were either (1) anchored by one
    of the l00 largest cities in 1940 or (2) that had at least 250,000 residents by 1970. The white and black
    population are calculated for counterfactual city borders. The borders are created by reassigning residents
    who would have lived in the suburbs if not for annexation back to the suburbs, under the assumption that
    the population living in the annexed area had the same white share as the suburban area as a whole.




                                                                                                                  37
