                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DO TAX CUTS STARVE THE BEAST?
             THE EFFECT OF TAX CHANGES ON GOVERNMENT SPENDING

                                         Christina D. Romer
                                          David H. Romer

                                        Working Paper 13548
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13548


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We are grateful to Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, and Barry Eichengreen for helpful comments and suggestions,
and to the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Tax Cuts Starve the Beast? The Effect of Tax Changes on Government Spending
Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 13548
October 2007
JEL No. E62,H50,H60,N12

                                           ABSTRACT

The hypothesis that decreases in taxes reduce future government spending is often cited as a reason
for cutting taxes. However, because taxes change for many reasons, examinations of the relationship
between overall measures of taxation and subsequent spending are plagued by problems of reverse
causation and omitted variable bias. To deal with these problems, this paper examines the behavior
of government expenditures following legislated tax changes that narrative sources suggest are largely
uncorrelated with other factors affecting spending. The results provide no support for the hypothesis
that tax cuts restrain government spending; indeed, they suggest that tax cuts may actually increase
spending. The results also indicate that the main effect of tax cuts on the government budget is to
induce subsequent legislated tax increases. Examination of four episodes of major tax cuts reinforces
these conclusions.


Christina D. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
cromer@econ.berkeley.edu

David H. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dromer@econ.berkeley.edu
        In a speech urging passage of the 1981 tax cuts, Ronald Reagan made the following argument:

                Over the past decades we’ve talked of curtailing government spending so that we
        can then lower the tax burden. Sometimes we’ve even taken a run at doing that. But
        there were always those who told us that taxes couldn’t be cut until spending was
        reduced. Well, you know, we can lecture our children about extravagance until we run
        out of voice and breath. Or we can cure their extravagance by simply reducing their
        allowance (Address to the Nation on the Economy, 2/5/81, p. 2).1

This idea that cutting taxes will lead to a reduction in government spending has become a staple of

conservative economic orthodoxy. Distinguished economists from Milton Friedman to Robert Barro have

argued that the most effective way to shrink the size of government is to “starve the beast” by reducing

tax revenues (see, for example, Friedman, 1967; Barro, 2003; and Becker, Lazear, and Murphy, 2003).

        Of course, this is not the only view of the effects of tax cuts. Another possibility is that

government spending is determined with little or no regard to taxes, and thus does not respond to tax cuts.

A third possibility is that tax cuts actually lead to increases in expenditure. One way this could occur is

through the “fiscal illusion” effect proposed by Buchanan and Wagner (1977) and Niskanen (1978): a tax

cut without an associated spending cut weakens the link in voters’ minds between spending and taxes, and

so leads them to demand greater spending.               Another possible mechanism is “shared fiscal

irresponsibility”: if supporters of tax reduction are acting without concern for the deficit, supporters of

higher spending may do the same.

        The question of how tax cuts affect government spending would seem to be one that should be

investigated empirically, not answered as a tenet of political faith. And, indeed, there have been attempts

to look at the aggregate relationship between revenues and spending. However, such examinations of

correlations are of limited value in determining the effect of revenues on spending. Revenues change for

a variety of reasons. Many changes are legislated, but many others occur automatically in response to

changes in the economy. And legislated tax changes themselves are motivated by numerous factors.

1
 Presidential speeches are from the database of presidential documents available from John Woolley and Gerhard
Peters, The American Presidency Project (www.presidency.ucsb.edu).
                                                                                                         2


Some, such as many increases in payroll taxes, are driven by increases in current or planned spending.

Others, such as tax cuts motivated by a belief in the importance of incentives, are designed to raise long-

run growth.

        The relationship between revenues and spending is surely not independent of the causes of

changes in revenues. For example, if spending-driven tax changes are common, a regression of spending

on revenues will almost certainly show a positive correlation. But this relationship does not show that tax

changes cause spending changes; causation, in fact, runs in the opposite direction. To give another

example, if automatic and legislated countercyclical tax changes are common, one might expect to see

government expenditures rising after declines in revenue, because spending on unemployment insurance

and other relief measures typically rises in bad economic times. In this case, both revenues and spending

are being driven by an omitted variable: the state of the economy. These examples suggest that looking

at the aggregate relationship between revenues and spending without accounting for the causes of revenue

changes may lead to biased estimates of the effect of revenue changes on spending.

        This paper therefore proposes a test of the starve the beast hypothesis that accounts for the

motivations for tax changes. In previous work (Romer and Romer, 2007a), we identified all significant

legislated tax changes in the United States since 1945. We then used the narrative record – presidential

speeches, executive branch documents, Congressional reports, and records of Congressional debates – to

identify the key motivation and the expected revenue effects of each action. In this paper, we use our

classification of motivation to isolate tax changes that can legitimately be used to examine the effect of

revenue changes on spending from those that are likely to give biased estimates. In particular, we focus

on the behavior of spending following tax changes taken for long-run purposes. These are changes in

taxes that are explicitly not tied to current spending changes or the current state of the economy. They

are, instead, taken to promote various long-run objectives, such as spurring productivity growth,

improving efficiency, or, as in the case of the Reagan tax cut discussed above, shrinking the size of

government. Examining the behavior of government spending following these long-run tax changes

should provide the fairest and least biased test of the starve the beast hypothesis.
                                                                                                           3


        Our key empirical test involves regressing the percentage change in real federal government

expenditures on the contemporaneous and lagged values of our measure of long-run tax changes. The

results are striking. We find no support for the hypothesis that a relatively exogenous decline in taxes

lowers government spending over the next five years. In our baseline specification, the estimates in fact

suggest a substantial and marginally significant positive impact of tax cuts on government spending. The

finding of a lack of support for the starve the beast hypothesis is highly robust.

        The result that spending does not fall in response to tax cuts raises an obvious question: How

does the government budget eventually balance? One possibility is that what gives in response to a tax

cut is not spending but the tax cut itself. To investigate this possibility, we examine the response of both

tax revenues and tax legislation to long-run tax cuts. We find that revenues fall in response to a long-run

tax cut in the short run, but then recover after about two years. Most of this recovery is due to the fact

that a large part of a long-run tax cut is typically counteracted by legislated tax increases within the next

several years.

        While there are numerous long-run tax changes spread fairly uniformly over the postwar era, four

stand out as the largest and most well known: the tax cut passed over Harry Truman’s veto in the

Revenue Act of 1948; the Kennedy-Johnson tax cut legislated in the Revenue Act of 1964; the Reagan tax

cut contained in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981; and the Bush tax cuts passed (along with some

countercyclical actions) in 2001 and 2003. As a check on our analysis, we examine these four episodes in

detail. We find that the behavior of spending and taxes in these extreme episodes is consistent with the

aggregate regressions. Perhaps more importantly, we find that policymakers often did not even talk as if

their spending decisions were influenced by revenue developments. They did, however, often invoke the

tax cuts as a motivation for later tax increases. Finally, we find there were concurrent developments,

namely wars, that account for some of the rise in spending in these episodes. But, there were other

concurrent developments that led to unusually low spending changes or that caused measured spending

changes to understate the effects of spending decisions that were taken in these episodes. As a result, it is

unlikely that failure of total expenditures to fall after these tax cuts was due to chance or unobserved
                                                                                                                 4


factors.

           As mentioned above, ours is not the first study to investigate the starve the beast hypothesis. But,

despite the importance of the hypothesis in motivating changes in fiscal policy in recent decades,

relatively little work has attempted to evaluate it. The most common approach is some variation of a

regression of spending on lagged revenues; examples include Anderson, Wallace, and Warner (1986) and

Ram (1988). Two more sophisticated versions of this methodology are pursued by Bohn (1991) and

Auerbach (2000, 2003). Bohn, focusing on a long sample period that is dominated by wartime budgetary

changes, examines the interrelationships between revenues and spending in a vector autoregression

framework that allows for cointegration between the two variables (see also von Furstenberg, Green, and

Jeong, 1986, and Miller and Russek, 1990).             Auerbach, focusing on recent decades, studies the

relationship between policy-driven changes in spending (rather than all changes in spending) and past

deficits or projections of what future deficits would be if policy did not change (see also, Calomiris and

Hassett, 2002).2

           The results of these studies are mixed, but for the most part they suggest that tax cuts are

followed by reductions in spending. None of these studies, however, consider the different reasons for

changes in revenues, and thus none isolate the impact of independent tax changes on future spending.

Indeed, our results point to a potentially important source of bias in studies using aggregate data. We find

that the only type of legislated tax changes that are systematically followed by spending movements in the

same direction are ones motivated by decisions to change spending. Since causation in these cases clearly

does not run from the tax changes to the spending changes, this relationship is not informative about the

starve the beast hypothesis. We also find that this type of tax change is sufficiently common to make the

overall relationship between tax changes and subsequent spending changes substantially positive.3


2
  In contrast to these studies, which focus on federal budget data, Holtz-Eakin, Newey, and Rosen (1989) estimate
the temporal correlation between taxes and spending at the municipal level.
3
  One can also test the starve the beast hypothesis indirectly. Perhaps the best known study of this type is Becker
and Mulligan (2003). They show that under appropriate assumptions, the same forces that would give rise to a
starve the beast effect would cause a reduction in the efficiency of the tax system to reduce government spending.
They therefore examine the cross-country relationship between the efficiency of the tax system and the share of
                                                                                                                 5


        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the different motivations for tax

changes, and identifies the tax actions best suited for testing the starve the beast hypothesis. Section II

analyzes the relationship between tax changes and government expenditures, and includes a plethora of

robustness checks.     Section III examines how changes in taxes affect future tax revenues and tax

legislation. Section IV discusses spending and taxes in four key episodes. Section V presents our

conclusions.




I. THE MOTIVATIONS FOR LEGISLATED TAX CHANGES AND TESTS OF THE STARVE
   THE BEAST HYPOTHESIS



        Legislated tax changes classified by motivation are a key input into our tests of the starve the

beast hypothesis. Therefore, it is important to describe our classification of motivation, and to discuss

which types of tax changes are likely to yield relatively unbiased estimates of the effects of tax changes

on government spending. It is also useful to provide a brief overview of our identification of the

motivations for tax changes, and of our findings about the patterns of legislated tax changes in the

postwar era.



A. Classification of Motivation

        Our classification and identification of the motivations for postwar legislated tax changes are

described in detail in Romer and Romer (2007a). That paper shows that the motivations for almost all tax

changes have fallen into four broad categories.

        One type of tax changes are those motivated by countercyclical considerations. These are


government spending in GDP. While they find a strong positive relationship, the correlation between efficiency and
spending, like that between taxes and spending, may reflect reverse causation or omitted variables. That is,
countries may invest in efficient tax systems because they desire high government spending, or a third factor, such
as tolerance of intrusive government or less emphasis on individualism, may lead both to a broader, more
comprehensive tax system and to higher government spending.
                                                                                                         6


changes made because policymakers believe that growth will be above or below normal, and therefore

change taxes to try to keep growth at its normal, sustainable level.        A classic example of such a

countercyclical action is the 1975 tax cut. Taxes were reduced because the economy was in a severe

recession and growth was predicted to remain substantially below normal. Countercyclical actions can be

either tax cuts or tax increases, depending on whether they are designed to counteract unusually low or

unusually high expected growth.

        A second type of tax changes are ones motivated by contemporaneous changes in spending.

Often, policymakers will introduce a new program or social benefit, and raise taxes to pay for it. This

was true, for example, in the late 1950s when the interstate highway system was started, and in the mid-

1960s when Medicare was introduced. The key feature of these changes is that the spending changes are

the impetus for the tax changes. Typically such changes are tax increases, but spending-driven tax cuts

are not unheard of.

        A third type of tax changes are those made to reduce an inherited budget deficit. By definition,

these changes are all increases. A classic example of this type of change is the 1993 Clinton tax increase.

This increase was undertaken not to finance a contemporaneous rise in spending, but to reduce a

persistent deficit caused by past developments.

        The fourth type of tax changes are ones intended to raise long-run growth. This is a broad

category designed to capture changes not made to keep or return growth to normal, and that are not

explicitly for deficit reduction. It includes tax changes motivated by a range of factors. The most

common motivation is a belief that lower marginal tax rates will improve incentives, and thereby raise

long-run growth. Another common motivation is a belief in small government and a desire to return the

people’s money to them. Many of the most famous tax cuts, such as the 1964 Kennedy-Johnson tax cut

and the Reagan tax cuts of the early 1980s, fall under the heading of tax changes to raise long-run growth.

Most long-run tax changes are cuts. But, there have been a few tax reforms that increased revenues and

that were designed to improve efficiency, and so fall into this category.
                                                                                                            7


B. Which Tax Changes Are Useful for Testing the Starve the Beast Hypothesis?

        This description of the different motivations for legislated tax changes makes it clear that some

changes are much more appropriate for testing the starve the beast hypothesis than others.              Most

obviously, spending-driven changes are clearly not valid observations in this context. Causation in these

episodes runs from desired changes in spending to changes in taxes. If we have classified these tax

changes correctly, there will be a positive correlation between these changes and spending changes by

construction.   These observations, however, provide no information on whether tax changes cause

policymakers to alter their subsequent spending decisions. Including spending-driven tax changes in a

regression would bias the results toward finding a positive effect of tax changes on government spending.

        Examining countercyclical and deficit-driven tax changes, on the other hand, might bias the

results against the starve the beast hypothesis. In both cases, there may be spending changes that are

negatively correlated with the tax changes but that are not caused by them. Rather, both the tax and

spending changes may be caused by a third factor.

        In the case of countercyclical actions, the third factor is the state of the economy. In bad times,

policymakers may cut taxes and increase spending as a way of raising aggregate demand. Also, some

types of spending, such as unemployment compensation and public assistance, increase automatically in

recessions. Thus, the relationship between taxes and spending in these episodes may reflect discretionary

and automatic responses to the state of the economy, not a behavioral link between tax revenues and

spending decisions.

        In the case of deficit-driven tax increases, the unobserved third factor is a general switch to fiscal

responsibility. Tax increases to reduce inherited budget deficits are often passed as parts of packages that

include spending reductions. The spending reductions are not caused by the tax increases; rather, both are

driven by a desire to eliminate the deficit. Inclusion of such budget packages in a regression will tend to

bias the results away from supporting the starve the beast hypothesis. This concern may be more

important in theory than in reality, however. Our narrative analysis of tax changes documents the

spending reductions agreed to in conjunction with deficit-driven tax changes. In almost every case, the
                                                                                                           8


spending cuts were small relative to the tax increase. Therefore, while one may want to treat the behavior

of spending following deficit-driven tax changes with caution, it may in fact yield relatively unbiased

estimates.

        The tax changes that are surely the most appropriate for testing the starve the beast hypothesis are

those taken to spur long-run growth. As described above, these are tax changes not made in response to

current macroeconomic conditions or in conjunction with spending changes. As a result, they are exactly

the kind of changes that proponents of the starve the beast hypothesis believe are likely to alter

government spending. Indeed, this category includes the tax cuts for which the induced reduction in

future spending is sometimes cited as motivation.

        To the degree that focusing on these observations may lead to bias, it is likely to be in the

direction of finding a positive correlation between taxes and spending. The very fact that proponents of

these tax cuts sometimes cite reducing the size of government as a motivation implies that there is a

potential correlation between spending and tax changes in these episodes driven by a third factor: belief

in limited government. Because this possible omitted variable bias works in the direction of supporting

the starve the beast hypothesis, using these observations gives the hypothesis the best reasonable chance

of success. At the same time, our narrative analysis suggests that this potential bias is likely to be small.

The desire for smaller government is rarely the primary stated motivation for long-run tax changes; a

desire to reap the efficiency gains of lower marginal tax rates is considerably more common, for example.



C. Overview of the Narrative Analysis

        The implementation and results of our narrative analysis of postwar tax changes are described in

Romer and Romer (2007a). We use a detailed examination of a wide range of policy documents, such as

presidential speeches, the Economic Reports of the President, and the reports of the House Ways and

Means Committee, to identify all significant legislated tax changes in the postwar era. We then identify

the motivations policymakers gave for each action. We find that policymakers are usually both quite

explicit and remarkably unanimous in their stated reasons for undertaking tax actions. Only infrequently
                                                                                                                  9


do they emphasize multiple motivations. In these cases, we divide the tax changes into pieces reflecting

the different motivations.

        We also use the narrative sources to estimate the revenue impacts of the actions. Specifically, we

determine how policymakers expected the actions to affect tax liabilities. Very often, tax bills change

taxes in a number of steps. In these cases, our baseline revenue estimates show changes in each of the

quarters the various provisions took effect.4 To make the revenue estimates comparable over time, we

express them as a percent of nominal GDP.5

        An obvious alternative to dating tax changes in each quarter that liabilities changed is to date all

tax changes associated with a given bill in the quarter that the law was passed. This alternative involves

calculating the present value of tax changes scheduled to occur at specific dates in the future. We

consider the effects of this alternative dating in a robustness check.

        Figure 1 shows our measure of legislated postwar tax changes classified by motivation. Long-run

changes, which are the key actions for our purposes, are shown in blue. The graph makes clear that the

vast majority of long-run tax actions are cuts. Only a few, such as those legislated in the Tax Reform Act

of 1986, are increases. The graph also makes clear that long-run tax changes have been fairly evenly

distributed over the postwar era. The largest long-run tax changes were the tax cuts in the late 1940s, the

mid-1960s, the early 1980s, and the early 2000s.

        Deficit-driven tax changes are shown in red in Figure 1. While there were a number of small

deficit-driven increases in the first half of the postwar era, the vast majority of these changes took place in

the 1980s and early 1990s. Spending-driven changes are shown in green. Tax changes explicitly tied to


4
  Tax actions are often retroactive for a quarter or two. When a change is retroactive in this way, it has a much
larger effect on liabilities in the initial quarter than in subsequent ones. In differences, this results in a large
movement in one direction in the initial quarter and a partially offsetting movement in the next quarter. For this
study, which examines the longer-run responses of spending and future taxes, the short-run volatility caused by
these changes may unnecessarily complicate the analysis. We therefore use the revenue estimates ignoring the
retroactive changes as our baseline estimates. Using the estimates including the retroactive changes has almost no
impact on any of the results.
5
  The nominal GDP data are from NIPA Table 1.1.5, www.bea.gov, downloaded 8/8/07. Quarterly nominal GDP
data are only available after 1947. We therefore normalize the one tax change in 1946 using the annual NIPA
figure.
                                                                                                        10


spending changes are typically tax increases, and were both frequent and relatively large in the first half

of the postwar era. Finally, countercyclical tax changes, which are shown in yellow, are typically large.

Until being resurrected by George W. Bush in 2001 and 2002, such explicitly countercyclical changes

were confined to the fairly short period 1965-1975.




II. THE EFFECTS OF TAX CHANGES ON EXPENDITURES



        The previous section describes our identification of legislated tax changes motivated by concern

about long-run growth. This section investigates the relationship between these relatively exogenous tax

changes and subsequent changes in government spending. It includes a detailed analysis of the robustness

of the results. We also investigate the behavior of spending following other types of tax changes to see if

there is evidence of bias when these tax measures are used.



A. Specification and Data

        To estimate the effects of tax changes on government spending, for the most part we employ

simple regressions using quarterly data of the form:

                                                       N
(1)                                   ∆ln Et = a + Σ bi ∆Tt-i + et,
                                                       i=0

where E is real government expenditure and ∆T is our measure of long-run tax changes (expressed as a

percent of nominal GDP).

        The key feature of our measure of long-run tax changes is that it is based on actions motivated by

considerations unrelated to current spending, current macroeconomic conditions, or an inherited budget

deficit. Our discussion of why such long-run changes provide the best test of the starve the beast

hypothesis suggests that they are unlikely to be systematically correlated with other factors affecting
                                                                                                          11


spending. It is for this reason that our baseline specification includes no control variables. However, it is

certainly possible that there are correlations in small samples. In our robustness checks, we therefore

consider a variety of alternative specifications.

         We include a number of lags of the tax variable to allow for the possibility that the response of

spending to tax changes may be quite delayed or gradual. In our baseline specification we set N to 20,

and so look at the response of spending over a five-year horizon. Because the starve the beast hypothesis

does not make predictions about the exact timing of how spending responds to tax changes, we focus on

the cumulative effect of a tax change on expenditures at various horizons. We summarize the regression

results by reporting the implied impact of a tax cut of one percent of GDP on the path of expenditures (in

logarithms). For our baseline specification, the cumulative impact after n quarters is just minus the sum

of the coefficients on the contemporaneous value and first n lags of the tax variable. The starve the beast

hypothesis predicts that tax cuts reduce spending. Therefore, the estimated cumulative impact of a tax cut

on expenditures should be negative if the hypothesis is correct.

        We use quarterly data on government expenditures from the National Income and Product

accounts. Our series on long-run tax changes refers only to federal legislation. Therefore, we consider

only the behavior of federal expenditures.

        What the Bureau of Economic Analysis calls “total expenditures” includes two components that

are not appropriate in thinking about the response of spending to tax changes. One is a deduction for the

consumption of fixed capital (that is, depreciation). This clearly cannot be affected by current spending

decisions, and so could not possibly show a starve the beast type of response. Thus, for a fair test of the

hypothesis we do not subtract depreciation. The other component is interest payments on government

debt. For a given interest rate, interest payments rise with the amount of debt. As a result, any tax cut

that increases the deficit will almost certainly increase interest payments, even if other types of spending

respond strongly. Again, to provide a fair test of the starve the beast hypothesis, we exclude this type of

spending. The resulting aggregate that we consider is thus total gross expenditures less interest. For
                                                                                                          12


simplicity, we refer to this as total expenditures in what follows.6

        The NIPA expenditure data are expressed in nominal terms. For some components, such as

defense and nondefense purchases, corresponding deflators exist.             However, for some categories,

especially those involving transfers, there are no associated deflators. We therefore deflate total gross

expenditures less interest by the price index for GDP.7

        Our data on tax changes begin in 1945Q1, and the data on expenditures begin in 1947Q1. The

data for both series extend through 2006Q4. Therefore, in the baseline specification, where we include

twenty lags of the tax variable, the longest possible sample is 1950Q1–2006Q4. However, previous work

has found some evidence that the behavior and effects of fiscal policy were unusual in the Korean War

period (see, for example, Blanchard and Perotti, 2002, and Romer and Romer, 2007b). We therefore also

consider the shorter sample 1957Q1–2006Q4.



B. The Effects of Long-Run Tax Changes on Total Expenditures

        Table 1 shows the results of estimating equation (1) for total expenditures using twenty lags of

the long-run tax variable over the full postwar sample. The coefficient estimates for the individual lags

fluctuate between positive and negative. As one would expect, few of the individual coefficients are

statistically significant. The overall fit of the regression is modest (R2 = 0.20).

        Figure 2 summarizes the results by showing the implied response of total expenditures to a long-

run tax cut of one percent of GDP, together with the one-standard-error bands. There is no evidence of a

starve the beast effect. The cumulative effect is negative in the quarter of the tax cut and the subsequent

three quarters, as the starve the beast hypothesis predicts, but very small, and the t-statistics do not rise

above 0.7 in absolute value. After that, the estimated cumulative effect is positive at every horizon except

quarters 9 and 10, suggesting fiscal illusion or shared fiscal irresponsibility.

        The estimated positive impact of the tax cut on spending is often substantial. Since federal

6
  Data on total expenditures, consumption of fixed capital, and interest payments are from NIPA Table 3.2,
downloaded 8/8/07.
7
  The price index for GDP is from NIPA Table 1.1.4, downloaded 8/8/07.
                                                                                                                   13


government spending averages roughly twenty percent of GDP in our sample, a tax cut of one percent of

GDP is equal to about five percent of government spending. The point estimates suggest that a one-

percent tax cut raises spending by four percent or more in quarters 13 through 20. That is, they suggest

that spending eventually rises by almost the amount of the tax cut. However, the standard errors are

substantial. The t-statistics for the cumulative impact of the tax cut on spending at horizons of more than

three years are generally between 1.5 and 2, and exceed 2 for only one horizon (quarter 14, for which the

t-statistic is 2.2).



C. Robustness

         The next step is to examine the robustness of the findings. We consider robustness along several

dimensions. Our most important checks are summarized in Figure 3, which shows the implied response

of total expenditures to a long-run tax cut of one percent of GDP for a number of variants of the baseline

regression.

         Sample Period and Outliers. One obvious concern is the possible importance of the sample

period and outliers. As described above, fiscal policy was very unusual in the Korean War period. Panel

(a) shows that considering the post-Korea sample weakens the evidence for a perverse effect of tax cuts

on spending, but still yields no evidence of a starve the beast effect. The change in the sample makes the

initial negative impact even smaller and more insignificant. The response in quarters 4 through 20 is

always positive, but considerably smaller than for the full sample and not even marginally significant. To

check more generally for the possible influence of outliers, we consider the effects of excluding each of

the four large long-run tax cuts discussed in the case studies.8 In all four cases, the estimated effect of a

tax cut on spending remains mainly positive and is never close to significantly negative at any horizon.

Dropping the 1948 tax cut, however, renders the positive effect of tax cuts on spending small and



8
  To exclude a tax cut, we set our series for long-run tax changes to zero from the first to the last quarter in which
the bill changed taxes. We treat the 2001 and 2003 cuts as a single measure; thus in this case, we set our series to
zero from 2002Q1 to 2005Q1.
                                                                                                                    14


insignificant.9

         Horizon. A second concern is the horizon over which tax changes may affect spending. Perhaps

the main effects of tax changes occur outside the five-year horizon considered in our baseline regression.

To test for this, we extend the baseline regression to include forty lags of the tax variable and estimate it

over the longest feasible sample (1955Q1–2006Q4). Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows that for horizons

beyond five years, the estimated cumulative impact of a tax cut of one percent of GDP on total

expenditures is always small, fluctuates between positive and negative, and is never remotely close to

statistically significant.   Thus, this change provides no evidence that tax cuts reduce government

spending, but also fails to support the hypothesis that they increase it.

         Richer Dynamics. A third issue concerns our specification for the dynamics of the normal

evolution of spending. Our baseline specification includes only a constant term, implicitly assuming that

other influences on spending growth are not serially correlated. Panels (c) and (d) show the results of two

approaches to providing for richer dynamics. The first approach is simply to add lagged values of the

percentage change in total expenditures to the regression. Since the data on expenditures begin in

1947Q1, we can include eleven lags of the percentage change in expenditures and still retain our baseline

sample of 1950Q1–2006Q4. The response of total expenditures to a tax cut for this specification, shown

in panel (c), now includes both the direct effect of the tax cut and the indirect effect through lagged

expenditure growth.10 We carry these dynamic multipliers out to 24 quarters to see if the indirect effects

are important. We find, however, that the estimated effect is virtually identical to that in the baseline

regression: there is no evidence of a starve the beast effect, and some evidence that tax cuts actually

increase government spending.

         Our second approach to providing for richer spending dynamics is to estimate a vector


9
   A related exercise along these lines is to split the sample in 1980Q4. For the period 1950Q1–1980Q4, the
estimates suggest a large and statistically significant positive effect of tax cuts on spending. For the period 1981Q1–
2006Q4, the estimated effects are again virtually always positive, but consistently small and far from significant.
10
   We compute the standard errors by taking 10,000 draws of the vector of coefficient estimates from a multivariate
normal distribution with mean and variance-covariance matrix given by the point estimates and variance-covariance
matrix of the coefficient estimates, and then finding the standard deviation of the implied responses at each horizon.
                                                                                                                  15


autoregression (VAR) with real expenditures and our series for long-run tax changes. For consistency

with our regressions, we put the tax changes first and expenditures second, so tax changes can affect

spending within the quarter. We enter expenditures in log levels; given the availability of the data, this

allows us to include twelve lags while still using our baseline sample. The estimated response of

spending to an innovation of minus one percentage point to the tax series, shown in panel (d), is similar to

the estimated effect of a long-run tax cut of one percent of GDP in the baseline specification.11 The point

estimates suggest that the tax cut reduces spending in the short run but then raises it, with a fairly large

positive long-run effect. None of the estimated effects are statistically significant. Thus again there is no

support for the starve the beast hypothesis.          Another finding from the VAR is that the estimated

cumulative response of the tax series to an innovation to government spending is very small and highly

insignificant at all horizons. This indicates that the actions we classify as long-run tax changes are indeed

not responses to spending developments.12

        Military Actions. A fourth robustness issue concerns the role of military actions. As discussed

in the case studies, many of the largest long-run tax cuts were followed by wars. Such military actions

could have caused federal spending to rise after tax changes just by chance, and thus may have obscured a

starve the beast effect that is actually present. To test for this possibility, we consider two alternative

specifications of our baseline regression.

        One alternative is to add an indicator of military actions to the specification given in equation (1).

Ramey (2006) suggests an updated list of the exogenous military actions identified by Ramey and Shapiro

(1998) from narrative sources. This list dates the beginning of military actions in 1950Q3 (Korean War),

1965Q1 (Vietnam War), 1980Q1 (Carter-Reagan military build-up in response to the Soviet invasion of

11
   The standard errors are computed in the same way as for the regression that includes lagged expenditure growth
(see n. 10). Note that the experiment considered in panel (d) is slightly different than the experiment of a one-time
tax cut of one percent of GDP with no further changes considered in the other panels and in the other figures. In
response to the innovation to our tax measure in the VAR, the cumulative change in the tax measure itself does not
remain constant at –1 percentage point; instead it rises from –1 percentage point to roughly –1.25 percentage points
after four quarters and then fluctuates around that level.
12
   We have also estimated a VAR with twenty lags for the period 1952Q1–2006Q4. The estimated effects of a tax
cut on spending in this specification are even more consistently positive, and are marginally significant. The
maximum effect is an increase of 3.9 percent after 18 quarters (t = 1.9).
                                                                                                           16


Afghanistan), and 2001Q3 (the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq following the September 11 terrorist

attacks). We expand the baseline regression to include the contemporaneous value and 20 lags of a

dummy variable equal to one in each of these four quarters. This specification shows the effect of tax

cuts on total expenditures, allowing for the possibility that wars have a separate effect on spending.

           The cumulative impact of a tax cut of one percent of GDP in this specification is shown in panel

(e) of Figure 3. The results are remarkably similar to those in the baseline specification. The effects of

tax cuts on total spending controlling for military actions are largely positive. However none of the

effects (positive or negative) are statistically significant. Thus, there is no evidence that accounting for

military actions rescues the starve the beast hypothesis. This is true even though wars do indeed exert a

strong independent upward force on spending: the maximum cumulative impact of a military action on

total expenditures is an increase of 16.5 percent (t = 2.9). The failure of the starve the beast hypothesis in

this alternative specification is equally strong in the post-1957 sample.

           A second alternative specification is to look only at the response of nondefense spending to long-

run tax cuts. In particular, in place of our measure of total federal expenditures in equation (1), we use

the log difference in total expenditures less national defense purchases (both deflated by the price index

for GDP).13 This test will almost surely bias the results in favor of the starve the beast hypothesis, for two

reasons. First, the case studies show that there is some correlation in our sample between supporters of

tax cuts and supporters of shifting spending toward defense. Most notably, Ronald Reagan, who presided

over the largest long-run tax cut in the postwar period, strongly advocated such a reallocation. Focusing

on the subset of spending that advocates of tax cuts favored reducing, and discarding the subset they

favored increasing, biases the results toward finding a starve the beast effect. Second, to the degree that

defense spending rises following tax cuts because of wars, nondefense spending may decline for the same

reason. Wartime tends to naturally lead policymakers to rearrange spending away from other purposes

and toward defense. Therefore, chance correlation between wars and long-run tax cuts could cause the

regression to find a starve the beast effect for nondefense spending when none actually exists.
13
     Data on national defense purchases are from NIPA Table 3.9.5, downloaded 8/8/07.
                                                                                                                 17


        The results of this exercise are shown in panel (f) of Figure 3.14                Remarkably, even this

potentially biased test does not show a significant starve the beast effect. As expected, the point estimates

are now generally negative, consistent with the starve the beast hypothesis, but the t-statistics for the

cumulative impact are almost always below 1.0 (in absolute value) and never greater than 1.4. The

effects are also quite small. Total expenditures less defense account, on average, for about 10 percent of

GDP over the full postwar sample. Therefore, for a tax cut of one percent of GDP to reduce nondefense

spending by the same amount, spending would need to decline by close to 10 percent. For the full

sample, the cumulative effect is generally a fall of less than 4 percent. The effects are even smaller for

the post-Korea sample, where the typical effect is a fall in nondefense spending of less than 2 percent

(and where the t-statistics are now almost all less that 0.5 in absolute value). Thus, this test again

suggests that the failure of the total expenditures to fall following a tax cut is not the result of chance

correlation between tax cuts and wars. Tax cuts do not have a noticeable negative effect on nondefense

spending.

        Political Variables. A fifth robustness issue concerns the role of political variables. It is

certainly possible that the party of the president or the existence of united government has an influence on

government spending. If such variables happen to be correlated with our tax measure, the baseline

regression could suffer from omitted variable bias. For this reason, we try adding a variety of political

variables to our baseline specification. To give one example, panel (g) of Figure 3 shows the effect of a

tax cut on spending when a dummy variable for Democratic administrations is included in the regression.

This regression asks whether tax cuts lower spending, taking into account that Democratic presidents may

consistently spend more or less than their Republican counterparts. Adding this variable weakens the

evidence for fiscal illusion or shared fiscal irresponsibility slightly. The estimated impact of a tax cut on

spending remains generally positive, but is slightly smaller than before and never significant. We also

consider specifications including a dummy variable for whether the presidency and both houses of


14
   This panel is on a different scale than the others in Figure 3 because the dependent variable is now a percent of
total expenditures less defense, rather than a percent of total expenditures.
                                                                                                                18


Congress are controlled by the same party, and including separate dummies for whether it is the first

quarter of a new Republican or a new Democratic administration.15 Neither specification provides any

support for the starve the beast hypothesis.

        Alternative Tax Variable. A sixth concern involves the specification of our tax variable. Our

baseline series dates revenue changes in the quarter that liabilities actually change. An alternative

measure, which emphasizes expectational effects, calculates the present discounted value of all revenue

changes called for by a given piece of legislation, and dates the revenue change in the quarter the law was

passed.16 Panel (h) of Figure 3 shows that the starve the beast hypothesis fares even worse when this

alternative tax measure is used. The estimated impact of a tax cut on spending is consistently in the

opposite direction from the predictions of the starve the beast hypothesis, often quantitatively large, and

sometimes marginally significant.

        Alternative Spending Variables. A final robustness issue involves the appropriate specification

of the spending variable. In all of the specifications discussed so far, we have looked at the response of

the percentage change in real government expenditures to long-run tax changes. The cumulative impact

therefore shows the effect of a tax change on the level of real expenditures relative to normal. We feel

this is the appropriate measure for testing the starve the beast hypothesis: Does a tax cut change the

spending decisions of policymakers? However, an alternative form of the hypothesis could be that a tax

cut leads to a reduction in expenditures as a percent of GDP. In this view, a tax cut could reduce the share

of spending in GDP not by changing policymakers’ spending decisions, but by changing output growth.

        To test this alternative version of the hypothesis, we re-estimate equation (1) using two different

specifications of the dependent variable. The more sensible of the two expresses real total expenditures

as a percent of trend real GDP, where trend real GDP is calculated using a conventional Hodrick-Prescott




15
   For the specification controlling for changes in the party of the president, we include both the contemporaneous
value and sixteen lags of the new Republican and new Democratic dummy variables.
16
   See Romer and Romer (2007b) for a detailed description of how we calculate the present value of revenue
changes.
                                                                                                             19


filter, and then uses the change in this variable as the dependent variable in equation (1).17 Detrending

real GDP is reasonable because, to the extent that a tax cut causes a temporary boom, it will inherently

tend to reduce real expenditures as a percent of actual GDP in the short run. We do not believe that this is

the mechanism proponents of even the alternative form of the starve the beast hypothesis have in mind.

However, as a further robustness check, we also estimate equation (1) using the change in the ratio of

total real expenditures to actual real GDP.

        The results of these two exercises are shown in panels (i) and (j) of Figure 3.18 Panel (i) shows

that the results using the change in spending as a share of trend GDP are very similar to the results using

the percentage change in spending. A tax cut of one percent of GDP for the most part raises the share of

spending in GDP. The estimated maximum effect is large, but only marginally significant. Thus, the

results again fail to support the starve the beast hypothesis, and provide moderate support for the

alternative view of fiscal illusion or shared fiscal irresponsibility.

        Panel (j) shows that a tax cut does not even reduce spending as a share of actual GDP. The

estimated effects fluctuate irregularly around zero. The results suggest a marginally significant starve the

beast effect in a single quarter (quarter 9), but they are more often positive than negative, and the

estimated long-run effect is positive, small, and very far from significant. That this second specification

fails to support the starve the beast hypothesis is quite surprising. As discussed in Romer and Romer

(2007b), the short-run stimulatory effects of tax cuts on output are very strong. Yet even this rapid

growth of output is not enough to generate a systematic fall in expenditures as a share of GDP.

        The robustness checks yield two conclusions. First, and most important, the lack of support for

the starve the beast hypothesis is extremely robust: none of the specifications we consider provide

evidence that tax cuts reduce government expenditures. Second, the evidence for the alternative view of

fiscal illusion or shared fiscal irresponsibility is only modest. The point estimates consistently suggest

17
   We again calculate real expenditures by dividing nominal expenditures by the price index for GDP. Real GDP is
constructed by dividing nominal GDP by the same price index. We fit a Hodrick-Prescott filter (lambda = 1600) to
log real GDP for the full postwar sample (1947Q1–2006Q4).
18
   These two panels are on a different scale than the others in Figure 3 because the dependent variable is now a
percent of GDP, not a percent of total expenditures.
                                                                                                                   20


that tax cuts raise government expenditures, but they are only occasionally significantly different from

zero, and then only marginally so.



D. The Relationship between Other Types of Tax Changes and Total Expenditures

         As discussed above, we focus on the response of government spending to long-run tax changes

because this is likely to provide the least biased and fairest test of the starve the beast hypothesis.

Nevertheless, it is interesting to look at the behavior of spending following the other types of tax changes

we have identified: deficit-driven, countercyclical, and spending-driven actions. This analysis can reveal

if the feared biases from using these other types of tax changes to estimate the response of spending

appear to be present. It can also provide an indirect check on our classification procedures. For example,

if we have classified spending-driven tax changes correctly, they should certainly be positively correlated

with spending changes.

         For this exercise, we estimate equation (1) using total gross expenditures less interest payments as

the dependent variable, and the contemporaneous and twenty lags of a particular type of tax change as the

independent variable. We estimate a separate regression for each type of tax change using the full

postwar sample period. The results are again summarized by calculating the implied cumulative response

of spending to a tax cut (of a given type) of one percent of GDP. These estimated cumulative impacts for

the three additional types of tax actions, along with the one-standard-error bands, are given in Figure 4.19

To facilitate comparisons, panel (a) of Figure 4 repeats the results for long-run tax actions from Figure 2.

         Of the three additional types of tax changes, deficit-driven actions are likely to be the most

informative about the starve the beast hypothesis. Like long-run changes, these actions are not taken in

response to current or prospective short-run macroeconomic conditions or because spending is moving in

the same direction. The reason for excluding these changes from the baseline regression was that deficit-


19
  This way of summarizing the estimates is slightly less intuitive for deficit-driven and spending-driven tax changes
than for our baseline case of long-run changes because deficit- and spending-driven tax changes are almost always
tax increases. Nevertheless, the interpretation is the same as before: a negative response of spending to a tax cut is
supportive of the starve the beast hypothesis; a positive response or no response is not.
                                                                                                           21


driven tax increases are often part of a budget package that includes spending reductions.             These

observations might therefore bias the results against the starve the beast hypothesis. The cumulative

impact of deficit-driven tax changes on total expenditures given in panel (b) of Figure 4 shows this fear is

somewhat justified. In the quarter of a deficit-driven tax cut and the subsequent two quarters, spending

rises substantially. Or, to think about the more realistic case, following a deficit-driven tax increase,

spending falls substantially. This is exactly the sort of inverse relationship one would expect if deficit-

reduction packages were common. The effect, while large, is not precisely estimated. The t-statistic on

the maximum impact is 2.0.

        After the first few quarters, the estimated effects of a deficit-driven tax cut turn negative for

several years, but return to being positive at distant horizons. None of these estimates are close to

statistically significant, however. These results suggest that any spending cuts agreed to at the time of a

deficit-driven tax increase disappear within the first year. The lack of a consistent pattern to the estimates

at longer horizons suggests little ultimate impact of tax changes on expenditure. In this way, the results

for deficit-driven tax changes echo those for long-run actions, and provide no support for the starve the

beast hypothesis.

        Panel (c) of Figure 4 shows the implied impact on spending of a countercyclical tax cut. We

excluded such tax changes from our baseline regression because the state of the economy could tend to

influence spending and taxes in opposite directions, and so again bias the estimates against the starve the

beast hypothesis. The results suggest that this is somewhat the case. A countercyclical tax cut is

associated with a persistent rise in spending. However, the standard errors are quite large, so it is

impossible to reject the hypothesis of no relationship.

        Panel (d) shows the behavior of government spending following a spending-driven tax cut. In

this case, the effects are negative, large in absolute terms, and highly statistically significant.20 This is

exactly the result one would expect: if we classified spending-driven tax changes correctly, there should

20
   These findings are somewhat sensitive to the sample period. Some of the largest spending-driven tax changes
were during the Korean War. When the post-1957 sample period is used, the maximum impact of a spending-driven
tax cut of one percent of GDP is large (–6.8 percent), but only marginally significant (t = –1.6).
                                                                                                              22


be a positive correlation between such actions and spending. That the relationship persists is consistent

with the spending changes associated with these spending-driven actions being permanent.                  These

findings for spending-driven tax changes both confirm our classification of these tax actions and illustrate

the importance of controlling for motivation when testing the starve the beast hypothesis. Including

spending-driven actions would clearly bias the results toward finding a positive correlation between

spending changes and tax changes.

        One way to see how much bias including these spending-driven actions would cause is to define a

tax variable that sums all four types of legislated tax changes and then uses this as the explanatory

variable in equation (1).21 Panel (e) of Figure 4 shows the implied impact of a legislated tax cut of any

motivation of one percent of GDP on total expenditures. The estimated response is strongly negative and

statistically significant for the first three years after a tax cut. The point estimate for the maximum

cumulative effect is –3.8 percent (t = –2.4). Since none of the other types of tax changes show a

consistent negative response, this implied negative effect of the aggregate tax variable reflects the

influence of the spending-driven tax changes.

        To test this proposition more directly, we define a second composite tax variable that includes all

legislated tax changes other than those motivated by spending changes. Panel (f) of Figure 4 shows the

implied cumulative response of total expenditures to a non-spending-driven legislated tax change of one

percent of GDP. The effects are consistently positive, suggesting that, if anything, tax cuts appear to

increase government spending, not decrease it as the starve the beast hypothesis predicts. And, for

horizons beyond three years, these positive effects are significantly different from zero. The results

suggest that the inclusion of spending-driven tax changes may explain why much of the previous

literature has found evidence for the starve the beast hypothesis.

        This possibility can investigated by considering a more standard measure of tax changes. A

typical test of the starve the beast hypothesis uses the change in cyclically adjusted revenues, which

21
  As discussed in Romer and Romer (2007a), we identify one legislated tax cut that was designed to accentuate an
existing economic boom. For completeness, we include this one procyclical tax action in the sum of all legislated
tax changes.
                                                                                                                   23


includes all changes in revenues not related to short-run fluctuations in income, as the measure of tax

changes. Data on the change in cyclically adjusted revenues are available beginning in 1947Q2. We

therefore investigate the effects of using the contemporaneous value and eleven lags of this variable as the

tax measure for the period 1950Q1–2006Q4.22 When we use this conventional tax variable, the result are

indeed supportive of the starve the beast hypothesis. Panel (g) of Figure 4 shows that the cumulative

effect of a decline in real cyclically adjusted revenues of one percent of GDP starts out positive, but then

turns strongly negative. The maximum impact is a change in government expenditures of –3.1 percent

(t = –2.1).

         Given that we have identified spending-driven tax changes, it is possible to subtract these actions

from the change in cyclically adjusted revenues.23 The results using this series, which are shown in panel

(h), are dramatically different from those using all cyclically adjusted revenues. The impact of a decline

in cyclically adjusted revenues less spending driven changes of one percent of GDP is now strongly

positive in the short run: the maximum impact is 3.6 percent (t = 4.7). It then gradually declines toward

zero, but never turns negative over the eleven-quarter horizon we consider. Thus, the results provide no

support for the starve the beast hypothesis, and, indeed, are somewhat supportive of the notion of shared

fiscal irresponsibility.   This suggests that the inclusion of spending-driven changes in conventional

revenue measures is an important source of the finding that government spending moves in the same

direction as tax revenues.24




22
   For comparability with our tax measure, we use the change in real cyclically adjusted revenues as a percent of real
GDP. See Romer and Romer (2007b) for a more detailed discussion of the sources and derivation of this measure.
23
   Since both series are expressed as a percent of GDP, the spending-driven tax changes can be subtracted without
further adjustment.
24
   The importance of spending-driven tax changes in causing bias is sensitive to the sample period used. Spending-
driven changes were largest during the Korean War and tend to cause substantial bias in samples that include this
period. In later sample periods, spending-driven changes are smaller and so are a less important source of bias. This
may explain why studies such as Ram (1988), Miller and Russek (1990), and Bohn (1991), which use data from the
Korean War period and before, find support for the starve the beast hypothesis, while those such as von Furstenberg,
Green, and Jeong (1986), which use data starting in 1954, do not.
                                                                                                          24


III. EFFECTS OF LONG-RUN TAX CHANGES ON FUTURE TAXES



        Our analysis finds no evidence that tax cuts lead to reductions in government spending. This

finding obviously raises another question: If tax cuts do not reduce government spending, how does the

government budget eventually balance? An obvious possibility is that the adjustment occurs on the tax

side rather than on the expenditure side. To explore this possibility, we examine the response of both tax

revenues and tax legislation to long-run tax changes.25



A. Response of Tax Revenues

        To investigate how revenues respond to long-run tax changes, we estimate equation (1) using a

measure of real tax revenues as the dependent variable. That is, we regress the percentage change in real

revenues on a constant and the contemporaneous value and twenty lags of our measure of long-run tax

actions. The particular revenue variable we use is the federal total receipts series from the National

Income and Product Accounts deflated by the price index for GDP.26 We estimate the revenue response

over both the full postwar sample period (1950Q1–2006Q4) and the post-Korean War sample (1957Q1–

2006Q4).

        Figure 5 shows the implied cumulative response of total receipts to a long-run tax cut of one

percent of GDP for both sample periods. Tax receipts decline strongly in the short run in response to a

tax cut. The contemporaneous effect is a change in receipts of –1.8 percent in the full sample (t = –1.9)

and –2.0 percent in the post-Korea sample (t = –2.2). Total receipts remain substantially below their pre-

tax-cut path for the next year and a half.

        In both samples, receipts then recover substantially. For the full sample, the rise in revenues two

years after the tax cut is dramatic and marginally significant. This finding is largely driven by the Korean

War. As described in Section IV, the large 1948 tax cut was followed roughly two years later by the

25
   Bohn (1991) also examines the degree to which deficits caused by tax cuts are eliminated by subsequent tax
increases.
26
   Data on total federal receipts are from NIPA Table 3.2, downloaded 8/8/07.
                                                                                                              25


outbreak of the war. Two major tax increases were passed early in the war, and the war was accompanied

by rapid output growth. For this reason, the results for the full sample almost surely overstate the true

tendency of revenue to rebound. For the post-Korea sample, receipts rise above their pre-tax-cut path

seven quarters after the tax cut, but the effect is modest and the standard errors are large (the t-statistics on

the positive effects do not rise above 0.9). Thus, the revenue effects of a tax cut are indistinguishable

from zero after roughly two years.



B. Response of Tax Legislation

        To understand the behavior of revenues following a long-run tax cut, it is important to investigate

the behavior of subsequent tax legislation. Do tax revenues recover because of unusually rapid growth or

because policymakers legislate tax increases? Given that we have constructed measures of legislated tax

changes classified by motivation, this is an issue we can investigate.

        In all of our previous analyses of spending and revenues, we consider the experiment of a long-

run tax cut that is not followed by any additional tax changes based on long-run considerations.

Therefore, it does not make sense to ask how long-run tax changes respond to our experiment. But, it is

reasonable to ask how other types of legislated tax changes respond to a long-run tax cut. Long-run tax

cuts that do not lower spending, and so increase the deficit, might lead to tax increases designed to reduce

an inherited budget deficit. Likewise, a long-run tax cut that gives rise to a short-run boom could lead to

a countercyclical tax increase. A long-run tax cut could also lead policymakers to switch to a “pay-as-we-

go” policy: a budget deficit resulting from a long-run tax cut may make policymakers unwilling to

increase spending without increasing taxes. Therefore, one could also see an increase in spending-driven

tax increases following long-run tax cuts.

        Our empirical framework is again identical to that in equation (1), except that the dependent

variable is now a measure of legislated tax changes. That is, we regress legislated tax changes of some

motivation on a constant and the contemporaneous value and several lags of our measure of long-run tax

changes. In our baseline specification we again use twenty lags. However, we experiment with longer
                                                                                                                   26


lags. We estimate the responses over both the full postwar sample and the post-Korean War sample. As

before, we summarize the results by examining the cumulative impact of a long-run tax cut of one percent

of GDP. A positive impact implies that subsequent tax actions counteract the long-run tax cut. Because

the other tax variables are also expressed as a percent of nominal GDP, the dependent and independent

variables are on the same scale. Therefore, the cumulative impact can be interpreted as the fraction of the

long-run tax cut that is undone over the horizon considered.

         The estimated impacts of a long-run tax cut of one percent of GDP on tax changes of various

types are shown in Figure 6. Panel (a) shows the impact on deficit-driven actions. The effect is positive

and highly statistically significant, suggesting that long-run tax cuts tend to be followed by deficit-driven

tax increases. The cumulative impact is 0.22 (t = 3.0) after eight quarters, and 0.23 (t = 2.2) after

sixteen.27 This suggests that about a fifth of a long-run tax cut is undone by deficit-driven tax increases

within a few years. These results are highly robust. Starting the sample in 1957 has virtually no impact.

And, increasing the number of lags to forty and carrying out the simulations for ten years strengthens the

results. Ten years after the long-run tax action, 41 percent of the action has been undone by deficit-driven

tax increases (t = 2.2).

         Panel (b) shows the impact of a long-run tax cut on countercyclical tax actions. The estimated

impact is moderate, but not close to significantly different from zero.                    After twenty quarters,

countercyclical tax actions have counteracted 17 percent of a long-run tax cut (t = 0.5). Starting the

sample in 1957 has no impact because there were no countercyclical tax actions in the early 1950s.

Including longer lag lengths suggests that the response diminishes at longer horizons. The estimated




27
   There is a substantial contemporaneous impact (0.10 with a t-statistic of 3.3). The most important observation
behind this estimate is 1983Q1. A large part of the tax cuts in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 were
scheduled to go into effect in 1983Q1. Concern about current and prospective deficits, however, led to passage of
the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, which raised revenues mainly by modifying some features of
the 1981 act that had already taken effect (Romer and Romer, 2007a). Thus, although the long-run tax cut and the
deficit-driven tax increase occurred simultaneously, there is a clear sense in which the deficit-driven increase was a
response to the long-run cut.
                                                                                                                 27


effect after ten years is 0.09 (t = 0.2).28

         Panel (c) shows the impact of a long-run tax cut on spending-driven tax changes. In this case, the

effects are virtually zero for the first nine quarters after the long-run tax cut, and then turn strongly

positive. The maximum cumulative impact is 0.50 (t = 2.6) after fourteen quarters. The impact after

twenty quarters is 0.37 (t = 1.6). This suggests that spending-driven tax increases occur after a long-run

tax cut, and that they counteract close to half of the initial cut. Thus, long-run tax cuts may indeed give

rise to more pay-as-we-go policies.

         More so that with the other tax changes, there is reason to be concerned that the results for

spending-driven actions are being influenced by the observations from the Korean War. Starting the

sample in 1957 does indeed weaken the link substantially, but does not eliminate it. The maximum

impact of a long-run tax cut is a rise in spending-driven taxes of 0.15 (t = 2.1). Likewise, including

twenty additional lags reduces the impact substantially for the full sample, but this effect is due entirely to

the required shortening of the sample period.

         Panel (d) shows the effect of a long-run tax cut on the other types of legislated tax changes

combined.29 The effect is positive, large, and significant. The effect is 0.58 (t = 2.0) after twelve

quarters, 0.81 (t = 2.3) after sixteen, and 0.76 (t = 2.0) after twenty. This suggests that a large fraction of

a long-run tax cut is typically undone by legislated tax increases of various sorts within five years.

         Figure 7 shows two robustness checks for the effect of a long-run tax cut on this composite of

other tax changes. Panel (a) shows the impact of starting the sample in 1957. Both the maximum impact

and the statistical significance are somewhat reduced by this change. The impact now peaks at 0.58

(t = 1.6) after nineteen quarters. Panel (b) shows the effect of including forty lags of long-run tax

changes. The required shortening of the sample reduces the estimated responses over the first twenty

quarters slightly. Thereafter, it moves irregularly upward. The response after 40 quarters is large (0.77),

28
   We also experimented with leaving out the 1975 tax cut, which is a huge outlier among countercyclical actions. It
is peculiar because it was a rebate that mainly cut taxes dramatically in one quarter and then raised them
dramatically in the next. Zeroing out this action reduces the response at medium horizons, but has almost no effect
on the longer-run response. The main effect of the change is to cut the standard errors by more than half.
29
   We again include the one procyclical tax action in the combined measure. See n. 21.
                                                                                                            28


but not precisely estimated (t = 1.3). Though they weaken the evidence slightly, these two robustness

checks confirm that a large fraction of a long-run tax cut is typically reversed by legislated tax increases

within the next few years.



C. Discussion

        This analysis of the response of revenues and tax legislation to a tax cut yields two main findings.

First, although a tax cut leads to a sharp fall in revenues in the short run, it does not have any clear impact

on revenues at horizons beyond about two years. Second, between one-half and four-fifths of the tax cut

is offset by legislated tax increases over the next several years. Taken together, these findings suggest

that at least some of the rebound in revenues is the result of non-legislated changes.

        The key source of the non-legislated changes in revenues is almost certainly the effect of the tax

cut on economic activity. In Romer and Romer (2007b), we find that a tax cut of one percent of GDP

increases real output by approximately three percent over the next three years. Since revenues are a

function of income, this growth undoubtedly raises revenues.

        There is, however, an important caveat to this finding that tax cuts partially pay for themselves

through more rapid growth: some of the output response is almost surely a transitory departure of output

from normal, not a permanent change in the economy’s normal level of output. The idea that a tax cut has

a large, rapid impact on the flexible-price level of output is not particularly plausible. And as we describe

in Romer and Romer (2007b), the behavior of inflation and unemployment following tax cuts is

consistent with the view that the output effects are largely temporary. To the extent that this is the case,

some of the rebound in revenues is also temporary. As a result, in the absence of further legislated

changes, there may be some long-run budgetary shortfall in the wake of the tax cut.

        Because of these complications, our results do not allow us to describe with complete confidence

how the government achieves long-run budget balance following a tax cut. But, we can say that we find

no evidence of adjustment on the spending side, and considerable evidence of substantial adjustment on

the tax side.
                                                                                                          29


IV. SPENDING AND TAXES IN FOUR KEY EPISODES



        In this section, we examine the four episodes in our sample that stand out as having by far the

largest long-run tax cuts. This examination serves several purposes. The first is to see whether the

narrative record suggests that the tax cuts affected spending decisions. We examine the reasoning

policymakers gave for their spending behavior, and so check whether tax cuts appear to have had an

important effect on the decision-making process. To keep the narrative analysis manageable, we focus

primarily on presidential documents and statements.30 However, in cases where Congressional views

appear to be central or at odds with those of the executive branch, we also examine Congressional

documents.

        The second purpose is to check whether the regression results reflect consistent patterns in the

data. Specifically, we look at the behavior of overall spending and its two broad components, defense

purchases and nondefense spending, in each episode.           This allows us to investigate whether the

relationships shown by the regressions appear in the key episodes.

        Our third purpose is to examine whether there are omitted variables or idiosyncratic shocks that

account for the failure of spending to fall after tax cuts.          We ask whether there were unusual

developments in the episodes that had an important impact on spending. This analysis can suggest

whether the regression results may be overstating (or understating) the evidence against the starve the

beast hypothesis.

        The final purpose is to address a similar set of issues concerning the tax side of the episodes. We

look at what tax actions were taken following the tax cuts, and thus again check whether the regression

results reflect consistent patterns. Perhaps more importantly, we examine the reasons policymakers gave

for those actions to see to what extent they appear to have been responses to the cuts. As with spending,

30
  The key presidential documents that we use are the Budget of the United States Government (abbreviated as
Budget in citations) and the Economic Report of the President (abbreviated as Economic Report). Presidential
speeches are identified by their title and date as given in John Woolley and Gerhard Peters, The American
Presidency Project (www.presidency.ucsb.edu). Page numbers are from our printouts of the speeches, and so may
be affected by our choices of font size and margins.
                                                                                                                30


we also check whether idiosyncratic factors were an important determinant of tax changes in the episodes.



A. The Revenue Act of 1948

        The Revenue Act of 1948 was passed over Harry Truman’s veto in April 1948. The bill reduced

revenues by 1.9 percent of GDP beginning in 1948Q2. The primary motivation for the cut was a desire to

improve economic efficiency by reducing marginal tax rates.31

        The tax cut was followed by a substantial reduction in revenues. It is clear, however, that the cut

had little impact on Truman’s view of appropriate spending. In his budget message in January 1949, he

said of his spending proposals:

        Substantial direct assistance is provided for other members of the family of nations, and
        expenditures in support of our armed forces are materially increased. Funds are included
        for the necessary strengthening of our economy through the development and
        conservation of the Nation’s productive resources. Increased emphasis is placed on the
        provision of badly needed measures to promote the education, health, and security of our
        people (1950 Budget, p. M5).

Truman’s main response to the tax cut was to propose a counteracting tax increase. He argued, “In a

period of high prosperity it is not sound public policy for the Government to operate at a deficit. … I am,

therefore, recommending new tax legislation to raise revenues by 4 billion dollars” (p. M5). This increase

would have offset 80 percent of the 1948 cut.

        The 1950 Economic Report provided an even clearer statement of Truman’s view that

government spending should be determined by considerations other than the level of revenues, and that

tax policy should be adjusted accordingly:

                In fields such as resource development, education, health, and social security,
        Government programs are essential elements of our economic strength. If we cut these
        programs below the requirements of an expanding economy, we should be weakening
        some of the most important factors which promote that expansion. Furthermore, we must
        maintain our programs for national security and international peace. …
                Government revenue policy should take into account both the needs of sound
        Government finance and the needs of an expanding economy (p. 8).

        Nonetheless, the fall in revenues appears to have had a marginal effect on Truman’s spending

31
  Our descriptions in this section of the motivations for tax changes and our figures for their revenue effects are
based on Romer and Romer (2007a). The revenue estimates exclude the effects of retroactive features of the bills.
                                                                                                         31


policies. In his budget message in January 1949, he stressed “the compelling need for financial prudence

by the Government at this time,” and added that “it has been necessary to deny many requests for

additional funds which would normally be desirable” (1950 Budget, p. M6). In the 1949 Midyear

Economic Report of the President, he explained, “When I submitted my budget for the fiscal year 1950

last January, the programs of expenditure that I then recommended were held to a minimum consistent

with our basic needs in view of the inflationary strain upon materials and manpower then prevailing” (p.

7). Since Truman viewed the budget deficit as contributing to inflationary pressures (for example,

Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union, 1/5/49, p. 3), this points to at least some effect

of the tax cut on spending decisions.

        On June 25, 1950, North Korea invaded South Korea. Once that occurred, taxes and the deficit

essentially disappeared from Truman’s discussions of spending. Even more so than in peacetime, his

view was that spending should be determined by the country’s needs, and taxes adjusted accordingly. For

example, in his budget message in January 1951, Truman described the spending side of the budget and

then stated, “I shall shortly recommend an increase in tax revenues in the conviction that we must attain a

balanced budget to provide a sound financial basis for what may be an extended period of very high

defense expenditures” (1952 Budget, p. M6).

        Finally, although Congress’s view of the tax cut was obviously very different from Truman’s,

Congress does not appear to have desired lower spending than the president. For example, in August

1948, Truman reported that although Congress had not appropriated the full amount he had requested for

fiscal 1948 and 1949, this shortfall was offset by two factors: some spending had been authorized but not

yet appropriated, and several pieces of legislation had been enacted that would require higher spending,

but no spending had yet been authorized. As a result, he expected spending in fiscal 1949 to be

significantly higher than what he had requested in January (Statement by the President: The Midyear

Review of the Budget, 8/15/48, p. 3). Thus, there is no evidence of a starve the beast effect operating

through Congressional actions.

        Panel (a) of Figure 8 shows the behavior of government spending in this episode. It plots both
                                                                                                         32


our measure of total expenditures, and the two categories of spending, national defense purchases and

nondefense spending. As in Section II, we define nondefense spending as the difference between our

measure of total expenditures and national defense purchases; the two main components of this

nondefense measure are nondefense purchases and current transfer payments. The vertical line shows the

quarter in which the tax cut took effect. Several things are apparent. First, and most important, there was

no discernable slowdown in overall spending or either of the components. Indeed, the growth of overall

spending increased after the tax cut. Total expenditures, which had been essentially flat before the tax

cut, rose by 16 percent in the two years between the cut and the start of the war. Second, there was a

substantial one-time spike in nondefense spending in 1950Q1. This rise reflected a one-time dividend

payment from the trust fund for National Service Life Insurance (the government insurance program for

military personnel). These payments were the result of a large accumulation of assets in the trust fund,

which could not be used for other purposes (Hines, 1943; Survey of Current Business, March 1950, pp. 1-

3, and August 1950, p. 7). Third, there was a sharp rise both in defense spending and in overall spending

after the outbreak of the war.

        Both the National Service Life Insurance dividend payment and the increased military spending

after the start of the war clearly reflected unusual developments, not just the normal response of spending

to tax cuts. The occurrence of these idiosyncratic upward influences on spending works in the direction

of causing the regressions to overstate the impact of tax cuts on subsequent spending increases.

        There was also an important unusual development operating in the opposite direction. The Social

Security Amendments of 1950 almost doubled Social Security benefits starting in September 1950 and

substantially increased the coverage of the system beginning in January 1951 (Social Security Bulletin,

October 1950, pp. 3-14). Because Social Security spending was initially small, these changes had little

immediate impact on overall spending. Nonetheless, the expansion of benefits and coverage contributed

significantly to the growth of spending over time. The fact that these delayed spending effects are not

captured in our regressions operates in the direction of causing the regressions to understate the impact of

tax cuts on later spending increases.
                                                                                                        33


        On the tax side, the 1948 tax cut was followed by a series of tax increases that were largely

spending-driven. The first, and least important, was an increase in Social Security taxes of 0.3 percent of

GDP in 1950Q1 that had been legislated before the tax cut was passed. After that, there were larger tax

actions. The Social Security Amendments of 1950 increased the base of the payroll tax from $3000 to

$3600 effective at the beginning of 1951 and called for a gradual increase in the combined Social Security

tax rate from 3 percent to 6½ percent over the next two decades (Social Security Bulletin, October 1950,

pp. 3-14). And three bills in 1950 and 1951 to finance the Korean War increased taxes by a combined 4.2

percent of GDP.

        The move to spending-driven tax increases in the early 1950s was clearly a policy decision. In

the case of Social Security, policymakers were grappling with the issue of how to finance the system. A

special Congressional commission and the Social Security Administration both recommended that Social

Security taxes be limited and that the system move toward increasing reliance on general revenues.

Instead, however, the 1950 amendments repealed the provision of the Social Security Act that permitted

financing from general revenues and made the system entirely self-financing (Social Security Bulletin,

May 1948, pp. 21-28; February 1949, pp. 3-9; October 1950, pp. 3-14). However, there is no direct

narrative evidence that the 1948 tax cut played a causal role in this decision.

        In the case of the Korean War, the extent of the government’s reliance on contemporaneous tax

increases is remarkable: total expenditures as a share of GDP rose by 6.0 percentage points from 1950Q2

to its peak in 1952Q3, only moderately more than the expected revenue effects of the tax increases to

finance the war. Moreover, Truman explicitly cited the deficit as a reason for this heavy reliance on tax

finance. Soon after the start of the war, he wrote to Congressional leaders:

        We embark on these enlarged expenditures at a time when the Federal budget is already
        out of balance. This makes it imperative that we increase tax revenues promptly lest a
        growing deficit create new inflationary forces detrimental to our defense effort.
                We must make every effort to finance the greatest possible amount of needed
        expenditures by taxation (Letter to the Chairman, Senate Committee on Finance, on the
        Need for an Increase in Taxes, 7/25/50, p. 1).

Thus, the Korean War tax increases were in part a response to the 1948 tax cut.
                                                                                                       34


        The only important unusual tax developments in this episode were ones closely tied to the

unusual spending developments. First, although the Korean War tax increases were partly a response to

the tax cut, they were also a response to the war. Second, the 1950 Social Security amendments

scheduled tax increases long after the five-year window considered in our regressions.          The first

development acts toward making the regressions overstate the relationship between long-run tax cuts and

later tax increases, while the second acts in the opposite direction.



B. The Revenue Act of 1964

        Lyndon Johnson signed the Revenue Act of 1964 in February 1964. It reduced revenues by 1.3

percent of GDP in 1964Q2 and by another 0.6 percent in 1965Q1. The key motivation for the tax cut was

a desire to increase long-run growth.

        Because of very rapid growth, revenues recovered quickly after the tax cut. As a result, there

were no immediate budget deficits to trigger a starve the beast type of response.           Nevertheless,

policymakers’ statements and behavior can provide some evidence concerning this mechanism.

        At almost the same time that he signed the tax bill, Johnson began to propose drastic increases in

spending. In February 1964 he gave a speech proposing federal hospital insurance for the elderly and

other health initiatives (Special Message to the Congress on the Nation’s Health, 2/10/64). In May 1964,

he gave his speech on “the Great Society” that called for elimination of poverty, urban renewal, pollution

reduction, and education expansion (Remarks at the University of Michigan, 5/22/64). Over the next

year, a number of spending increases directed at achieving these goals were passed. The most significant

was the dramatic expansion of benefits and the introduction of Medicare contained in the Social Security

Amendments of 1965.

        The administration believed that spending should be determined by necessity and efficiency. For

example, the 1967 Economic Report stated: “most economists now agree that the selection of appropriate

expenditure levels … should be made in light of the relative merits of alternative programs, and of the

benefits of added public expenditures, compared with private ones, at the margin. … [I]t is preferable to
                                                                                                       35


emphasize changes in tax rates (suitably coordinated with changes in monetary policy) for stabilization

purposes” (p. 68). The narrative record in this episode is striking in the degree to which revenues were

not mentioned as a determinant of expenditures.

        Defense spending increased substantially starting in mid-1965 because of escalation of the war in

Vietnam. Johnson argued forcefully against allowing budgetary concerns to stop the rise in nondefense

spending. He stated:

                 There are men who cry out: We must sacrifice. Well, let us rather ask them:
        Who will they sacrifice? Are they going to sacrifice the children who seek the learning,
        or the sick who need medical care, or the families who dwell in squalor now brightened
        by the hope of home? …
                 I believe that we can continue the Great Society while we fight in Vietnam
        (Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union, 1/12/66, p. 2).

Congress went along with his calls for increased spending.           For example, the Social Security

Amendments of 1967 brought about another substantial increase in benefits and a significant increase in

coverage. Thus, the rise in spending following the tax cut was in no way just the consequence of the war.

        Beginning in early 1966, policymakers began to worry that the economy was overheating. In

addition, by late 1966, the deficit had increased substantially. Nevertheless, the administration did not

call for substantial spending reductions. Federal expenditures were expected to rise by $15 billion in

1968 (1968 Economic Report, p. 54). Instead, the administration concluded: “the cost of meeting our

most pressing defense and civilian requirements cannot be responsibly financed without a temporary tax

increase” (1969 Budget, p. 8).

        Over the president’s objection, Congress included a $6 billion spending reduction (relative to

projected) in the 1968 bill imposing a ten-percent temporary tax surcharge. Congress pressed for the

spending cuts not because revenues had declined, but because they felt it was unfair to take all of the

needed macroeconomic restraint in the form of higher taxes. A number of senators expressed sentiments

similar to that of Senator Byrd, who stated: “Before any new tax burden … is placed upon the American

taxpayer, the executive branch and the legislative branch should reduce, and eliminate where possible, all

nonessential expenditures” (Congressional Record, 90th Congress, 2d Session, Volume 114—Part 7,
                                                                                                          36


4/2/68, p. 8561). The tax cut was surely one of the factors contributing to the overheating that motivated

the tax surcharge. Therefore, although policymakers did not draw a direct link between the tax cut and

the spending cut, the spending reduction is the one development in this episode that could suggest some

connection between tax cuts and subsequent spending decisions.

           The actual behavior of spending following the 1964 tax cut is completely consistent with

policymakers’ stated positions. Panel (b) of Figure 8 shows that total expenditures were basically

constant during the first year after the tax cut, but then rose dramatically. Total expenditures increased by

27 percent in the five years after the tax cut. This is noticeably greater than the 18 percent growth in the

five years before the cut. The rise in defense purchases was clearly one source of the increase. However,

nondefense spending, fueled by a large increase in current transfer payments, increased even more

rapidly.

           Special factors clearly played a role in the behavior of spending. Much of the rise in defense

expenditures was related to the Vietnam War. To the extent that defense spending truly was non-

discretionary, some of the rise in spending reflects this exogenous shock rather than a failure of the starve

the beast phenomenon. At the same time, the immediate increase in spending called for by the Social

Security Amendments of 1965 and 1967 in a fundamental way underestimates the true rise in spending.

The creation of the Medicare program and the increases in Social Security benefits and coverage put in

place an enormous stream of future spending. So, the present value increase in spending that was passed

in the wake of the 1964 tax cut was unquestionably huge.

           Policymakers’ statements and actions on taxes in this episode are striking. In 1965, the Johnson

administration proposed (and succeeded in passing) two significant tax actions. One was the Excise Tax

Reduction Act of 1965. The administration viewed this tax cut as a continuation of the 1964 action. In

this case, the serial correlation of tax changes reflected serial correlation in views about appropriate

policy. The second was the Social Security Amendments of 1965, which included a substantial increase

in payroll taxes to pay for an equally substantial increase in benefits, including hospital insurance for the

elderly. This tax increase appears to have had little to do with the 1964 tax cut. Policymakers paid for
                                                                                                                   37


the desired expansion of benefits through expansion of taxes because the decision had been made in the

early 1950s that the Social Security system should be self-financing.32

          The overheating of the economy beginning in 1966 led policymakers to advocate tax increases.

The Tax Adjustment Act of 1966 (enacted in March 1966) rescinded the excise tax reduction that had just

occurred the previous January.          Public Law 89-800 (enacted in November 1966) suspended the

investment tax credit. Together, the two tax increases were expected to raise revenues by 0.3 percent of

GDP. 33

          By far the largest tax increase in the immediate post-1964 period was the 1968 surcharge. The

administration first proposed a six-percent surcharge in January 1967. In August 1967, Johnson stated:

“If left untended, this deficit could cause … [a] spiral of ruinous inflation” and “[b]rutally higher interest

rates” (Special Message to the Congress: The State of the Budget and the Economy, 8/3/67, p. 1). He

requested that the surcharge be increased to ten percent, which was the level ultimately included in the

Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968. The act increased taxes by 0.9 percent of GDP in 1968Q3

and by another 0.2 percent in 1969Q1. Johnson was quite explicit that the surcharge was undoing part of

the 1964 tax cut. In the Statement by the President Upon Signing the Tax Bill, he stated: “This

temporary surcharge will return to the Treasury about half the tax cuts I signed into law in 1964 and

1965” (6/28/68, p.1). This action, combined with the continued rise in expenditures, is a vivid example

that what typically gives in response to a tax cut is not spending but the tax cut itself.



C. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981

          A very large long-run tax cut was enacted in August 1981, shortly after Ronald Reagan took

office. The cut lowered taxes by a combined 4.5 percent of GDP in a series of steps.


32
   The Social Security Amendments of 1967, enacted in January 1968, also raised taxes substantially to pay for
another increase in benefits and coverage.
33
   Public Law 90-26 (enacted in June 1967) restored the investment tax credit. As discussed in Romer and Romer
(2007a), the motivation for this change involved the conditions in a particular sector (the capital goods market), and
concern about longer-run incentives for investment. It does not appear to have been motivated by the 1964 tax cut
or short-run macroeconomic conditions.
                                                                                                         38


          Reagan was a strong advocate of spending reductions throughout his presidency. For example, in

a speech presenting his economic program, he identified “reducing the growth in government spending

and taxing” as a central goal, and he argued that “[s]pending by government must be limited to those

functions which are the proper province of government” (Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress

on the Program for Economic Recovery, 2/18/81, pp. 1, 5). Similarly, in his first budget message, in

February 1982, he listed “[r]educing the growth of overall Federal spending by eliminating Federal

activities that overstep the proper sphere of Federal Government responsibilities” as one of his

fundamental economic goals (1983 Budget, p. M4).

          The tax cut was followed by a substantial fall in revenues and a large rise in the budget deficit.

As the deficit increased, Reagan often cited it as a further reason for restraining spending. For example,

in his February 1986 budget message, he said, “there is a major threat looming on the horizon: the

Federal deficit” (1987 Budget, p. M-4). He went on to say: “Spending is the problem – not taxes – and

spending must be cut. The program of spending cuts and other reforms contained in my budget will lead

to a balanced budget at the end of five years” (p. M-5). Similarly, his February 1988 budget message

stated:

                  Last year, members of my Administration worked with the Leaders of Congress
          to develop a 2-year plan of deficit reduction – the Bipartisan Budget Agreement. …
                  The Bipartisan Budget Agreement reflects give and take on all sides. I agreed to
          some $29 billion in additional revenues and $13 billion less than I had requested in
          defense funding over 2 years. However, because of a willingness of all sides to
          compromise, an agreement was reached that pared $30 billion from the deficit projected
          for 1988 and $46 billion from that projected for 1989 (1989 Budget, p. 1-6).

Thus, the narrative record from this episode provides some evidence that revenue declines affected

spending decisions.

          Panel (c) of Figure 8 plots the behavior of government spending around the 1981 tax cut. The

vertical line is drawn in 1981Q3, the date of the first of the series of cuts. Despite what is suggested by

the narrative evidence, the growth of overall spending did not fall, but actually rose. In the five years

following the tax cut, total expenditures grew by 23 percent, substantially above the 14 percent growth in

the five years before the cut. This overall rise in the growth of spending reflects a combination of a large
                                                                                                                39


rise in the growth of defense spending and a more moderate rise in the growth of nondefense spending.

        There were two important unusual spending developments in this episode. First, the tax cuts

coincided with a shift in political power toward supporters of lower spending.                 Reagan’s goal of

restraining government spending was not shared by his predecessor. For example, in his final budget

message, Jimmy Carter, while advocating “budget restraint,” stated, “The growth of budget outlays is

puzzling to many Americans, but it arises from valid social and national security concerns” (1982 Budget,

pp. M4-M5). There was also a large swing in the balance of political power in Congress toward

advocates of spending restraint at the time of Reagan’s election. Thus, there was clearly an omitted

variable acting to reduce spending in this episode.34

        Second, the heightening of the cold war acted to increase defense spending. Ramey and Shapiro

(1998), for example, identify the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1980Q1 as an exogenous positive

shock to defense spending. This factor operates in the opposite direction of the political shift toward

supporters of lower spending. Note, however, that the Reagan tax cuts did not begin until 1981Q3, well

after the date of the shock identified by Ramey and Shapiro.

        The tax cuts were followed by two types of tax increases. First, the Social Security Amendments

of 1983 called for a series of tax increases from 1984 to 1990 to improve the solvency of the Social

Security system. These increases appear to have been largely a continuing consequence of the 1950

decision to make the Social Security program self-financing.

        Second, there was a series of tax increases that were explicitly motivated by a desire to reduce the

budget deficits that developed followed the tax cuts.            These included the Tax Equity and Fiscal

Responsibility Act of 1982, which undid some of the provisions of the 1981 act; the Deficit Reduction

Act of 1984; the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987; and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation

Act of 1990. For example, in a national address on the 1982 act, Reagan stated that it reflected a choice


34
   Although Reagan supported spending reduction in general, he favored higher defense spending. He had
campaigned on a need to rebuild the military and identified “strengthening the Nation’s defenses” as one of his key
goals (1983 Budget, p. M4). Thus, focusing only on nondefense spending would surely bias the analysis in favor of
the starve the beast hypothesis in this episode.
                                                                                                              40


to “reduce deficits and interest rates by raising revenue from those who are not now paying their fair

share,” rather than to “accept bigger budget deficits, higher interest rates, and higher unemployment”

(Address to the Nation on Federal Tax and Budget Reconciliation Legislation, 8/16/82, p. 4). Similarly,

the 1989 Budget reported that the 1987 act was enacted “[i]n conformance with the Bipartisan Budget

Agreement” (p. 4-5), which, as described above, was motivated by concern about the deficit. The 1982

and 1984 actions alone increased taxes by 1.0 percent of GDP. Thus, there is some narrative evidence

that these tax increases were a fairly direct response to the earlier tax cut.



D. The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 and the Jobs and Growth Tax
   Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003

        Two long-run tax cuts were passed early in the administration of George W. Bush.                     The

Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001, enacted in June 2001, included a long-run

tax cut of 0.8 percent of GDP in 2002Q1, as well as a large countercyclical tax cut in 2001Q3. The Jobs

and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003, enacted in May 2003, included a long-run cut of 1.1

percent of GDP in 2003Q3.

        These tax cuts do not appear to have had any substantial impact on the administration’s view of

appropriate spending. Throughout the episode, both spending restraint and either preserving the surplus

or reducing the deficit received some attention.         But, the discussions of spending did not change

appreciably in response either to the tax cuts or to the subsequent deterioration of the budget situation.

        The administration’s first budget proposals, which predated the tax cuts, put some emphasis on

spending restraint and on paying down debt. The president’s first budget document, for example, stated

that the budget would “Moderate Growth in Government and Fund National Priorities” and achieve “Debt

Reduction” (A Blueprint for New Beginnings: A Responsible Budget for America’s Priorities, 2/28/01,

p. 7).35 It also said that “[t]he President’s Budget commits to using today’s surpluses to reduce the


35
   This document was not part of the president’s formal 2002 budget, which was not submitted until April 2001.
However, it is included with the other 2002 budget documents on the Government Printing Office website. See
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/usbudget/fy02/index.html.
                                                                                                           41


Federal Government’s publicly held debt so that future generations are not shackled with the

responsibility of paying for the current generation’s overspending” (p. 22), and that “we must ensure that

we rein in excessive Government spending” (p. 23).

        In the immediate aftermath of the attacks of September 11, 2001, discussions of budget policy

placed less emphasis on spending restraint (see, for example, Address Before a Joint Session of the

Congress on the State of the Union, 1/29/02, p. 4). Later presidential statements, however, returned to

calls for spending restraint similar to those in 2001. For example, in his 2004 State of the Union Address,

Bush stated: “I will send you a budget that funds the war, protects the homeland, and meets important

domestic needs, while limiting the growth in discretionary spending …. By doing so, we can cut the

deficit in half over the next five years” (Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the

Union, 1/20/04, p. 5). Similarly, in the 2007 State of the Union Address, he said, “What we need is

spending discipline …. I will submit a budget that eliminates the Federal deficit within the next 5 years”

(Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union, 1/23/07, p. 1). While these

statements were very similar to those before the tax cuts, actual budget conditions had changed

substantially: revenues had fallen and the overall budget had shifted from surplus to deficit. The

similarity in the rhetoric despite the large changes in the deficit suggests that there was not a link between

the level of revenues and the perceived need for spending restraint.

        Panel (d) of Figure 8 plots the behavior of the major categories of spending in this episode. The

two vertical lines show the dates that the two tax cuts first took effect. As in the other episodes, overall

spending growth did not slow. In the five years following the first cut in 2001Q3, spending grew by 22

percent, substantially larger than the 14 percent growth in the five years before the cut. The growth in

spending following the tax cut was greatest in defense: national defense purchases rose by 33 percent in

the five years after the tax cut, while nondefense spending rose by 19 percent.

        The events of September 11, 2001 were clearly an important outside influence on spending.

Some of the behavior of total expenditures surely reflects the impact of this outside development rather

than the effect of the tax cuts. On the other hand, there was one important spending action that is not well
                                                                                                            42


reflected in our spending measures. The addition of prescription drug coverage to Medicare, enacted in

December 2003, was expected to have only a modest short-run effect on spending but to raise its path

substantially over time. Thus, although the change was enacted soon after the tax cuts, most of its impact

on spending will almost surely come after the period considered in our regressions.

        One notable feature of this episode is that the tax cuts were not soon followed by counteracting

tax increases. A modest countercyclical tax cut was enacted in March 2002, in the wake of the September

11 attacks. The only important tax increase was that the bonus depreciation provisions included in the

2002 bill, and then expanded and slightly extended as part of the 2003 tax bill, were allowed to expire as

scheduled at the end of 2004. Thus the issue of how the government will eventually deal with the loss of

revenues from the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts remains open.



E. Assessment

        Examination of the four episodes of major long-run tax cuts reinforces the findings from the

statistical work: there is little evidence of a starve the beast effect. The one aspect of the episodes that is

somewhat consistent with the hypothesis that tax cuts reduce government spending is the narrative record

of the budget process. Although the presidents in two of the episodes (Johnson and Bush) appear to have

paid little attention to the impact of the tax cuts on revenues in formulating their budget policies, the

presidents in the other two (Truman and Reagan) cited the level of revenues as a consideration in forming

budget policy. Even in these cases, however, other factors were clearly much more important, and to a

considerable extent the concern over revenues led not to advocacy of spending reductions, but to support

(or acceptance) of tax increases.

        The actual behavior of spending in all four episodes provides no support for the starve the beast

hypothesis. In no episode was there a discernible slowdown in spending following the tax cut. Indeed, in

all of the episodes, there was an acceleration of spending. This is similar to the overall statistical finding

of a positive (though only marginally significant) effect of tax cuts on spending, and suggests that the

regression results reflect a consistent pattern in the data rather than the effects of outliers.
                                                                                                                      43


         Examination of other influences on spending in the episodes fails to rescue the starve the beast

hypothesis. On the one hand, there was an important external development in each episode that acted to

raise defense spending. By itself, this pattern would suggest that the regressions might overestimate the

positive effects of tax cuts on spending.

         Two considerations, however, point in the opposite direction. First, the largest tax cut (1981)

coincided with the election of a president who had a strong commitment to reducing the size of

government. This suggests that the positive impact of tax cuts on spending might be even larger than that

implied by the regressions. Second, there were significant actions taken in the episodes to increase

spending that had important effects after the five-year window considered in our baseline regressions.

For example, in two of the episodes (1964 and 2001/03), the government enacted major changes in the

provision of medical care for the elderly that had very large implications for the long-term path of

government spending. Since our regressions miss much of the effects of these actions, this too suggests

that the regressions may underestimate the extent to which tax cuts increase spending. Thus, examination

of other factors affecting spending in the episodes suggests that on net the regressions do not overstate the

evidence against the starve the beast hypothesis.36

         The behavior of subsequent tax changes in the episodes is consistent with the pattern shown by

the regressions. In three of the cases, there were substantial tax increases within five years that offset a

substantial fraction of the initial tax cut. Only in the most recent episode has there not been an offsetting

tax increase of some kind. Perhaps more striking than the pattern is what policymakers said about the tax

increases. In all three cases they referred directly to the need to raise taxes to counter the macroeconomic

and budgetary effects of the original tax cuts. And in two cases (1948 and 1964), the president said

explicitly that raising taxes was preferable to cutting spending.




36
  In addition, recall that our statistical results are robust to controlling for a measure of exogenous shocks to defense
spending, and that even excluding defense spending entirely does not provide evidence for the starve the beast
hypothesis.
                                                                                                          44


V. CONCLUSIONS



        The starve the beast hypothesis – that is, the idea that tax cuts restrain government spending – is a

central argument for tax reduction. Despite its importance, however, the hypothesis has been subject to

few tests, and the tests that have been done are far from definitive.

        This paper tests the starve the beast hypothesis by examining the behavior of government

spending following tax changes motivated by long-run considerations. Because these tax changes are not

motivated by factors that are likely to have an important direct effect on government spending, they are

the most appropriate for testing the theory. The results provide no evidence of a starve the beast effect:

following long-run tax cuts, government spending does not fall. Indeed, if anything, spending rises,

providing some support for the alternative view of fiscal illusion or shared fiscal irresponsibility. These

findings are highly robust. Detailed examination of the four largest postwar episodes of long-run tax cuts

reinforces the statistical findings.

        We also identify a potentially powerful source of bias in tests of the starve the beast hypothesis

that use data on overall revenues and spending.           Some tax changes are explicitly motivated by

contemporaneous or planned changes in spending. Not surprisingly, these tax changes are followed by

large spending changes in the same direction. Causation, however, runs from the decisions to raise

spending to the tax changes. For the full postwar sample, this type of tax change is sufficiently common

that it causes the overall relationship between tax revenues and spending to be significantly positive.

Excluding these spending-driven changes makes the relationship negative and marginally significant.

        The fact that tax cuts do not lead to reductions in spending raises the question of how the

government budget constraint is ultimately satisfied. We find that long-run tax cuts are offset by

legislated tax increases and non-legislated increases in revenues over the next several years. Thus, it

appears that in the wake of tax cuts, budget balance is restored mainly on the tax side rather than the

spending side.

        There are two main caveats to our conclusions about the starve the beast hypothesis. First,
                                                                                                          45


because our estimates are not highly precise, the hypothesis that tax cuts exert some restraining influence

on spending cannot be rejected. Second, although we find that the fall in revenues caused by a tax cut

disappears after a few years, some of this disappearance is most likely the result of a temporary output

boom. Thus, we do not completely resolve the issue of how the government restores long-run budget

balance following a tax cut.        Since the government’s long-run budgetary situation deteriorated

substantially over the period we consider, to some extent this limitation is inherent: not all of the

offsetting actions have yet occurred. Both caveats suggest that the conclusion that tax cuts do not restrain

government spending at all may be too strong. Nonetheless, over the period we consider, there is no

evidence of any such effect.

        The finding that tax cuts do not appear to restrain government spending could obviously have

implications for policy. At the very least, policymakers should be aware that the historical experience

suggests that tax cuts tend to lead to tax increases rather than to spending cuts.

        The finding also has implications for models that assume the existence of a starve the beast effect.

For example, Bohn (1992) argues that one reason for Ricardian equivalence to fail is that a tax cut implies

that government spending will be lower; as a result, a tax cut leads households to reduce their estimates of

the present value of their present and future liabilities, and so to increase their consumption. Similarly, a

restraining effect of tax cuts on government spending plays a central role in the theories of strategic debt

accumulation of Persson and Svensson (1989), Tabellini and Alesina (1990), and others. If decision-

makers understand that tax cuts do not in fact reduce government spending, none of these mechanisms

can operate. Thus, better estimates of the effects of tax cuts on spending may require changes to the

modeling of a wide range of issues.
                                                                                                  46


                                           REFERENCES


Anderson, William, Myles S. Wallace, and John T. Warner. 1986. “Government Spending and Taxation:
       What Causes What?” Southern Economic Journal 52 (January): 630-639.

Auerbach, Alan J. 2000. “Formation of Fiscal Policy: The Experience of the Past Twenty-Five Years.”
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 6 (April): 9-23.

Auerbach, Alan J. 2003. “Fiscal Policy, Past and Present.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
       1, pp. 75-138.

Barro, Robert J. 2003. “There’s a Lot to Like about Bush’s Tax Plan.” Business Week, February 24, p.
        28.

Becker, Gary S., Edward P. Lazear, and Kevin M. Murphy. 2003. “The Double Benefit of Tax Cuts.”
        Wall Street Journal, October 7, p. A20.

Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan. 2003. “Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government.”
       Journal of Law and Economics 46 (October): 293-340.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects
       of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117
       (November): 1329-1368.

Bohn, Henning. 1991. “Budget Balance through Revenue or Spending Adjustments? Some Historical
       Evidence for the United States.” Journal of Monetary Economics 27 (June): 333-359.

Bohn, Henning. 1992. “Endogenous Government Spending and Ricardian Equivalence.” Economic
       Journal 102 (May): 588-597.

Budget of the United States Government. U.S. Office of Management and Budget. Various years.

Buchanan, James M., and Richard E. Wagner. 1977. Democracy in Deficit: The Political Legacy of
      Lord Keynes. New York: Academic Press.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Kevin A. Hassett. 2002. “Marginal Tax Rate Cuts and the Public Tax
       Debate.” National Tax Journal 55 (March): 119-131.

Congressional Record. U.S. Congress. Various issues.

Economic Report of the President. U.S. Office of the President. Various years.

Friedman, Milton. 1967. “Fiscal Responsibility.” Newsweek, August 7, p. 68.

Hines, Frank T. 1943. “National Service Life Insurance.” Annals of the American Academy of Political
        and Social Science 227 (May): 83-93.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney Newey, and Harvey S. Rosen. 1989. “The Revenue-Expenditures
       Nexus: Evidence from Local Government Data.” International Economic Review 30 (May):
       415-429.
                                                                                                 47


Miller, Stephen M., and Frank S. Russek. 1990. “Co-Integration and Error-Correction Models: The
        Temporal Causality between Government Taxes and Spending.” Southern Economic Journal 57
        (July): 221-229.

Niskanen, William A. 1978. “Deficits, Government Spending, and Inflation: What Is the Evidence?”
       Journal of Monetary Economics 4 (August): 591-602.

Persson, Torsten, and Lars E. O. Svensson. 1989. “Why a Stubborn Conservative Would Run a Deficit:
        Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (May): 325-
        345.

Ram, Rati. 1988. “Additional Evidence on Causality between Government Revenues and Government
      Expenditure.” Southern Economic Journal 54 (January): 763-769.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2006. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks:            It’s All in the Timing.”
      Unpublished manuscript, University of California, San Diego (July).

Ramey, Valerie A., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1998. “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of
      Government Spending.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48 (June): 145-
      194.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2007a. “A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax Changes.”
       Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley (October).

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2007b. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
       Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” Unpublished manuscript, University of
       California, Berkeley (July).

Social Security Bulletin. Social Security Administration. Various issues.

Survey of Current Business. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Various issues.

Tabellini, Guido, and Alberto Alesina. 1990. “Voting on the Budget Deficit.” American Economic
        Review 80 (March): 37-49.

von Furstenberg, George M., R. Jeffrey Green, and Jin-Ho Jeong. 1986. “Tax and Spend, or Spend and
       Tax?” Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (May): 179-188.

Woolley, John, and Gerhard Peters. The American Presidency Project (www.presidency.ucsb.edu).
                         Table 1
  Estimated Impact of Tax Changes on Total Expenditures


          Variable                       Coefficient

        Constant                         0.72 (0.25)
        Tax Change:
          Lag 0                          0.33   (0.85)
          Lag 1                          0.46   (0.85)
          Lag 2                          0.05   (0.85)
          Lag 3                         –0.27   (0.84)
          Lag 4                         –0.98   (0.88)
          Lag 5                         –1.59   (0.88)
          Lag 6                          0.17   (0.88)
          Lag 7                         –1.46   (0.76)
          Lag 8                          2.72   (0.77)
          Lag 9                          2.63   (0.77)
          Lag 10                        –1.02   (0.77)
          Lag 11                        –1.52   (0.76)
          Lag 12                        –2.32   (0.76)
          Lag 13                        –2.21   (0.76)
          Lag 14                        –1.00   (0.80)
          Lag 15                         0.37   (0.80)
          Lag 16                         0.34   (0.81)
          Lag 17                        –0.06   (0.78)
          Lag 18                         0.43   (0.78)
          Lag 19                         0.91   (0.78)
          Lag 20                         0.02   (0.80)

        R2                               0.20
        D.W.                             1.89
        s.e.e.                           2.74

Note: Estimates of equation (1) in the text using long-run tax
changes and total gross expenditures less interest payments.
The sample period is 1950Q1–2006Q4. The numbers in
parentheses are standard errors.
                                                   Percent of GDP




          -3.5
                 -3.0
                        -2.5
                               -2.0
                                      -1.5
                                                   -1.0
                                                          -0.5
                                                                 0.0
                                                                       0.5
                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                             2.0
                                                                                                                                   2.5
1945:01
1947:01
1949:01
1951:01
1953:01
1955:01
1957:01
1959:01
                                                                                              Spending-Driven




1961:01
1963:01
1965:01
1967:01
1969:01
1971:01
1973:01
1975:01
                                                                                                                                                            Figure 1




1977:01
1979:01
1981:01
1983:01
                                                                                                           Countercyclical
                                                                                                                                         Legislated Tax Changes Classified by Motivation




1985:01
1987:01
                                        Long-Run




1989:01
                                                                             Deficit-Driven




1991:01
1993:01
1995:01
1997:01
1999:01
2001:01
2003:01
2005:01
                                                   Figure 2
                       Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Expenditures


          12

          10

           8

           6

           4
Percent




           2

           0

          -2

          -4

          -6
               0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7    8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                      Quarters
                                                          Figure 3
                              Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Expenditures
                                                Using Different Specifications


                    a. Starting Sample in 1957Q1                            b. Including 40 Lags of Tax Changes


           12                                                              12

           10                                                              10

            8                                                               8

            6                                                               6
Percent




                                                                 Percent
            4                                                               4

            2                                                               2

            0                                                               0

           -2                                                              -2

           -4                                                              -4

           -6                                                              -6
                0     2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                           0     4   8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
                                   Quarter                                                       Quarter



          c. Including 11 Lags of Total Expenditures                                d. Using a Two-Variable VAR


           12                                                              12

           10                                                              10

            8                                                               8

            6                                                               6
Percent




                                                                 Percent




            4                                                               4

            2                                                               2

            0                                                               0

           -2                                                              -2

           -4                                                              -4

           -6                                                              -6
                0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24                               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                   Quarter                                                       Quarter
                                                   Figure 3 (continued)
                            Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Expenditures
                                              Using Different Specifications


                e. Including War Dummy Variable                            f. Total Expenditures Less Defense


           12                                                            12

           10                                                            10
                                                                          8
            8
                                                                          6
            6
                                                                          4
Percent




                                                               Percent
            4                                                             2
            2                                                             0
                                                                          -2
            0
                                                                          -4
           -2
                                                                          -6
           -4                                                             -8
           -6                                                            -10
                0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                            0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                 Quarter                                                       Quarter



          g. Including Democratic Dummy Variable                         h. Using PDV Measure of Tax Changes


           12                                                            12

           10                                                            10

            8                                                             8

            6                                                             6
Percent




                                                               Percent




            4                                                             4

            2                                                             2

            0                                                             0

           -2                                                            -2

           -4                                                            -4

           -6                                                            -6
                0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                            0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                 Quarter                                                       Quarter
                                                           Figure 3 (continued)
                                    Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Expenditures
                                                      Using Different Specifications


                 i. Expenditures as a Share of Trend GDP                                j. Expenditures as a Share of Actual GDP


                  2.0                                                                    2.0

                  1.5                                                                    1.5

                  1.0                                                                    1.0
Percent of GDP




                                                                       Percent of GDP
                  0.5                                                                    0.5

                  0.0                                                                    0.0

                 -0.5                                                                   -0.5

                 -1.0                                                                   -1.0

                 -1.5                                                                   -1.5
                        0   2   4    6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                                   0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                          Quarter                                                              Quarter
                                                    Figure 4
            Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Expenditures by Type of Tax Change


                    a. Long-Run Tax Changes                                b. Deficit-Driven Tax Changes


          16                                                        16

          12                                                        12

           8                                                         8

           4                                                         4
Percent




                                                          Percent
           0                                                         0

           -4                                                        -4

           -8                                                        -8

          -12                                                       -12

          -16                                                       -16
                0    2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                      0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                 Quarter                                                  Quarter



                c. Countercyclical Tax Changes                            d. Spending-Driven Tax Changes


          16                                                        16

          12                                                        12

           8                                                         8

           4                                                         4
Percent




                                                          Percent




           0                                                         0

           -4                                                        -4

           -8                                                        -8

          -12                                                       -12

          -16                                                       -16
                0    2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                      0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                 Quarter                                                  Quarter
                                              Figure 4 (continued)
            Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Expenditures by Type of Tax Change


                 e. All Legislated Tax Changes                      f. All Legislated Less Spending-Driven


          16                                                         16

          12                                                         12

           8                                                          8

           4                                                          4
Percent




                                                          Percent
           0                                                          0

           -4                                                        -4

           -8                                                        -8

          -12                                                       -12

          -16                                                       -16
                0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                       0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                Quarter                                                   Quarter



                g. Cyclically Adjusted Revenues                     h. C. A. Revenues Less Spending-Driven


          16                                                         16

          12                                                         12

           8                                                          8

           4                                                          4
Percent




                                                          Percent




           0                                                          0

           -4                                                        -4

           -8                                                        -8

          -12                                                       -12

          -16                                                       -16
                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                                Quarter                                                   Quarter
                                                         Figure 5
                               Estimated Impact of a Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Total Receipts


                       a. Full Sample                                              b. Starting Sample in 1957Q1


          10                                                              10

           8                                                               8

           6                                                               6

           4                                                               4
Percent




                                                                Percent
           2                                                               2

           0                                                               0

          -2                                                              -2

          -4                                                              -4

          -6                                                              -6
               0   2   4   6     8 10 12 14 16 18 20                           0     2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                  Quarter                                                        Quarter
                                                              Figure 6
                            Estimated Impact of a Long-Run Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on Tax Changes by Type


                   a. On Deficit-Driven Tax Changes                                    b. On Countercyclical Tax Changes


                 1.4                                                                 1.4

                 1.2                                                                 1.2

                 1.0                                                                 1.0

                 0.8                                                                 0.8
Percent of GDP




                                                                    Percent of GDP
                 0.6                                                                 0.6

                 0.4                                                                 0.4

                 0.2                                                                 0.2

                 0.0                                                                 0.0

                 -0.2                                                                -0.2

                 -0.4                                                                -0.4
                        0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                                 0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                        Quarter                                                             Quarter



                  c. On Spending-Driven Tax Changes                                  d. On All Other Tax Changes Combined


                 1.4                                                                 1.4

                 1.2                                                                 1.2

                 1.0                                                                 1.0

                 0.8                                                                 0.8
Percent of GDP




                                                                    Percent of GDP




                 0.6                                                                 0.6

                 0.4                                                                 0.4

                 0.2                                                                 0.2

                 0.0                                                                 0.0

                 -0.2                                                                -0.2

                 -0.4                                                                -0.4
                        0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                                 0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                        Quarter                                                             Quarter
                                                          Figure 7
                  Estimated Impact of a Long-Run Tax Cut of 1% of GDP on All Other Tax Changes Combined
                                               Using Different Specifications


                        a. Starting Sample in 1957Q1                                       b. Including 40 Lags


                 1.4                                                            1.4

                 1.2                                                            1.2

                 1.0                                                            1.0

                 0.8                                                            0.8
Percent of GDP




                                                               Percent of GDP
                 0.6                                                            0.6

                 0.4                                                            0.4

                 0.2                                                            0.2

                 0.0                                                            0.0

                 -0.2                                                           -0.2

                 -0.4                                                           -0.4
                        0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20                            0   4   8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
                                        Quarter                                                      Quarter
                                               Logarithms                                                                                                                       Logarithms




      0.0
            0.5
                                               1.0
                                                                           1.5
                                                                                 2.0
                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                             -0.5
                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.0
1962:02                                                                                                                                1947:01
1962:03
                                                                                                                                       1947:02
1962:04
                                                                                                                                       1947:03
1963:01
                                                                                                                                       1947:04
1963:02
1963:03                                                                                                                                1948:01

1963:04                                                                                                                                1948:02
1964:01                                                                                                                                1948:03
1964:02                                                                                                                                1948:04
1964:03                                                                                                                                1949:01
1964:04                                                                                                                                1949:02
1965:01
                                                                                                                                       1949:03
1965:02
                                                                                                                                       1949:04
1965:03
                                                                                                                                       1950:01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 8




1965:04




                                                     Nondefense Spending
1966:01                                                                                                                                1950:02




                  National Defense Purchases
1966:02                                                                                                                                1950:03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a. Revenue Act of 1948




                                                                                                              b. Revenue Act of 1964
1966:03                                                                                                                                1950:04
1966:04                                                                                                                                1951:01
1967:01                                                                                                                                1951:02
1967:02                                                                                                                                1951:03
1967:03
                                                                                                                                       1951:04
1967:04
                                                                                                                                       1952:01
1968:01
                                                                                                                                       1952:02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Real Federal Government Expenditures after Four Key Long-Run Tax Cuts




1968:02
                                                                                                                                       1952:03
1968:03
                                                                                   Total Expenditures                                  1952:04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Total Expenditures




1968:04
                                                                                                                                                          Nondefense Spending




1969:01                                                                                                                                1953:01
                                                                                                                                                                                      National Defense Purchases




1969:02                                                                                                                                1953:02
                                               Logarithms                                                                                                                   Logarithms




      1.0
            1.5
                                               2.0
                                                      2.5
                                                                                  3.0
                                                                                                             3.5
                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.0
1999:03                                                                                                                                                   1979:03
1999:04                                                                                                                                                   1979:04
2000:01                                                                                                                                                   1980:01
2000:02                                                                                                                                                   1980:02
2000:03                                                                                                                                                   1980:03
2000:04                                                                                                                                                   1980:04
2001:01                                                                                                                                                   1981:01
2001:02                                                                                                                                                   1981:02
2001:03                                                                                                                                                   1981:03
2001:04                                                                                                                                                   1981:04
2002:01
                                                                                                                                                          1982:01
2002:02
                                                                                                                                                          1982:02
2002:03
                                                                                                                                                          1982:03
2002:04
                                                                                                                                                          1982:04
2003:01
                                                                                                                                                          1983:01
2003:02
                                                                                                                                                          1983:02
2003:03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                          1983:03
2003:04
                                                                                                                                                          1983:04
2004:01
                                                                                                                                                          1984:01
2004:02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c. Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981




                                                                                                                   d. EGTRRA of 2001 and JGTRRA of 2003
2004:03                                                                                                                                                   1984:02
2004:04                                                                                                                                                   1984:03
2005:01                                                                                                                                                   1984:04
2005:02                                                                                                                                                   1985:01
2005:03                                                                                                                                                   1985:02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Real Federal Government Expenditures after Four Key Long-Run Tax Cuts




2005:04                                                                                                                                                   1985:03
                                                                                        Total Expenditures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Total Expenditures


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nondefense Spending




2006:01                                                                                                                                                   1985:04




                                                            Nondefense Spending




                  National Defense Purchases
                                                                                                                                                                              National Defense Purchases




2006:02                                                                                                                                                   1986:01
2006:03                                                                                                                                                   1986:02
2006:04                                                                                                                                                   1986:03
