                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE IMPACT OF MILTON FRIEDMAN ON MODERN MONETARY ECONOMICS:
                   SETTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT ON
             PAUL KRUGMAN'S "WHO WAS MILTON FRIEDMAN?"

                                          Edward Nelson
                                         Anna J. Schwartz

                                      Working Paper 13546
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13546


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2007




We are indebted to David Laidler and Lawrence White for helpful correspondence on the subject matter
of this paper. Justin Hauke and Faith Weller provided research assistance. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, the Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Edward Nelson and Anna J. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Milton Friedman on Modern Monetary Economics:
Setting the Record Straight on Paul Krugman's "Who Was Milton Friedman?"
Edward Nelson and Anna J. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 13546
October 2007
JEL No. E31,E51,E58

                                             ABSTRACT

Paul Krugman's essay "Who Was Milton Friedman?" seriously mischaracterizes Friedman's economics
and his legacy. In this paper we provide a rejoinder to Krugman on these issues. In the course of setting
the record straight, we provide a self-contained guide to Milton Friedman's impact on modern monetary
economics and on today's central banks. We also refute the conclusions that Krugman draws about
monetary policy from the experiences of the United States in the 1930s and of Japan in the 1990s.


Edward Nelson
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166
edward.nelson@stls.frb.org

Anna J. Schwartz
NBER
365 Fifth Ave, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
aschwartz@gc.cuny.edu
Introduction
        Paul Krugman’s essay “Who Was Milton Friedman?” (Krugman, 2007a) seriously
mischaracterizes Friedman’s economics and his legacy as well as the legacy of monetarism.1
Krugman also mischaracterizes monetary policy in the United States in the 1930s and in Japan in
the 1990s. In this paper we provide a rejoinder to Krugman on these issues. In the course of
setting the record straight, we provide a self-contained guide to Milton Friedman’s main
contributions to monetary policy debates and a picture of his impact on the policies of today’s
central banks.
        We begin this rejoinder by summarizing Krugman’s principal misstatements regarding
Friedman’s body of work and its influence on monetary policy formulation today. Krugman
indulges in inaccurate forays into economic history by attributing the depth and duration of the
U.S. Great Depression in the 1930s and Japan’s extended slump in the 1990s to a liquidity trap,
and giving an incorrect picture of the impact of monetarism on monetary policy (Section 1).
        In Section 2, we trace the development of Friedman’s ideas on inflation, beginning with
the record of his opposition to the macroeconomic policies pursued in the United States during
the 1960s and 1970s. We also briefly review Friedman’s role in theoretical debates on inflation.
We highlight differences between the views of Keynesians and those of Friedman. Friedman
rejected both the cost-push and the simple Phillips curve approaches that were emblematic of
Keynesian 1970s inflation analysis. We then describe the steps leading to Friedman’s
modifications of the simple Phillips curve and his criticism of Keynesian “patched-up” versions
of the Phillips curve.
        We next turn to the 1970s debates about price controls as the means of reducing inflation,
and show that Krugman’s (2007b) statements about the 1970s debate on controls in his reply to
our criticisms exhibited further misunderstanding of the importance of monetarist debates and
the contribution of monetarism.
        We contrast Friedman’s view on incomes policies to those of his leading Keynesian
opponents (James Tobin, Paul Samuelson, Arthur Okun, and Walter Heller).

———————————————————————————————————————
1
  Krugman’s essay appeared in the New York Review of Books on February 15, 2007. Our Letter to the Editor in
response to the essay, limited to 750 words by the magazine’s rules, and a reply by Krugman, appeared in the March
29, 2007 issue (Schwartz and Nelson, 2007; Krugman, 2007b). Our response dealt only with some obvious
inaccuracies in the essay although it alluded to questionable versions of technical economic issues in Krugman’s
commentary. Apart from the space limitations the periodical imposed, The New York Review of Books is not an
appropriate forum for a discussion of these issues. This rejoinder serves that purpose.


                                                        1
         We show that Krugman’s assertion that opposition to price controls was common ground
among monetarists and non-monetarists is incorrect.
         Sections 3 to 5 then discuss Friedman’s further influences on modern monetary policy
thinking.
         In Section 6, we refute Krugman’s claims that a liquidity trap characterized monetary
policy in the Great Depression in the United States in the 1930s and in Japan in the 1990s. For
Krugman it is enough to note that short-term nominal interest rates are close to or at the zero
bound to designate the two episodes as examples of a liquidity trap. He neglects an investigation
of the actual motivations of the policymakers involved, and so the factors that account for the
policies they adopted; he also understates the scope that was available for achieving a successful
monetary expansion.
         We conclude the paper in Section 7 with remarks on the credibility of Krugman’s
portrayal of Milton Friedman.


1. Krugman’s misstatements in “Who Was Milton Friedman?” about Friedman’s economics
    and about monetarism, as well as his assertions of existence of liquidity traps


    a.   On Friedman
Krugman doubletalks throughout his essay. How can he say Friedman was a great economist
and a great man, if he believes Friedman to have been intellectually dishonest? Or argue that
Friedman was a man of courage, if he misled people?


    b. On Monetarism
According to Krugman, the generally successful monetary policies observed in the United States
and other countries since the 1980s amount to an unambiguous defeat for Friedman and
monetarism. Krugman’s discussion is confused to say the least—for example, in treating
Friedman’s work on inflation as separate from his work on monetary theory and policy.
Krugman does certainly create the clear impression that monetary policy since the 1980s
constitutes a return to the pre-Friedman, pre-monetarism status quo.2 But the last 20 years have

———————————————————————————————————————
2
 “… ever since then [1984] the Fed has engaged in precisely the sort of discretionary fine-tuning that Friedman
decried” (Krugman, 2007a).


                                                         2
not seen a return in the United States and other countries to the wage-price guideposts and wage-
price controls of the 1960s and 1970s; nor have they been characterized by anything other than
wide acceptance of Friedman’s position that controls and guideposts were ineffective ways to
fight inflation. Replacement of these failed measures with arrangements in which central banks
accept responsibility for inflation control, is a major legacy of Friedman and of monetarism—a
legacy which Krugman (2007a), in attempting to press his case that “monetarism is now widely
regarded a failure,” overlooks.
       Does Krugman really believe that the principles monetarists advocated no longer
influence the Federal Reserve and central banks in all advanced countries? Does he deny that
Friedman’s position that inflation is a monetary phenomenon has shaped monetary policy
strategy around the world? Does he believe that the distinction between nominal and real
interest rates, which had fallen into virtual disuse in U.S. and U.K. monetary policy discussions
until the monetarist counterrevolution, is not a central part of contemporary policymaking? And
what does he make of the public recognition of Friedman’s contributions to monetary economics
by such senior policymakers as Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, former Chairman Alan
Greenspan, and Bank of England Governor Mervyn King?
   A recent evaluation of the contribution of monetarism by Michael Woodford (2007, p. 3)
notes accurately that “monetarism established that monetary policy can do something about
inflation, and that the central bank can reasonably be held accountable for controlling inflation.”
This evaluation is inconsistent with Krugman’s dismissal of monetarism.
   In his reply to us, Krugman (2007b) objects that “to say that central banks now take
responsibility for inflation is a long way from saying that monetarism has succeeded.” But
Krugman himself is on record as saying the following in a 1999 talk (Krugman, 1999):
        We live in the Age of the Central Banker…Through much of the world, quasi-independent
        central banks are now entrusted with the job of steering economies between the rocks of
        inflation and the whirlpool of deflation. Their judgment is often questioned, but their power is
        not… we have all become sort-of monetarists…




                                                   3
Therefore, in 1999 Krugman described the assignment of inflation control to central banks as
evidence that “we have all become sort-of monetarists,” but in 2007 he claims that this
assignment cannot be said to be a legacy of Friedman and monetarism!3


        c. Liquidity trap
Krugman disagrees with the accounts of the Depression given in Friedman and Schwartz (1963a)
and Friedman’s other writings. Krugman (2007a) disputes the Friedman-Schwartz position that
preventing the money supply collapse would have avoided the Great Depression, and even
argues that Japan’s experience in the 1990s shows that central banks cannot increase the money
supply much under Depression conditions. These claims indicate a degree of hardline
Keynesianism on Krugman’s part beyond that held by many of Friedman’s contemporary
Keynesian critics.4 Does Krugman really believe that U.S. monetary policy was helpless in the
1930s? Does he believe that the Federal Reserve could not have conducted large-scale open
market purchases? Does he deny that such operations would have prevented the collapse of the
money supply and the economy? In his reply to us, Krugman (2007b) confirms that he indeed
embraces the extreme Keynesian answers to these questions—he believes that the central bank
was largely powerless to raise the money stock, and that, if achieved, monetary expansion would
not have revived the economy. We argue the contrary case in Section 6, while also taking the
opportunity to correct Krugman’s misstatements about Friedman’s work on the Great
Depression. Prior to that discussion, however, we consider the contributions of Friedman and
monetarism to monetary theory and policymaking (Sections 2 to 5).


2. Milton Friedman’s position on inflation


        In this section, we provide a perspective on Friedman’s role in debates on inflation in the
1960s and 1970s. But as background for this discussion, we start with a brief review of his
participation in theoretical debates. This review highlights the differences between his views
and those of Keynesians. This allows us to bring out the corresponding differences between
———————————————————————————————————————
3
  Krugman’s 1999 remarks are downloadable from the internet (see our bibliography). A published version has also
appeared (Krugman, 2000).
4
  Krugman’s (2007a, 2007b) position about the power of monetary policy is more negative than the position
advanced in his early work on Japan (e.g., Krugman, 1998). In that early work he was already applying the label
“liquidity trap” to Japan, but was nevertheless proposing monetary policy actions to revive the Japanese economy.


                                                        4
Friedman and Keynesians on policy issues in the 1970s. Our review of these debates establishes
that Krugman (2007b) is incorrect to claim that opposition to price controls was common ground
among monetarists and Keynesians. Our discussion of more recent developments emphasizes
that the contemporary shift to inflation-oriented monetary policies reflects the influence of
Friedman and monetarism.


2.1 Keynesian economics and inflation


And if price-levels are determined by money-costs, it follows that whilst an ‘appropriate’ quantity
of money is a necessary condition of stable prices, it is not a sufficient condition.
                                                               John Maynard Keynes (1943, p. 185).
…monetary restraint is a sufficient condition for controlling inflation…
                                                                Milton Friedman (1980a).


        Friedman regarded monetary policy as the decisive instrument for controlling inflation.
This position distinguished Friedman from Keynes himself—as a direct comparison of the
Keynes and Friedman quotations given above makes clear. Friedman further contended that
monetary policy could not determine real variables such as output or employment in the long
run. Friedman’s stand on what monetary policy could do, and what it could not do, stood him
apart from the predominant views associated with successive versions of Keynesian economics.
The successive Keynesian positions were: (i) that inflation was a cost-push phenomenon
independent of demand pressure (at least until output reached its full-employment level); and (ii)
the early Phillips-curve position, according to which inflation did depend on demand pressure,
but a menu of trade-off choices existed, whereby higher inflation could permanently buy lower
unemployment. We consider Friedman’s characterization and critique of each of these positions,
before considering his own view of the inflation process.
        Friedman’s characterization of the Keynesian view of inflation. Friedman (1953a, p.
118) characterized the Keynesian view of price-level behavior as follows: prices were insensitive
to increases or decreases in nominal aggregate demand so long as output remained below its full-
employment level; once output attained its full-employment position, on the other hand, prices
absorbed any further increase in nominal aggregate demand. He later described the rigid-price-
level assumption as “the distinctive feature” of Keynesian economics (Friedman, 1972a, p. 906),



                                                     5
prominent both in the work of “Keynes himself, and his American followers even more”
(Friedman and Schwartz, 1982, p. 426).5
         According to Friedman’s characterization, while Keynesian analysis did acknowledge
that price fluctuations occurred while output was below its full-employment value, it did not treat
these fluctuations endogenously.6 Rather, as Friedman put it, prices and the inflation rate were
treated as an “institutional datum.”7 In particular, variations in inflation were attributed to
exogenous cost-push forces. Friedman emphasized that the view of inflation as cost-push was a
form of Keynesian analysis which particularly received support from Keynes’ General Theory
(1936). A markup equation for prices, “link[ing] prices to costs, mainly wages,” with costs
autonomously determined, was “derivable from Keynes’ system,”8 and the treatment of inflation
as cost-push was “more general [than the price-rigidity assumption] and perhaps more consistent
with the spirit rather than the letter of Keynes’ analysis.”9
         This characterization of Keynes (1936) was challenged in Friedman’s 1972 debate with
his critics, with Friedman (1972a, p. 906) noting that three of his five critics disputed his
interpretation. But Friedman’s position is consistent with the views of Roy Harrod, Keynes’
biographer.10 Harrod wrote in 1958:
     I would venture to point out that the contrast between demand inflation and cost inflation is
     quite fundamental to what is known as Keynesian economics. Those who regard cost
     inflation and demand inflation as similar phenomena should be regarded as pre-Keynesian.
     (Harrod, 1958, p. 115, para. 68).

         Harrod went on to say that Keynes’ practice in the General Theory of expressing
variables in “wage units” was a means of abstracting from cost-push inflation when studying
variations in aggregate demand. Harrod’s statement is consistent with Friedman’s portrayal of
Keynesian economics as a doctrine that espoused a cost-push view of inflation. In addition,

———————————————————————————————————————
5
  More specifically, Friedman interpreted Keynes as assuming wage rigidity. But Friedman treated this as implying
de facto price rigidity (see, for example, Friedman, 1977, p. 468). The perception of wage rigidity as implying price
rigidity was consistent with standard representations of Keynesian economics, such as most traditional IS-LM
analysis. It also reflected Friedman’s preference for a “concentration on a few key magnitudes” (Friedman, 1972a,
p. 908) and therefore often abstracting from “the margin between prices and wages” (Friedman and Schwartz, 1982,
p. 446). See also Friedman (1976a, p. 218) for a related discussion.
6
  See Friedman and Schwartz (1982, 49−50).
7
  See, for example, Friedman (1972a, p. 910; 1976a, p. 219); Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 42).
8
  Friedman (1972a, Appendix 2, point 11); Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 49).
9
  Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 61).
10
   See Harrod (1951). Readers of Keynes (1943) will also find unmistakable support for Friedman’s characterization
of Keynes’ views.


                                                         6
Harrod’s statement supports Friedman’s position that the rigid-prices assumption was a natural
simplification in Keynes’ analysis because price movements served no economic function in that
analysis when output was below full employment; instead of acting to clear demand/supply
imbalances, price movements simply reflected autonomous cost variations, so it was logical to
treat prices as rigid when considering demand-management issues.11
         Simple Phillips curve approach. Friedman acknowledged that later developments of
Keynesian economics made the price level endogenous by replacing the assumption of rigid or
exogenous prices when the output gap was negative, with the simple Phillips curve approach. In
the early Phillips-curve literature, inflation depended on the output gap (or on unemployment
relative to its full-employment level). Therefore, in contrast to early Keynesian analysis, the
price level was now treated as endogenous for all levels of output. Friedman (1977, p. 469)
noted that the Phillips curve approach seemingly “filled a gap in Keynes’ theoretical structure”
by adding inflation to the list of endogenous variables.12


2.2 Friedman’s view of inflation


         Friedman rejected both versions of Keynesian inflation analysis: the cost-push view and
the simple Phillips-curve view.
         Friedman rejected the cost-push view in favor of the position that inflation depends on
monetary policy via an aggregate demand channel. “The price level and inflation are monetary
phenomena,” he wrote, “not institutionally determined data to be analyzed by psychologists and
industrial relations and industrial organization specialists.”13 The factors typically cited as
sources of cost-push inflation could not, in fact, have a sustained effect on inflation unless they
were accommodated by monetary policy.
         Friedman’s objection to simple Phillips curve analysis, on the other hand, was that it
preserved a form of money illusion. The underlying inflation/unemployment or inflation/output
gap relationship embedded in simple Phillips curves was typically motivated by appeal to the
determination of wages and employment in the labor market. Friedman (1968) argued that the
———————————————————————————————————————
11
   See Friedman (1972a, Appendix 2, point 9), and Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 49).
12
   In addition, unlike early Keynesian work in which full employment corresponded to maximum feasible
employment, Phillips curve analysis was more flexible by allowing for the possibility of positive output gaps (i.e.,
overfull employment), as Friedman (1976a, p. 218) noted.
13
   Friedman (1975, p. 176).


                                                          7
flaw in this approach was that it made bargaining over real quantities (i.e., the equilibrium level
of employment or hours worked) a function of a nominal variable, namely nominal wage growth
Δwt.14 Traditional Phillips curve analysis imposed a form of money illusion by not including in
the equation for Δwt an inflation term, with unit coefficient, that was needed to make the
equation effectively a description of real wage adjustment.
         At the same time, a satisfactory Phillips-curve specification could not be obtained simply
by adding current inflation (Δpt) to a Δwt equation. The reason is that such a modification would
make the equation one for real wage growth (Δwt – Δpt), with nothing to say about the
determination of Δwt and Δpt separately; that is, it could not serve as an equation pinning down
inflation behavior.15 Friedman (1968, 1977) instead proposed a different modification, which
still admitted a long-run interpretation of the equation as a real wage equation. This proposal
was to view the Phillips curve as describing the evolution of perceived real wage growth: for
example, Δwt – Et−1Δpt. Underlying this modified Phillips curve was the idea that contracts for
nominal wages were negotiated conditional on last period’s expectation of this period’s price
level.16 The resulting Phillips curve was of the form Δwt = Et−1Δpt + ξu (ut – ut*); if Δpt is then
substituted for Δwt via a constant-markup assumption, there emerges the expectation-augmented
Phillips curve, Δpt = Et−1Δpt + ξu (ut – ut*).17 The expectations-augmented Phillips curve
simultaneously allows for a short-run inflation/unemployment relation for a given natural rate of
unemployment (more precisely, a {Δpt, ut – ut*} relation); as well as the long-run absence of
such a relationship, with ut invariably reverting to the natural unemployment rate ut* irrespective
of the maintained inflation rate. Phelps (1967, 1968) provided modifications to the Phillips
curve that paralleled and overlapped with Friedman’s proposals.
         Though an explicit augmented-expectations Phillips curve was not written down in
Friedman (1968) (appearing, however, in Friedman, 1970a, and Friedman and Schwartz, 1982),
the discussion in Friedman (1968) provided a basic underpinning for subsequent developments
of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve and the natural rate hypothesis, including rational
———————————————————————————————————————
14
   Here wt is the log of the nominal wage index in period t, and Δ is the first difference operator.
15
   See Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 50).
16
   Friedman’s (1968, p. 10) terminology for the price level relevant to the wage decision was the “earlier price
level,” but a more precise terminology, and one consistent with our use of Et−1Δpt in the text, would be “the previous
period’s expectation of the current price level.” Such an interpretation is consistent with Friedman’s (1977, p. 457)
statement that the “perceived future average price” enters nominal wage agreements.
17
   As in traditional Phillips curve analysis, ξu < 0, to ensure that inflation responds to excess demand and supply.


                                                          8
expectations models with nominal price or wage stickiness such as those in Fischer (1977) and
Taylor (1980). That influence continues to be reflected in the modern literature that incorporates
nominal price contracts into a dynamic general equilibrium environment. An early study in this
literature, King and Wolman (1996), noted the common themes with those advanced by
Friedman, and the authors listed five elements which meant that their “model is monetarist.”
These included the presence of temporary price stickiness, which implied “short-run non-
neutrality of money with long-run neutrality,” an implication they noted was “in line with the
perspective of Friedman and Schwartz (1963a, 1963b).” The authors further observed that their
model implied an “emphasis on expectations... in the tradition of Irving Fisher and Milton
Friedman” (King and Wolman, 1996, pp. 83−84).
        Friedman (1977, p. 469) further criticized Keynesian economics for using “patched-up
versions” of the Phillips curve that added explanatory variables, but did not make the vital
modification of including expected inflation with a unit coefficient. Starting with Phillips (1958)
and Samuelson and Solow (1960), subscribers to a simple Phillips curve had tried to explain
deviations from the curve by appeal to cost-shifting variables such as import prices or labor
union pressure. In Friedman’s view, as an empirical matter, a simple Phillips curve augmented
by these additional explanatory variables was not an adequate substitute for the expectations-
augmented Phillips curve; and as a theoretical matter, adding these extra variables brought in
cost-push factors as supplementary explanations of inflation, and so actually went back in the
direction of treating prices as an institutional datum.18


2.3 Policy debates on wage and price controls in the 1970s


        Friedman’s analysis of inflation in the 1970s reflected his theoretical views. He
diagnosed the inflation problem in the United States and elsewhere as “excess demand” due to
monetary ease.19 He completely rejected wage and price controls as a solution, for several
interrelated reasons. One of these was traditional: controls did not genuinely remove inflationary
pressure but simply meant that price signals were suppressed, creating shortages, or had to be

———————————————————————————————————————
18
   See Friedman (1976a, p. 219) and the discussion of the inflation equations in Solow (1969) in Friedman (1976a, p.
228) and Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 446).
19
   See e.g. Friedman’s Newsweek columns “Burns and Guidelines” (June 15, 1970) and “Imitating Failure” (January
11, 1971), reprinted in Friedman (1972c, Chapter 2).


                                                         9
transmitted in a less efficient way, such as via quality changes. This line of argument paralleled
the criticism of wartime price controls in Friedman and Schwartz (1963a, p. 557).
        Friedman’s remaining arguments against controls reflected the circumstances of the
1970s policy debate and his reaction to it. Cost-push theories were being revived as an
explanation of U.S. inflation, and incomes policies (i.e., some variant of wage and price controls)
proposed as the ideal way of fighting this inflation. Friedman continued to reject cost-push as a
credible source of sustained inflationary pressure: he knew of no postwar episode explicable by
cost-push (Friedman, 1966), while the 1970s inflation was attributable to past monetary
expansion, not wage-push (Friedman, 1972b). Therefore, he saw no justification for incomes
policy. Controls and other actions on specific prices would transfer inflationary pressure to those
items in the price index not subject to control. With inflation due to excess demand, controls
were counterproductive: not only did they take attention away from the genuine cure, which was
reduced pressure on demand; by virtue of their perceived status as a distinct tool against
inflation, incomes policies actually gave policymakers more reason to pursue expansion of
aggregate demand.
        Accordingly, when President Nixon’s “New Economic Policy” of August 1971 included
a wage-price freeze (to be followed by further phases of controls), Friedman’s Newsweek column
was entitled “Why the Freeze Is a Mistake.” Friedman warned in 1971 that proponents of
incomes policy regarded it “as a substitute for demand restraint, not a supplement,” and would
lead to the attitude: “Full speed ahead. The price freeze will hold back inflation.”20
        Friedman’s opposition to incomes policy, his rejection of cost-push accounts of inflation
behavior, and his calls for monetary restraint, are in contrast with the positions of leading
Keynesians during the 1970s, as we will now show.


James Tobin. Tobin noted that a major difference on inflation policy between himself and
Friedman was in their attitudes to incomes policies:
         [Friedman] will not entertain wage and price controls or other incomes policies as
         alternatives or complements to anti-inflationary monetary restrictions… If they [i.e.,
         monetarists] triumph, democratic capitalist economies will suffer high unemployment
         and slow real growth for some years to come. (Tobin, 1976.)

———————————————————————————————————————
20
  See Friedman’s Newsweek columns “Imitating Failure” (January 11, 1971) and “Why the Freeze Is a Mistake”
(August 30, 1971), reprinted in Friedman (1972c, Chapters 1 and 2).


                                                     10
        Tobin was therefore an advocate of incomes policies to fight inflation. He saw cost-push
as a distinct source of inflation, and one requiring direct measures: “if the real wages and profits
demanded for producing output add up to more than the output produced, we will have to inject
more competition, or alternatively control a la guideposts, into the setting of prices and wages.”
(Tobin, 1966, p. 12.)
        In principle, Tobin supported monetary and fiscal policies that complemented the
incomes policies that he wanted deployed against inflation. But this did not lead him in practice
to support monetary restraint during the 1970s. Rather, Tobin endorsed the expansionary
economic policies pursued in the United States. For example, in lectures given in 1972, Tobin
wrote approvingly of the shift to expansionary policies that the Nixon Administration had
undertaken in 1971:
         At the beginning of the Nixon Administration there were indications that the new
         Council and other top economists were taking a monetarist line… But events, common
         sense, and politics have prevailed… The New Economics lives after all. (Tobin, 1974,
         p. 70.)

        In fact, Tobin advocated monetary and demand management policies for the United
States over the 1970s that were even more expansionary than those actually followed. In
February 1977 he recommended that the Fed “lower significantly short-term rates… say, by 150
basis points.” (February 4, 1977, testimony, in Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs Committee,
1977a, p. 138.) Thus, in addition to supporting incomes policies, Tobin supported the demand
policies that produced the mid-1970s peak in inflation, and wanted a monetary policy even
looser than that which produced the second peak of inflation in 1980.
        For Tobin, the contribution that aggregate demand management could make was in
securing full employment. From that perspective, demand restriction was justified when output
threatened to exceed its full-employment level. But constriction on aggregate demand in any
other circumstances was damaging to the full-employment objective, and, in Tobin’s view, did
not contribute to controlling inflation. After the mid-1960s, Tobin rarely perceived the economy
as being in an excess demand situation, and so often criticized U.S. monetary policy for being
too tight.




                                                  11
Paul Samuelson. Much of Paul Samuelson’s commentary on macroeconomic policy during the
1970s took place in his Newsweek columns. In these columns, Samuelson repeatedly stressed
cost-push as a source of inflation. In a late 1970 column, Samuelson acknowledged that
“classical demand-pull inflation” had been a problem over the second half of the 1960s, but he
argued that the situation had changed, and that inflation now reflected “the militant desire of
union members” for wage increases. This, he said, vindicated the “increasing emphasis on this
new disease of ‘cost-push’ or ‘sellers’ inflation’” that he had put in his writings. Samuelson
continued, “What can be done about cost-push inflation…? What is needed is some kind of
successful ‘incomes policy’…” Samuelson argued that incomes policy would leave demand
management free to produce full employment without wage pressure. (Newsweek, December 28,
1970.)
         In his October 4, 1971, column, Samuelson said that President Nixon’s New Economic
Policy was necessary, and that the year-to-end-1972 inflation rate would be 1% less than
otherwise as a consequence of the introduction of wage/price controls. In 1973, Samuelson
argued that the next price-control phase “must bear down selectively hard on the few hundred
largest industrial corporations which do have quasi-oligopolistic administered prices.”
(Newsweek, July 23, 1973.) In the late 1970s, Samuelson continued to support incomes policy,
writing, “I’d counsel experimenting with tax rewards to price and wage moderation…”
(Newsweek, January 2, 1978.)


Arthur Okun. When the 1971 wage-price freeze was imposed, Okun (Chairman of the Council
of Economic Advisers 1968−69) said that it reflected a “newfound realism” on President Nixon’s
part (New York Post, August 16, 1971: see Greenspan, 1971). Okun continued to support
incomes policies in subsequent years, focusing on incentive- and guidepost-based wage policies
instead of wage and price controls. He repeatedly advocated a cost-push view of inflation. For
example, in April 1977, Okun testified: “[T]he structure of the American economy clearly has
been transformed… With cost-oriented prices and equity-oriented wages, excess supply cannot
break the momentum of inflation and restore price stability.” (April 6, 1977, testimony, in
Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs Committee, 1977b, p. 13.)
         Okun was a persistent critic of the use of monetary policy against inflation. “Any
professional economist who respects the facts must conclude, regretfully, that our momentum-


                                                 12
inflation cannot be brought under control by any reasonable fiscal-monetary strategy.” (Ibid, p.
14.) Okun also referred to “fiscal-monetary restraint, which has been thoroughly tested and
proved a failure.” (Ibid, p. 15.) The solution was incomes policy: “[F]iscal-monetary policy
alone won’t do the job… And I think that countries that have adopted structural measures and
incomes policies have found them worth having.” (Ibid, p. 36.) A wage-guideline system was
“effective in the early 1960s and I am hopeful that it will be once again.” (February 7, 1979,
testimony, in Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, 1979, p. 150.)
       In contrast to Friedman, Okun repeatedly rejected the excess-demand diagnosis of recent
years’ inflation, stating in 1978: “The inflation we have had in the last three years simply is not
an excess demand phenomenon...” (April 24, 1978, testimony, in Ways and Means Committee,
1978, p. 6341.) Okun therefore argued that “fighting inflation by curbing demand at a time when
it is not being caused by excess demand is absurdly inefficient.” (May 22, 1978, written
testimony, in Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee, 1978, p. 17.) In 1979, Okun
testified: “any additional fiscal-monetary restraint would be an overdose, seeking to cure excess-
demand inflation when that is not the disease.” (February 5, 1979, testimony in Ways and Means
Committee, 1979, p. 330.) And he claimed: “During recent years, the price-wage spiral has been
the most fundamental source of rapid inflation in the United States. Any efficient cure for
inflation must get directly at that source. At the present time, the administration’s program of
price-wage standards [i.e., guideposts] deserves our full support.” (Okun, 1979, p. 50.)


Walter Heller. Walter Heller (CEA Chairman 1961−64) wrote in early 1976, “American
business seems to be losing many of its inhibitions about jacking up prices… The old formula,
namely, focus on the concentrated industries and the powerful labor unions, and monitor their
price and wage increases, makes awfully good sense…” (Heller, 1976, p. 59.) Along similar
lines, Heller testified that “Congress should bear constantly in mind that any balanced program
for full employment without excessive inflation must contain some kind of restraint on excessive
price increases enacted by concentrated industries and excessive wage increases enacted by
overly powerful labor unions.” (March 10, 1976, testimony, in Budget Committee, U.S. Senate,
1976, p. 247.) In 1977, Heller said: “What the country faces is not demand-pull inflation, but the
stubborn push of a price-wage or cost-price spiral that has to be tackled from the cost, supply,
and incomes policy side.” (January 11, 1977, testimony, in Budget Committee, U.S. Senate,


                                                 13
1977, p. 31.) Monetary policy actions against inflation, he said, would be ineffective: “our
fundamental source of inflation is that price-wage spiral… [and] any attack on inflation [that]
doesn’t include a direct attack on that… isn’t going to work.” (March 5, 1979, testimony, in
Budget Committee, U.S. Senate, 1979, p. 46.) Heller (1979) claimed that “three years of slack in
the economy from early 1975 to early 1978… failed to dent the underlying rate of inflation.” He
wrote approvingly of “a vigorous policy of wage-price restraint to curb cost-push inflation… that
is so resistant to economic slack and recession.”


2.4 Friedman and modern monetary policy


       The preceding discussion has established that: (i) Friedman identified Keynesian
economics with cost-push views; (ii) this interpretation finds support from a leading Keynesian
who was one of Keynes’ biographers; (iii) Friedman’s concentration on monetary causes of
inflation and Keynesians’ emphasis on cost-push causes are manifested in their respective
positions on the 1970s inflation, with Friedman opposing incomes policies and criticizing
monetary expansion, at the same time that leading Keynesians emphasized nonmonetary
approaches to inflation control and analysis.
       It is clear that Friedman’s perspective has had a more durable influence on anti-inflation
policy than the cost- and incomes-policy-oriented perspective taken by his 1970s critics. Indeed,
the adoption of inflation targeting and similar procedures by central banks in recent decades can
be thought of as reflecting an acceptance of Friedman’s position that monetary restraint is both
necessary and sufficient for inflation control. While much of the discussion of monetarism in the
1970s policy debates was formulated in terms of monetary aggregates, it was clear even in the
1970s that a distinguishing feature of monetarism was the responsibility it assigned to monetary
policy for the control of inflation. For example, the member of the Federal Open Market
Committee who was most sympathetic to monetarist views during the 1970s noted that “the
implication is that monetary policy should be formulated with an eye toward controlling
inflation” (Francis, 1974, p. 7). This contribution of monetarism is borne out by the Woodford
(2007) and Krugman (1999) quotations given in Section 1.




                                                14
3. Additional contributions by Friedman to monetary economics


       The influence of Friedman on monetary policy analysis is not limited to his extremely
influential positions on the causes of inflation and on the need for inflation-oriented monetary
policy rules. Other aspects of Friedman’s work have been very influential on modern thinking
about monetary policy. Some examples follow.


(a) The Fisher effect and the nominal/real interest rate distinction. Both McCallum (2004) and
Woodford (2007) acknowledge that the real/nominal interest rate distinction was a major theme
stressed by monetarists. As Friedman (1983, p. 2) observed, “inflationary expectations play such
an important role in monetarist analysis.” Friedman continually stressed inflationary
expectations as a factor in the determination and interpretation of nominal interest rates.
Friedman (1958, p. 183) had noted that once inflation becomes anticipated, “interest rates will
rise to allow for the price rise.” The danger of failing to distinguish between real and nominal
interest rates, and so treating low nominal rates as synonymous with easy money and high
nominal rates as tight money, was a theme Friedman consistently emphasized, notably in
Friedman (1968). As Friedman (1975, p. 176) put it: “Nominal interest rates must be sharply
distinguished from real interest rates.”
       This stress on the Fisher effect distinguished monetarism from Keynesian analysis well
into the 1970s. Suppressing the nominal/real rate distinction when specifying the IS curve
relationship was a flaw Friedman (1971, p. 330) emphasized in traditional IS-LM analysis:
“anticipations of inflation… seem to me too important and too central to be pushed off stage…”
But even years after 1971, traditional IS-LM analysis that abstracted from expected inflation, and
so had the nominal interest rate instead of the real interest rate appearing in the IS equation, was
still appearing in journals. For example, Benjamin Friedman (1978a) undertook policy analysis
with just such an IS-LM setup. And when he did study the relation between nominal rates and
inflation in his empirical work, Benjamin Friedman reached conclusions different from
monetarist analysis. He acknowledged that nominal rates in the 1970s had not kept up with
inflation, but he interpreted this phenomenon as a financial market reaction rather than a
reflection of easy monetary policy (B. Friedman, 1978b).




                                                 15
       By contrast, Milton Friedman emphasized that the fact that nominal rates were below
inflation was a sign that the Federal Reserve was creating excessive monetary ease. The result
was that nominal interest rates were much higher than they were in the 1960s because the
liquidity effect of earlier rounds of ease had worn off, and the Fisher effect had emerged in the
wake of the earlier easy periods, causing nominal rates to rise. But real interest rates were low
because the Federal Reserve was still following a generally expansionary policy, with each
added stimulus tending to push unemployment and the real interest rate temporarily below their
natural values.
       The convergence of economists to agreement with the monetarist emphasis on the Fisher
effect played a part in the move to a new monetary policy regime. Taylor (1998, p. 8) observes
that “emphasizing the distinction between the real and nominal interest rate [was] part of the
means” by which the Federal Reserve moved to a more inflation-control-oriented policy from the
end of the 1970s. This observation is confirmed by the newly released transcripts of the Federal
Open Market Committee meetings for 1978. At the July 18, 1978, FOMC meeting, the President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Mark H. Willes, observed,


     Most of the economic theory that I know says that if you want to look at the real bite of
     interest rates, you also adjust for inflation. And interest rates adjusted for inflation are not
     high at all. I think that is the sense [in which] we are not very tight. In fact, we have had
     negative real rates of interest on Treasury bills, for example, for over two years. This is in
     contrast with periods in the early ’60s and most of the ’50s when real rates of interest not
     only were not negative, but they were positive. I don’t see how we can deal effectively,
     when we are at full employment, with accelerating inflation, and still have substantially
     negative real rates of interest. So it does not bother me to have interest rates go up; I think
     they should go up. If they don’t go up, I think we are simply guaranteeing more rapid rates
     of inflation, which will then guarantee, in turn, higher interest rates. One of the most stable
     and profound relationships we have in all of economics is the relationship between inflation
     and interest rates, and I don’t think we hold [inflation] down by failing to move interest rates
     up now. (In Transcript, Federal Open Market Committee Meeting, July 18, 1978, p. 41.)


       Several years later, Friedman (1986, p. 644) was able to observe, “no one any longer
disregards Fisher’s distinction between nominal and real interest rates.”




                                                     16
(b) Costs of inflation via relative price distortions. Friedman (1958, p. 183) noted that inflation
made it “more difficult to maintain the appropriate structure of relative prices, since individual
prices have to change in order to stay the same relative to others.” In Friedman (1974, p. 30) he
elaborated on this theme, noting the coexistence of some predetermined prices and some prices
that were able to increase when nominal aggregate demand changed. In such an environment, “a
slowdown of total spending produces substantial shifts in relative prices, which will sooner or
later have to be corrected; the correction in turn will cause economic disturbances.”
       As Taylor (1981, pp. 57−58) observed, the “added risk and uncertainty about… relative
price changes” was an element stressed in Friedman’s (1977) Nobel lecture and cited there as a
reason why inflationary policies might produce a lower natural level of output and a higher
natural rate of unemployment. Thus Friedman’s writings emphasized both resource
misallocation and economic fluctuations as likely to result from the distortions to the relative
price structure produced by inflation. Friedman’s (1974) proposed remedy was indexation if
inflation continued; or better still, no inflation and no indexation.
       The New Keynesian literature has built on these themes of Friedman’s. For example,
Taylor (1981, p. 72) considered “relative price dispersion due to a mixture of [nominal] contracts
of different lengths.” New Keynesian analysis centers on the welfare costs associated with
relative price dispersion (see King and Wolman, 1996; Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997;
Woodford, 2003). These costs are implied by the interaction of fluctuating inflation and
staggered nominal price contracts.
       The explosion of work on relative price dispersion therefore represents another case of a
Friedman theme that has been formalized and has become central to macroeconomics. The
vindication of Friedman’s position by the New Keynesian literature contrasts with the reaction
by older Keynesians to Friedman’s relative-price idea. For example, a U.K. Keynesian, R.C.O.
Matthews, claimed in 1982 that none of the participants at a macroeconomic conference believed
that appreciable costs of inflation came via the relative-price-distortion channel, and that he
could not find anyone willing to provide a paper for the conference that argued that this was an
empirically important channel (Matthews, 1982, p. 11).


(c) Lags in monetary policy. Friedman’s (1961, p. 464) phrase “long and variable lags” to
characterize the response of the economy to monetary policy actions, has become so


                                                  17
commonplace that it is rarely attributed to him. But it is worth remembering that Friedman’s
emphasis on lags was challenged by Keynesian critics in the 1960s. For example, Ando, Brown,
Solow, and Kareken (1963, p. 3) contended, “Milton Friedman’s proposition that the effects of
monetary policy actions on aggregate output are powerful, but occur with a very long and highly
variable lag… simply will not hold water.” They rejected Friedman’s emphasis on the response
of aggregate output, preferring to study components of expenditure. Their study concluded that
monetary policy mainly works via inventory investment, which responds within a quarter to
interest-rate movements (Ando et al, 1963, pp. 5−6). 21 This position contrasts with the emphasis
by economists today, in line with monetarists’ position in the 1960s and 1970s, on important but
delayed responses of private consumption and all investment categories to monetary policy
actions.


(d) Dangers of relying on measures of potential output and the output gap. As Orphanides
(2003) stresses, Friedman continually warned of the fragility of estimates of potential output and
the output gap and cautioned against giving them heavy weight in making monetary policy. In
light of the large errors in estimates of potential during the 1970s, that warning appears prudent.
As early as 1979, an undergraduate textbook specifically identified with monetarists the view
that U.S. output gap estimates were unreliable (Wonnacott and Wonnacott, 1979, pp. 333−334).


(e) Benefits of flexible exchange rates. One of Krugman’s first papers, Dornbusch and Krugman
(1976), was on the subject of floating exchange rates. The opening page of Dornbusch and
Krugman’s article observed, “The literature on flexible rates goes back to Milton Friedman, ‘The
Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,’ in his Essays in Positive Economics.” But this Friedman
article (Friedman, 1953b), and its enormous influence on economists and policymaking, are not
mentioned in Krugman’s (2007a) article on Friedman. In rationalizing this omission, Krugman
(2007c) said, “I didn’t bring up exchange rate policy because I don’t think Friedman can be said
to have made a deep intellectual contribution on the subject.” The fact is that Krugman has
acknowledged on the record that Friedman launched the literature on flexible rates—which is by
itself a deep intellectual contribution.

———————————————————————————————————————
21
 Their narrow conception of the interest-elastic component of aggregate demand supports the characterization of
Keynesian economics in Friedman (1972a) and Bordo and Schwartz (2004).


                                                       18
(f) Rejection of credit controls. Some Keynesians believed that formal and informal credit
controls could serve a valuable monetary policy role, reducing the need for interest rates to rise
when the authorities wanted to restrict aggregate demand. Arthur Okun, for example, suggested
that a “firm squeeze on the availability of credit can be applied… with a dozen telephone calls to
commercial bankers.” He argued that this “jawboning approach” could create a “pinch on
availability without… interest rates anywhere near their present level.” (March 10, 1980,
testimony, in Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee, 1980, pp. 53, 80.) Paul
Samuelson (1980) argued that with “direct limitations on borrowing, any desired slowdown in
overall activity could have been contrived with interest rates not having to peak so high.”
       Friedman (1960) rejected the use of credit controls, arguing that open market operations
were an unambiguously superior policy tool. Friedman and Schwartz (1970, p. 145) suggested
that direct controls on banks were ineffective, as they promoted growth in financial
intermediaries not subject to the regulations. Open market operations did not have this difficulty
as they delivered symmetric signals to all financial intermediaries.
       The dismantling of credit controls and the focus on open market operations in modern
central banking reflect acceptance of Friedman’s position on credit controls.


4. The influence of monetarism on Krugman


       Krugman is not a specialist in monetary economics. His lack of appreciation of the
contributions of monetarism may partly reflect the fact that many monetarist ideas were already
being incorporated by moderate Keynesians into their analysis by the time Krugman became
active in economics. This possibility is brought out by studying a 1970s textbook that Krugman
regards highly, Dornbusch and Fischer (1978). Krugman has recently stated (Krugman, 2007d):
      The key thing is that good Keynesianism, as embodied even in undergrad textbooks of the time,
      was perfectly OK: Dornbusch and Fischer, 1978 edition, offered a description of what disinflation
      would look like that matches the experience of the ’80s reasonably well, and the textbook does not
      seem all that dated even now.


       We have no disagreement with Krugman on the merits of the Dornbusch-Fischer
textbook. But it is misleading simply to label its analysis as “good Keynesianism.” A major




                                                  19
reason why Dornbusch and Fischer (1978) “does not seem all that dated even now” is because it
incorporates many monetarist ideas. Indeed, Dornbusch and Fisher (1978, p. 520) observe,
          Much of the analysis of this book would, a few years ago, have been considered monetarist.


Dornbusch and Fischer (1978, p. 521) go on to acknowledge Friedman’s influence on monetary
economics far more accurately and fairly than Krugman did:
          The forceful and persuasive way in which Friedman has emphasized the role of money has
          changed the views of most economists on the importance of monetary policy.


5. Explaining Krugman’s view of modern monetary policy

           How could Krugman have arrived at so egregious a misunderstanding of the spirit and
content of modern monetary policy? And of their connections to Friedman’s monetary
economics? A possible explanation is that Krugman is unfamiliar with the literature of the past
two decades incorporating monetarist perceptions into Keynesian and New Keynesian
economics, but that he acquired superficial information about two positions of Friedman’s that
central banks did not embrace. In particular: (1) Friedman urged the Federal Reserve to adopt a
constant growth rate for a monetary aggregate as a faute de mieux policy that would reduce the
volatility of money growth; (2) Friedman recommended that the Fed use as its instrument the
monetary base instead of the nominal Federal funds rate. If Krugman regarded these two
positions as the essence of monetarism, he could jump to the conclusion that monetarism was
dead.
           It is worth reviewing the reasons that led Friedman to adopt these positions.22
Historically, major mistakes in monetary policy occurred in periods when central banks
associated low nominal rates with easy policy, ignoring the signal—coming from a stagnant or
declining money stock—that monetary policy was tight; or when they interpreted a high nominal
rate as implying tight monetary policy, even when rapid money growth and high inflation
suggested the opposite. In addition, the use of the nominal interest rate as an instrument could
lead to situations where the rate was pegged even though macroeconomic stabilization required a
changing interest rate. In evaluating Friedman’s position, Dornbusch and Fischer (1978, p. 517)
observed: “Each of these arguments on the dangers of conducting monetary policy by reference
———————————————————————————————————————
22
     See e.g. Friedman (1960, 1968, 1970b).


                                                     20
to nominal interest rates is important.” The arguments led to Friedman’s preference for a
monetary base instrument—with the aim of constant growth in the money stock (M2)23—over an
interest-rate instrument. Friedman’s recommendations thus comprised both a change in target
(toward constant growth in money) and a change in instrument (toward the use of the monetary
base, or, in some presentations, total reserves).24
         But these policy positions were never the central core of monetarist doctrine. Indeed, in
listing the basic propositions of monetarism, Friedman (1970b) did not include the constant-
money-growth rule or the base-instrument prescriptions. Instead, monetarist propositions were
defined as propositions about the structure of the economy and the effects of monetary policy.
Friedman (1983, p. 4) went on to note that while he favored a constant money growth rule,
“some monetarists favor varying the rate of growth in accordance with one or another rule.” He
subsequently observed:
        Historically, monetarist policy has become associated with a particular prescription—slow, steady
        monetary growth. That is not a necessary implication of monetarist theory. A believer in
        monetarist theory still can favor an activist monetary policy as a way to offset other changes in
        the economy… (Friedman, 1984, p. 3.)

But he added:

        So far as monetarist theory is concerned, it will continue to be the bread and butter of monetary
        economics. (Friedman, 1984, p. 4.)

         Both New Keynesian economics and modern monetary policy practice can be thought of
as indeed accepting monetarist theory as “the bread and butter of monetary economics.” The
Friedman policy prescriptions of constant money growth and a base instrument have been
rejected, but many core theoretical and empirical propositions of monetarism have been
incorporated into the mainstream. Two central monetarist propositions—the nominal rate/real
rate distinction; and the need for inflation control to be assigned to monetary policy—now guide
the formulation of interest-rate policy by central banks in a way that they did not in the 1970s.
Consequently, the recommendation that central banks move to a quantity instrument has fallen
by the wayside, with monetary policy successes reducing the case for this reform.
———————————————————————————————————————
23
   Friedman and Schwartz (1963a) used a monetary aggregate that included currency, demand and time deposits, and
so was similar to (though narrower in definition than) the monetary aggregate now defined officially as M2.
24
   Friedman’s desire that monetary authorities use a monetary quantity as an instrument was conceptually distinct
from his advocacy of monetary targeting. Advocacy of an M2 target is not in itself a rejection of the interest rate as
an instrument, since the interest rate in principle could be varied so as to hit the M2 target.


                                                         21
           Friedman understood that interest-rate instrument rules could in principle deliver stable
inflation, and that the choice between the interest rate and the monetary base as an instrument
was consequently a tactical, not a strategic, matter.25 But actual experience with interest-rate
rules in most countries up to the late 1970s was discouraging. With policymakers apparently
unwilling or unable to make the interest-rate decisions needed to restore price stability, a base
instrument rule had merits as an automatic means of delivering the needed movements in interest
rates. To repeat, the switch in many countries after the late 1970s to more stabilizing interest-
rate rules did not come by accident, but arose from acceptance of core monetarist propositions.
The foundation of that regime change, and of interest-rate decisions today, is acceptance of
Friedman’s (1980a) position, noted earlier, that “monetary restraint is a sufficient condition for
controlling inflation.”
           Financial innovations, such as sweeps programs and interest payments on money, have
loosened the relationship between many monetary aggregates and nominal GDP. With some
monetary aggregates (e.g., M1 in the United States) affected more seriously by innovation than
others, defining money has become a more difficult empirical task. In light of these
developments, the most durable aspects of monetarist theory are those that hold even in
environments where there are not reliable money data. We listed and elaborated these aspects of
monetarism in the preceding sections, with particular reference to Friedman’s work.
           At the same time, financial change is not in itself a legitimate reason for not devoting
resources to the careful measurement and study of money, nor a basis for ignoring monetary
aggregates when making policy decisions. What is more, the value of money (both as an
indicator and as a candidate policy instrument) is likely to increase when short-term nominal
interest rates reach very low values, as in the cases of Japan in the 1990s and the United States in
the Great Depression. We consider those cases in detail in the next section. Monetary
aggregates may also be valuable data for central banks that have occasion to intervene in the
foreign exchange market. Information on base money becomes useful because central-bank
sterilization of the exchange transaction—i.e., operations in domestic securities markets that
offset the impact of the foreign exchange operation on the aggregate level of base money—may
be the most reliable means of ensuring that the intervention does not produce an unintended
change in aggregate demand.
———————————————————————————————————————
25
     See, for example, Friedman (1980b).


                                                    22
6. Evidence contradicting claims for a liquidity trap in the United States in the 1930s
     and in Japan in the 1990s


United States
         As Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, p. 52) emphasize, the Federal Reserve’s behavior in
the course of the 1929−33 Great Contraction can be broken into an initial period of monetary
restriction until 1930, and a period of monetary collapse from 1930, intensified by specific
Federal Reserve actions from late 1931. The fact that the situation deteriorated from 1930
should not detract from the fact that monetary policy was already highly restrictive in 1928−30.
Krugman claims that Friedman’s AEA Presidential Address (Friedman, 1968) engaged in crude
assertion by stating that the Federal Reserve “permitted a sharp reduction in the monetary base.”
In fact, the monetary base declined over 5 percent from April 1928 to October 1930 (Friedman
and Schwartz, 1963a, pp. 290, 340–342, and 803). It was this initial period of monetary
restriction that Friedman was referring to in his AEA Presidential Address. Moreover, he was
not suddenly emphasizing a theme that had not been raised by himself and Schwartz in previous
accounts; the accounts of the Great Contraction in Friedman and Schwartz (1963a, 1963b) noted
the monetary tightness of the 1920s, and Friedman (1962, p. 46) referred to the “unusually tight
monetary conditions” of 1928−30. The role of the Federal Reserve in producing the initial
economic downturn is also stressed by Bernanke (2002), who referred to the “policy tightening
of 1928−29.”
         But it was the severe contraction from late 1930 that transformed the downturn into a
Depression. The coexistence of a depressed economy and low nominal interest rates in the
1930s prompted Keynes (1936) to introduce the concept of a liquidity trap on which Krugman
places such emphasis.26 Keynes himself expressed some quibbles about its empirical validity,
but on the whole came out in favor of the liquidity trap as a relevant concept for analyzing the
conditions of the 1930s.27
         In surveying situations in which short-term nominal interest rates have fallen to zero or
close to that, and aggregate demand is depressed, some economists look for a liquidity trap. An
———————————————————————————————————————
26
   The name, liquidity trap, was originated by Dennis Robertson (see, for example, Robertson, 1940); Keynes did
not name the concept. Hawtrey’s (1932) “credit deadlock” concept closely overlaps with the vision of monetary
policy ineffectiveness seen in the liquidity trap scenario; see Laidler (2007).
27
   Friedman (1972a) documented the preponderance of references in the General Theory to the liquidity trap.


                                                       23
open market purchase by the central bank cannot reduce the interest rate already at the zero
bound. In such circumstances, monetary policy may be helpless according to the theory. Keynes
referred to a low level of the long-term rate of interest, not the short-term rate, but for supporters
of a liquidity trap currently, it is often enough to identify it as relevant whenever short-term
nominal rates are at the zero bound. For them, it seems, no further substantiation is needed.
       Economists like Krugman interpret the phenomena of the United States in the 1930s and
in Japan in the 1990s as examples of a liquidity trap. But examination of the actual policies of
the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan provides evidence that refutes the liquidity trap
interpretation.
       It is well known that the majority of Federal Reserve policymakers in the Great
Depression opposed open market purchases that a minority favored as a way of invigorating the
economy. The opposition had nothing to do with the liquidity trap notion. The opposition to
open market purchases was based on adherence to the real bills doctrine. The real bills doctrine
taught that Fed purchases of government securities were an illegitimate speculative use of
monetary policy. Only commercial bank borrowing at the discount window of the Fed was an
acceptable use of monetary policy because it was assumed to be for productive purposes, i.e., to
underpin projects that expanded the stock of productive capital. Over and above their adherence
to this flawed doctrine, opponents of expansive monetary policy operations believed that existing
low nominal interest rates were evidence that monetary ease had already been achieved.
       To argue the case for a liquidity trap, its advocates should have been able to cite either
reductions in reserve requirements on commercial banks or Fed open market purchases that
increased bank reserves and the stock of money, but that did not induce the public to spend any
of their additional money balances. There was no action in the Fed to reduce reserve
requirements during the 1930s and there was no support for an open market purchase until April
1932, when, to forestall Congressional plans to adopt measures that the Fed perceived as
inflationary, the Fed finally undertook moderate open market purchases. The record shows that
the operation resulted in an increase in the money supply, industrial production, and wholesale
prices in the late summer and fall of 1932. The general improvement of the economy led
observers within the Fed to give weight to the possibility that July 1932 might be classified as
the trough of the Great Contraction. It was not to be. The Fed ceased open market purchases in




                                                  24
August 1932 after Congress adjourned. Had purchases continued, the collapse of the economy in
the winter of 1933 might have been avoided (see Meltzer, 2003, pp. 373−374).
         It is on the issue of Federal Reserve behavior in the early 1930s that Krugman makes
some of his most serious accusations against Friedman. Essentially, Krugman argues that
Friedman’s post-1963 writings distorted the message of the Monetary History. But Krugman’s
accusations are baseless, as we now show.
         Contrary to Krugman’s suggestion, the description of 1930s monetary policy as
deflationary is not something Friedman thought up in 196728 to distort the Monetary History.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, p. 52) referred to “deflationary actions on the part of the Federal
Reserve System” in the 1930s in their paper “Money and Business Cycles.” And the 2002 talk
by Ben Bernanke twice characterized the 1930s as featuring “contractionary monetary policies,”
not unlike Friedman’s description. Another expert on this period, Christina Romer, notes that
“the Federal Reserve deliberately raised the discount rate and as a consequence lowered the
money supply substantially further” in 1931 (Romer, 1993, p. 32). Friedman’s description of
Federal Reserve policy as deflationary is consistent and accurate.
         Krugman contends that Friedman distorted the Monetary History in journalistic outlets,
offering as evidence Friedman’s statement that the Depression was “produced by government
mismanagement.”29 But the Friedman statement is not a distortion. A comparable formulation
was used by Bernanke, who noted that the Federal Reserve failed to execute its duty “to improve
the management of banking panics.” There was, in short, government mismanagement.
         As Bernanke (2002) noted, banking panics prior to the creation of the Federal Reserve
had had a circuit-breaker, because of the convention for clearinghouse associations to make
arrangements that supported banks that were basically sound but suffering from deposit runs.
The Federal Reserve’s existence was thought to have made such arrangements redundant: private
institutions no longer had to serve as surrogate central banks (see Bernanke, 1983, pp. 259−260;
Timberlake, 1984). But as Friedman and Bernanke note, the Federal Reserve in the 1930s did
not carry out the central banking function expected of it.

———————————————————————————————————————
28
   For his address in Friedman (1968), where he referred to the “highly deflationary policies” of the Federal Reserve
in the Great Contraction.
29
   Incidentally, Krugman’s brings this quotation into his essay by writing, “By 1976 Friedman was telling readers of
Newsweek that “the elementary truth is that the Great Depression was produced by government
mismanagement,’…” This is another inaccuracy in Krugman’s essay, for the quoted passage (from Friedman,
1976b) did not appear in Newsweek.


                                                         25
          If Friedman’s intention was to distort the Monetary History to noneconomist readers,
then his 1973 Playboy interview30 offered an ideal opportunity. Yet Friedman told Playboy:
            Just as banks all around the country were closing, the Fed raised the discount rate; that’s the rate
            they charge for loans to banks. Bank failures consequently increased spectacularly. We might
            have had an economic downturn in the thirties anyway, but in the absence of the Federal
            Reserve System—with its enormous power to make a bad situation worse—it wouldn’t have
            been anything like the scale we experienced.


          In this interview, Friedman clearly characterized the problem as Federal Reserve failure
to support commercial banks. That was the task the Federal Reserve was assigned when it was
created, and it did not exercise that function. Friedman did not imply—as Krugman (2007a)
suggests—that “the Depression wouldn’t have happened if only the government had kept out of
the way.” Furthermore, Friedman’s emphasis on the discount-rate episode—a deflationary
action by the Federal Reserve that compounded its inaction on the banking collapse—agrees
with the Monetary History and with Bernanke’s retrospective.
          Another journalistic account by Friedman of the Great Contraction appeared in the San
Francisco Chronicle in 1979 (Friedman, 1979). Again, the mismanagement attributed to the
government is clearly identified as failure of the Federal Reserve to support the private banking
system. In his 1979 article, Friedman observed:
            The Great Depression was produced by a failure of government, by a failure of monetary policy.
            It was produced by a failure of the Federal Reserve System to act in accordance with the
            intentions of those who established it….

            [I]t was in the management of this fundamental function of government that government failed
            and produced the Great Depression.


          Krugman prefers to ignore the inactive and deflationary aspects of 1930s Federal Reserve
policy, instead stressing the increase in the monetary base that took place from 1930 to 1933.
But the 1930–33 increase in the monetary base did not reflect official ease, as Krugman implies.
The growth of the base was entirely the result of an increase in the currency component as the
public withdrew their deposits from banks they distrusted, and converted the deposits into



———————————————————————————————————————
30
     Norman (1973).


                                                        26
currency. The other component of the monetary base—bank reserves—declined, limiting the
possibility of bank lending.31
           Krugman’s (2007a) discussion takes for granted that expansion of the aggregate
monetary base implies easy policy. Apparently, only the aggregate of the base should be used
for studying policy. That is a strange dictum. The aggregate matters, but there is no rule
prohibiting analysis of the separate components. There can be no dispute that how the base is
split up between its currency and reserves components has different implications for commercial
banks’ ability to increase their loans and investments (and thus create deposits). Moreover,
monetary policy actions can ensure an increase in bank reserves. True, the division of the level
of the monetary base between currency and reserves is ultimately a private sector decision. It is,
however, generally not the case that the way an increase in the monetary base is split between
currency and reserves is independent of monetary policy. For the circumstances that prevailed
in the 1930s we can be confident that more expansionary open market operations would have
prevented the reserves portion of the base from declining. The fundamental reason for this is
that the Federal Reserve is always able to expand its total balance sheet at a sufficient rate so that
bulges in currency demand do not translate into drains on bank reserves and so into
macroeconomic instability.
           Nominal interest rates were very low in the 1930s, but such an environment does not
prevent expansion of the money supply from being an effective means of stimulating aggregate
demand. How does monetary expansion remain effective for stimulating demand? The
monetarist transmission mechanism (described, for example, in Friedman and Schwartz, 1963b,
or Meltzer, 2003) offers an answer. The bringing of the short-term nominal interest rate to zero,
or near zero, does not imply that the scope for monetary expansion to stimulate the economy has
been exhausted. Other asset prices that matter for aggregate demand will be bid up (and
corresponding implied yields on the assets lowered) by the increase in the money stock and the
use of the extra money to purchase assets. Even when the nominal rate is zero, there are a great
number of asset prices susceptible to influence by monetary policy.




———————————————————————————————————————
31
     See Friedman and Schwartz (1963a, pp. 739–740) for tabulation of data on bank reserves over this period.


                                                          27
Japan
         Japan’s experience after its stock market and property price collapse in the early 1990s
was a fall in money market rates to less than 1 percent. Here too Krugman interprets the low
level of market rates as proof of a liquidity trap. He takes for granted that Japan’s experience is a
refutation of the Friedman-Schwartz position on monetary policy’s scope to stimulate the
economy. He ignores the proposals for monetary expansion in Japan made by Friedman (1997)
and other monetarists during the 1990s.32
         Japan was confronted with a banking system in disarray and an unprecedented level of
government debt in addition to a falling price level and recessionary conditions. Ambivalence
was prevalent about what policy to pursue, with the Bank of Japan maintaining well into the late
1990s that low nominal interest rates were proof that it was following an easy policy. Eventually
a more affirmative policy was introduced, with the “quantitative easing” program undertaken by
the Japanese monetary authorities from 2001. This policy can be criticized for having been
begun too late and for being too opaque compared to alternative programs of sustained monetary
expansion. But in retrospect it appears that the economy did respond to the quantitative easing,
which involved increases in the monetary base and deliberate injections of reserves into the
banking system. As discussed by Ugai (2007), the empirical evidence suggests that the Bank of
Japan’s operations were successful in stimulating aggregate demand via the term structure and
other channels. Monetary policy revived the economy and contradicted the picture of ineffective
monetary policy painted by the liquidity trap story.
         The monetary stimulus from 2001 is a more plausible explanation for Japan’s economic
recovery than Krugman’s (2007a) suggestion that technological innovation stimulated a revival
of investment in Japan. A technological innovation by itself would stimulate aggregate supply
but not aggregate demand, and so would be a source of deflation and a worsening output gap.
Monetary expansion created the conditions for nominal aggregate demand to expand and so
allowed a sustained increase in real aggregate demand.




———————————————————————————————————————
32
  See Orphanides (2004) for comparisons of Japan’s experience in the 1990s with the conditions in the United
States in the 1930s. Orphanides concludes that neither period can be described using the liquidity trap scenario.


                                                         28
7. Concluding remarks


       Paul Krugman is a respected trade theorist. But he does not speak authoritatively on
subjects on which he has no expertise. Monetary economics is not his field of expertise.
Krugman’s research background does not qualify him as an authority on Milton Friedman’s
work. Krugman’s scholarly publications rarely mentioned Friedman and, when they did, they
acknowledged the contributions of Friedman and monetarism in a way that contradicts his
(2007a) essay on Friedman. Friedman’s reputation is intact despite Krugman’s deplorable
efforts to denigrate him and his contributions.




                                                  29
References


Ando, Albert, E. Cary Brown, Robert M. Solow, and John Kareken (1963). “Lags in Monetary
and Fiscal Policy.” In Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization Policies. Eaglewood,
N.J.: Prentice Hall. 1−13.


Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs Committee, House of Representatives (1977a). Conduct of
Monetary Policy. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs Committee, House of Representatives (1977b).
Amendments to the Council on the Wage and Price Stability Act: Hearings. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.


Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs Committee, House of Representatives (1979).
Amendments to the Council on the Wage and Price Stability Act, 1979. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.


Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee, House of Representatives (1978). Anti-
Inflation Proposals. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate (1980). Extension of the Council
on Wage and Price Stability and the President’s Anti-Inflation Policies. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.


Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression,” American Economic Review, Vol. 73(3), 257−276.


Bernanke, Ben S. (2002). “On Milton Friedman’s Ninetieth Birthday.” Remarks at the
Conference to Honor Milton Friedman, University of Chicago, November 8.




                                              30
Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz (2004). “IS-LM and Monetarism,” History of Political
Economy, Vol. 36 (Supplement), 217−239.


Budget Committee, House of Representatives (1978). First Concurrent Resolution on the
Budget, Fiscal Year 1979. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Budget Committee, U.S. Senate (1976). First Concurrent Resolution on the Budget—Fiscal
Year 1977. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Budget Committee, U.S. Senate (1977). The Economy and the Federal Budget. Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office.


Budget Committee, U.S. Senate (1979). First Concurrent Resolution on the Budget—Fiscal
Year 1980. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer (1978). Macroeconomics. New York: McGraw Hill.


Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Paul Krugman (1976). “Flexible Exchange Rates in the Short Run,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 7(3), 537−575.


Federal Open Market Committee (1978). “Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee
Meeting, July 18 1978.” www.federalreserve.gov.


Fischer, Stanley (1977). “Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money
Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85(1), 191−205.


Francis, Darryl R. (1974). “Inflation, Recession—What’s a Policymaker to Do?,” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 56(11), 3−7.


Friedman, Benjamin M. (1978a). “Crowding Out or Crowding In? Economic Consequences of
Financing Government Deficits,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 9(3), 593−641.


                                              31
Friedman, Benjamin M. (1978b). “Who Puts the Inflation Premium into Nominal Interest
Rates?,” Journal of Finance (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 33(3), 833−845.


Friedman, Milton (1953a). “The Effects of a Full-Employment Policy on Economic Stability: A
Formal Analysis.” In M. Friedman, Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 117−132.


Friedman, Milton (1953b). “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates.” In M. Friedman, Essays in
Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 157−203.


Friedman, Milton (1958). “The Supply of Money and Changes in Prices and Output.” In Joint
Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, The Relationship of Prices to Economic Stability and
Growth. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Reprinted in M. Friedman, The
Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine, 1969. 171−187.


Friedman, Milton (1960). A Program for Monetary Stability. Fordham, NY: Fordham
University Press.


Friedman, Milton (1961). “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 69(5), 447−466.


Friedman, Milton (1962). Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Friedman, Milton (1966). “What Price Guideposts?” In G. P. Shultz and R. Z. Aliber (eds.),
Guidelines: Informal Contracts and the Market Place. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
17−39.


Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, Vol.
58(1), 1−17.




                                              32
Friedman, Milton (1970a). “A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 78(2), 193−238.


Friedman, Milton (1970b). “The Counter-Revolution in Monetary Theory.” Institute of
Economic Affairs Occasional Paper No. 33. Reprinted in M. Friedman, Monetarist Economics.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991. 1−20.


Friedman, Milton (1971). “A Monetary Theory of Nominal Income,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 79(2), 323−337.


Friedman, Milton (1972a). “Comments on the Critics,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
80(5), 906−950.


Friedman, Milton (1972b). “Have Monetary Policies Failed?,” American Economic Review
(Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 62(2), 11−18.


Friedman, Milton (1972c). An Economist’s Protest. Glenn Ridge, N.J.: Thomas Horton.


Friedman, Milton (1974). “Monetary Correction.” IEA Occasional Paper No. 41. Reprinted in
M. Friedman, Tax Limitation, Inflation and the Role of Government. Dallas: Fisher Institute,
1978. 22−51.


Friedman, Milton (1975). “Twenty-Five Years After the Rediscovery of Money: What Have We
Learned?: Discussion,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 65(2),
176−179.


Friedman, Milton (1976a). Price Theory. Second Edition. Chicago: Aldine.


Friedman, Milton (1976b). “Economic Myths and Public Opinion,” The Alternative: An
American Spectator, Vol. 9(4), January, 5−9. Reprinted in M. Friedman, Bright Promises,



                                               33
Dismal Performance: An Economist’s Protest. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983.
60−75.


Friedman, Milton (1977). “Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 85(3), 451−472.


Friedman, Milton (1979). “Real Cause of the Great Depression,” San Francisco Chronicle,
February 20, 5.


Friedman, Milton (1980a). “Monetarism: A Reply to the Critics,” The Times, March 3, 19.


Friedman, Milton (1980b). “Memorandum: Response to Questionnaire on Monetary Policy,
June 11, 1980.” In Treasury and Civil Service Committee, Memoranda on Monetary Policy.
London: HMSO. 55−61.


Friedman, Milton (1983). “Monetarism in Rhetoric and in Practice,” Bank of Japan Monetary
and Economic Studies, Vol. 1(2), 1−14.


Friedman, Milton (1984). “Has Monetarism Failed?,” Manhattan Report, Vol. 4(3), 3−4.


Friedman, Milton (1986). “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 94(3), 642−647.


Friedman, Milton (1997). “Rx for Japan: Back to the Future,” Wall Street Journal, December
17, A22.


Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963a). A Monetary History of the United States,
1867−1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963b). “Money and Business Cycles,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 45(1), 32−64.


                                               34
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1970). Monetary Statistics of the United States. New
York: Columbia University Press.


Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1982). Monetary Trends in the United States and the
United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates, 1867−1975. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Greenspan, Arthur (1971). “Leading Economists View Nixon Freeze,” New York Post, August
16, pp. 5 and 39.


Harrod, Roy (1951). The Life of John Maynard Keynes. London: Macmillan.


Harrod, Roy (1958). “Memorandum of Evidence Submitted by Mr. Roy Harrod, F.B.A.” May
27, 1958. In Committee on the Working of the Monetary System, Principal Memoranda of
Evidence, Volume 3. London: HMSO, 1960. 108−117.


Hawtrey, Ralph G. (1932). The Art of Central Banking. London: Longmans, Green and
Company.


Heller, Walter W. (1976). “Can We Have Full Employment without Inflation?,” Challenge, Vol.
19(1), March/April, 59−60.


Heller, Walter W. (1979). “The Realities of Inflation,” Wall Street Journal, January 19, 10.


Keynes, John Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
London: Macmillan.


Keynes, John Maynard (1943). “The Objective of International Price Stability,” Economic
Journal, Vol. 53(210), 185−187.




                                               35
King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1996). “Inflation Targeting in a St. Louis. Model
of the 21st Century,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 78(3), 83−107.


Krugman, Paul (1998). “It’s Baack! Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 29(2), 137−187.


Krugman, Paul (1999). “Thinking About the Liquidity Trap.” December.
(URL: http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/trioshrt.html)


Krugman, Paul (2000). “Thinking About the Liquidity Trap,” Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies, Vol. 14(4), 221−237.


Krugman, Paul (2007a). “Who Was Milton Friedman?,” New York Review of Books, Vol. 54(2),
February 15, 27−30.


Krugman, Paul (2007b). “Paul Krugman Replies,” New York Review of Books, Vol. 54(5),
March 29, 50.


Krugman, Paul (2007c). “Paul Krugman Replies,” New York Review of Books, Vol. 54(6), April
12, 86.


Krugman, Paul (2007d). “Supply-Side Economics: Paul Krugman Responds.” “Economist’s
View” web site, April 11. (URL:
http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2007/04/supplyside_econ.html)


Laidler, David (2007). “Successes and Failures of Monetary Policy since the 1950s.” Paper
presented at “Monetary Policy over Fifty Years: A Conference to Mark the Fiftieth Anniversary
of the Deutsche Bundesbank,” Frankfurt, Germany, September 21.


Matthews, R.C.O. (1982). “Introduction.” In R.C.O. Matthews (ed.), Slower Growth in the
Western World. London: Heinemann. 1−16.


                                                36
McCallum, Bennett T. (2004). “Monetarism.” Manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.


Meltzer, Allan H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913−1951. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Norman, Geoffrey (1973). “Playboy Interview: Milton Friedman,” Playboy, Vol. 28(2),
February, 51−68 and 74. Reprinted in M. Friedman, Bright Promises, Dismal Performance: An
Economist’s Protest. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983. 9−59.


Okun, Arthur M. (1979). “Sticks with Two Short Ends,” Challenge, Vol. 22(3), July/August,
47−51.


Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 50(4), 633−663.


Orphanides, Athanasios (2004). “Monetary Policy in Deflation: The Liquidity Trap in History
and Practice.” FEDS Discussion Paper 2004−001, Federal Reserve Board.


Phelps, Edmund S. (1967). “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation, and Optimal
Unemployment over Time,” Economica, Vol. 34(135), 254−281.


Phelps, Edmund S. (1968). “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium,” Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 76(4), 678−711.


Phillips, A. W. (1958). “The Relationship between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of
Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861−1957,” Economica, Vol. 25(100), 283−299.


Robertson, D.H. (1940). Essays in Monetary Theory. London: P.S. King and Son.


Romer, Christina D. (1993). “The Nation in Depression,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 7(2), 19−39.

                                              37
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997). “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 12(1),
297–346.


Samuelson, Paul A. (1970). “Price Controls,” Newsweek, December 28, 57.


Samuelson, Paul A. (1971). “Questions and Answers,” Newsweek, October 4, 72.


Samuelson, Paul A. (1973). “Naggings,” Newsweek, July 23, 64.


Samuelson, Paul A. (1978). “The Year That Was,” Newsweek, January 2, 52.


Samuelson, Paul A. (1980). “The Case for Controls,” Newsweek, March 3, 42.


Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow (1960). “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation
Policy,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 50(2), 177−194.


Schwartz, Anna J., and Edward Nelson (2007). “Who Was Milton Friedman? A Response,”
New York Review of Books, Vol. 54(5), March 29, 48−50.


Solow, Robert M. (1969). Price Expectations and the Behavior of the Price Level. Manchester,
U.K.: Manchester University Press.


Taylor, John B. (1980). “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 88(1), 1−23.


Taylor, John B. (1981). “On the Relation Between the Variability of Inflation and the Average
Inflation Rate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 15(1), 57−86.


Taylor, John B. (1998). “Monetary Policy and the Long Boom,” Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis Review, Vol. 80(6), 3−11.


                                              38
Timberlake, Richard H. (1984). “The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 16(1), 1−15.


Tobin, James (1966). “Check the Boom,” New Republic, September 3, 9−14.


Tobin, James (1974). The New Economics One Decade Older. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.


Tobin, James (1976). “The Nobel Milton,” The Economist, October 23, 94−95. Reprinted in J.
Tobin, Essays in Economics: Theory and Policy: The Papers of James Tobin Volume 3.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982. 663−666.


Ugai, Hiroshi (2007). “Effects of the Quantitative Easing Policy: A Survey of Empirical
Analyses,” Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, Vol. 25(1), 1−47.


Ways and Means Committee, House of Representatives (1978). The President’s 1978 Tax
Program. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Ways and Means Committee, House of Representatives (1979). Real Wage Insurance.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


Wonnacott, Paul, and Ronald J. Wonnacott (1979). Economics. New York: McGraw Hill.


Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Woodford, Michael (2007). “How Important Is Money in the Conduct of Monetary Policy?”
Manuscript, Columbia University.




                                              39
