NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STAR SCIENTISTS, INNOVATION AND REGIONAL AND NATIONAL IMMIGRATION
Lynne G. Zucker
Michael R. Darby
Working Paper 13547
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13547

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

This research has been supported by grants from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the National
Science Foundation (grants SES-0304727 and SES-0531146) and the University of California’s Industry-University
Cooperative Research Program (grants PP9902, P00-04, P01-02 and P03-01). An earlier version of
this paper was presented at the 2nd annual Kauffman Foundation/Max Planck Institute Research Conference
on Entrepreneurship, Dana Point, California, July 19-21, 2007. We are indebted to our research team
members Emre Uyar, Jason Fong, Robert Liu, Tim Loon, Hongyan Ma and Amarita Natt. Certain
data included herein are derived from the Science Citation Index Expanded, Social Sciences Citation
Index, Arts & Humanities Citation Index, High Impact Papers and ISI Highly Cited of the Institute
for Scientific Information®, Inc. (ISI®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: © Copyright Institute for
Scientific Information®, Inc. 2005, 2006. All rights reserved. Certain data included herein are derived
from the Zucker-Darby Science & Technology Agents of Revolution (STAR) database © Lynne G.
Zucker and Michael R. Darby. All rights reserved. This paper is a part of the NBER's research program
in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of their employers
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Star Scientists, Innovation and Regional and National Immigration
Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby
NBER Working Paper No. 13547
October 2007, Revised February 2008
JEL No. J61,L26,O14,O31
ABSTRACT
We follow the careers 1981-2004 of 5401 star scientists listed in ISI HighlyCitedSM as most highly
cited by their peers. Their number in a US region or a top-25 science and technology (S&T) country
significantly increases the probability of firm entry in the S&T field in which they are working. Stars
rather than their disembodied discoveries are key for high-tech entry. Stars become more concentrated
over time, moving disproportionately from areas with few peers in their discipline to many, except
for a countercurrent of some foreign-born American stars returning home. High impact articles and
university articles all tend to diffuse. America has 62 percent of the world’s stars as residents, primarily
because of its research universities which produce them. Migration plays a significant role in some
developing countries.

Lynne G. Zucker
Departments of Sociology & Public Policy
University of California, Los Angeles
Box 951551
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
and NBER
zucker@ucla.edu
Michael R. Darby
John E. Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
michael.r.darby@anderson.ucla.edu

Star Scientists, Innovation and Regional and National Immigration
Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby
The world, in fact, is only beginning to see that the wealth of a nation consists
more than anything else in the number of superior men that it harbors .... Geniuses are
ferments; and when they come together, as they have done in certain lands at certain
times, the whole population seems to share in the higher energy which they awaken. The
effects are incalculable and often not easy to trace in detail, but they are pervasive and
momentous.
- William James (1911, p. 363)
In the last half of the twentieth century, America was the location of choice for the best
and brightest scientific minds in the world. Recently America has partially rolled up its welcome
mat to foreign doctoral and postdoctoral students while a reverse brain drain has set in for senior
professors. Does this matter for the US economy or is it a matter of purely academic concern –
in both senses? This paper reports evidence that a sizable fraction of the very top scientists are
responsible for startup firms across the broad range of high-technology industries whether they
are in the United States or abroad. When America loses its star scientists – or star scientists in
the making – it is losing not only their academic research and teaching, but new firms and jobs.
On the order of one third of the star scientists actually become involved in
commercializing their discoveries at least once in their career; so losing a few hundred star
scientists will have a small effect on the number of firms started in the US over the next
generation. However, the firms started with star scientists as principals have proven to be the
leading firms in terms of innovation and employment growth in a number of high-technology
industries, such as biotechnology, lasers and semiconductors.

In America and similar

economies, most economic growth is concentrated at any given time in a relatively few firms in a
relatively few industries experiencing very large productivity gains or introducing new products
of much greater value than their cost of production (Harberger 1998, Darby and Zucker 2003).

These firms are most often but not always somewhere en route from entrepreneurial start-up to
large, industry-dominant firms.1 Losing to other countries star scientists who are likely to
become star innovators is a recipe for shifting leading firms in specific new technologies abroad,
leaving an imitative or no role for American firms.
This paper is organized in four sections. The first section discusses research findings in
the literature on university-industry technology transfer before focusing on our research on the
role of star scientists in determining where and when firms enter the biotechnology industry,
which firms are most successful, how quickly they go public, and the stock market returns for
particular firms. Section II presents evidence that – at least so far as starting firms is concerned –
these top scientists are star innovators across the gamut of high-tech industries. Section III
presents evidence on the emergence of a reverse brain drain from the US to other countries that
has reduced the number of these top scientists operating in and starting firms in the US. The
final section offers conclusions and concerns for policymakers.

I. Top Scientists as Star Innovators
The importance of basic university science to successful commercialization of scientific
discoveries has been confirmed in a number of other research studies, especially the importance of
intellectual human capital (Di Gregorio and Shane 2003). Faculty are a key resource in creating and
transferring early, discovery research via commercial entrepreneurial behavior (Yarkin 2000).
Jensen and Thursby (2001) confirm that active, self-interested participation of discovering
professors is an essential condition for successful commercial licensing of most university
inventions.

Thursby and Thursby (2002) find that the sharp increase in university-industry

technology transfer has not resulted so much from a shift in the nature of faculty research as from an

2

increased willingness of faculty and administrators to license and increased interest on the part of
firms.
Labor mobility of discovering scientists becomes very important in technology transfer,
however, when a new discovery has both high commercial value and a combination of scarcity
and tacitness that defines natural excludability, the degree to which there is a barrier to the flow
of the valuable knowledge from the discoverers to other scientists (Zucker and Darby 1996b;
Zucker, Darby and Brewer 1998).

Those with the most information about breakthrough

discoveries are the scientists actually making them, so there is initial scarcity.
To the extent that the knowledge is both scarce and tacit, as it often is in breakthrough
discoveries, it constitutes intellectual human capital retained by the discovering scientists and is
embodied in them.

At the extreme, labor mobility is required to transfer the knowledge

successfully (as found empirically by Jensen and Thursby 2001). To measure the extent of labor
mobility of the stars, we use the count of ‘linked’ articles authored by stars with firm employees.
These linked stars are most often local academic scientists-entrepreneurs who possess a
significant equity or founding interest in the firm. The number of such articles serves as an
indicator of the depth of the star’s involvement with the firm’s research effort. Nearly 70 percent
of the ISI highly cited stars, who are the focus of Sections II and III, write at least one article
with at least one firm employee, with 10 percent of all articles written by these stars linked to a
firm.
In order to gain access to the knowledge of discovering scientists, firms in related areas
of technology employ them. In most cases, the discovering scientists are initially employed by
universities and research institutes; we are concerned with the extent to which they move at least
part of their labor effort to specific firms. Some of these firms are incumbent firms which adopt

3

the new technology (see Zucker and Darby 1996a, 1996b, 1997a, 1997b, Darby and Zucker
2001), but many of the firms are newly created around these star scientists, who often become
residual owners as well as employees (Zucker, Darby and Brewer 1998). The discovering
scientists often become the main resource around which firms are built or transformed (Zucker,
Darby and Brewer 1998, Zucker, Darby and Armstrong 1998 and 2002; Darby and Zucker 2007;
Zucker and Darby 2006). Star scientists are important in the process of technology transfer
because the knowledge is both scarce and tacit and because their knowledge contributes
significantly to the success of firms (Zucker, Darby and Torero 2002).
Our biotechnology database and research program was built around the 327 most productive
scientists in terms of genetic sequence discoveries through 1989, a period encompassing the
formative years of biotechnology but ending before the advent of automated sequencers which
made our selection criterion obsolete in the 1990s. These ‘star’ scientists are truly among the best
and brightest in the world: Accounting for only 0.7 percent of the authors of articles reporting
genetic sequence discoveries through 1989, they accounted for 17.3 percent of the published
articles. Great scientists – including these stars – differ from ordinary scientists in many ways, from
mentoring fewer and brighter students to many more articles published, citations to those articles
and patents (Zuckerman 1967, 1977; Zucker, Darby and Armstrong 1998). Not only did these
scientists play a major role in shaping the advance of the science underlying biotechnology, our
research has also shown that they played an important role in determining where and when firms
entered biotechnology and which of those firms were most successful.
Zucker, Darby and Brewer (1998) and Darby and Zucker (2001) examined entry of new
firms and incumbent firms into biotechnology in America and Japan, respectively. We argue there
that the geographic distribution of a new science-based industry can be mostly derived from the

4

geographic distribution of the intellectual human capital embodying the breakthrough discovery
upon which it is based. This occurs when the discovery – especially an ‘invention of a method of
discovery’ (Griliches 1957) – is sufficiently costly to transfer due to its uncodified complexity or
tacitness (Nelson 1959; Arrow 1962, 1974; Nelson and Winter 1982; Rosenberg 1982) that the
information can effectively be used only by employing those scientists in whom it is embodied.
Technological opportunity and appropriability – the principal factors that drive technical progress
for industries (Nelson and Wolff 1997; Klevorick, Levin, Nelson and Winter 1995) – are also the
two necessary elements that created extraordinary value for our stars' intellectual human capital
during the formative period of biotechnology. The employment of stars with a firm was often as a
founding principal and usually part-time near their university laboratory (Zucker, Darby and
Armstrong 1998; Zucker, Darby and Torero 2002). When the new techniques have diffused widely,
access to stars is less essential, but once the technology has been commercialized in specific locales,
internal dynamics of agglomeration tend to keep it there (Grossman and Helpman 1991; Marshall
1920; Audretsch and Feldman 1993, 1996; Head, Ries and Swenson 1995).2
In both the US and Japan, where and when star scientists are active has a strongly positive
and significant independent effect on where and when biotech-using firms entered into
biotechnology, and this effect is always separate from, and in addition to, the effects of research
support for university scientists and local general economic conditions. We do find that intellectual
capital variables play a relatively more important role for entry in the US whereas it is the local
economic geography variables which are more significant in Japan.
As far as we know, neither we nor any other scholars have done any comparable research
for Europe for this formative period through 1990. To a large degree, this may reflect a real
disconnection during this period between academic science and industry. We recall a German

5

pharmaceutical executive complaining, as late as the early 1990’s, that the only way his firm could
get German scientists to do genetic engineering for them was to employ them in the United States.
A series of papers by Cooke (2001, 2004 and 2005) suggests that disconnection has since been
bridged in some European metropolitan regions.
Table 1, adapted from Zucker and Darby (1999b), shows that Europe in fact had enough of
the world’s star scientists during the formative period to have been a major player in the commercial
biotechnology revolution rather than playing the peripheral role that it did. Europe, including
Russia and Israel, accounted for 32 percent of the stars, counted once per nation in which they
published, compared to 62 percent for the US and Japan. The European university-industry
disconnection is underlined by the fact that the corresponding percentages for stars ever working as
or with a firm employee are 9 and 90. Small net immigration into a few countries did not offset the
large emigration from Britain and Switzerland to the benefit of the US and Japan. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that the greater hospitality of the latter countries to academic scientistentrepreneurs played a role in this pattern with immigrants establishing firm ties soon after moving.
We hypothesize in Section III on the reasons that the virtuous circles present in America and Japan
may have been largely short-circuited in Europe.
We have found that the publication of articles by a star as, or with, a firm employee is a
robust indicator of substantial involvement of that star with the firm. Substantial involvement of
one or more star bioscientists was not a sufficient condition to make a firm successful, but it
dramatically improved the odds relative to those firms that did not have it. For example, we
consider the 38 publicly traded 1975 members of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association.
Of the 15 firms which developed working arrangements with star scientists by 1990, 80 percent (12
firms) survived until 1999. Of the 23 firms without such star participation, only 17.4 percent (4

6

firms) survived to 1999 (Darby and Zucker 2001). A pharmaceutical firm not doing cutting edge
biotechnology by the 1990s was either going out of business or into generics or other businesses.
In Zucker, Darby and Armstrong (1998) we analyzed the success of a census of Californian
biotech firms in terms of number of products in development, number of products on the market and
employment growth. We demonstrated that what appear to be ‘geographically localized knowledge
spillovers’ (positive externalities as proposed by Jaffe 1986; Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson
1993) from academic science to research productivity of nearby firms were in fact concentrated in
the relatively few firms with stars linked via co-authorship whereas other firms gained no advantage
from locating near the leading research universities.3 These results were obtained from poisson
regressions which controlled for the effect of firm characteristics such as incumbency-new-entrant
status, technology used and time since entry. The estimated effects are quite significant as indicated
in the left side of Figure 1. The more star-linked articles a firm had – indicating deeper involvement
of the star at the bench level – the better the firm did, whether judged by products in development,
products on the market or employment.

These differences are large enough to explain the

difference between success and failure: A biotech firm with no star-linked articles (with all other
factors set to their mean values) had an expected employment growth of 80 workers from 1984 to
1989 compared to 341 and 734 for firms with 2 and 5 articles, respectively.
We replicated these results for Japan in Zucker and Darby (2001), with the star impacts
indicated on the right half of Figure 1. There are two notable differences from the California
results: Firstly, the entire profile of products on the market in Japan is much lower and flatter, as
they were lagging behind California by approximately 5 years. Secondly, we were unable to get
usable estimates of biotechnology employment for Japanese firms which were almost exclusively
large incumbent firms using the technologies in a limited sector of their businesses. As a result we

7

substituted the number of US patents granted as a third measure of success and found results that fit
the pattern of strong effects from star involvement.
There is much more evidence that the star scientists play a special role, independently from
their potentially separable research discoveries, in shaping the formation and transformation of
biotechnology-using industries. Figure 2 (adapted from Zucker, Darby and Armstrong 2002, Figure
2) illustrates that star articles are a much stronger indicator of firm success than popular alternatives
such as all firm articles co-authored with top-research-university faculty members or venture capital
funding. Audretsch and Stephan (1996) had analyzed the locational patterns of university scientists
appearing in the prospectuses of biotechnology firms going public March 1990 and November
1992, many of whom overlapped with our set of stars. In Darby and Zucker (2007) we show that
firms with deeper star involvement do go public significantly more quickly than other biotech firms;
implying that the characteristics described by Audretsch and Stephan differed systematically from
the entire population of private biotech firms at risk for going public. Darby, Liu and Zucker (2004)
show that not only does the stock market value star involvement in pricing publicly traded biotech
firms, but those firms follow different high risk, high return strategies reflected in larger jumps or
discontinuities in the evolution of their stock prices. Zucker and Darby (2007a) show that the stars’
contributions to open science increase during their period of involvement with a firm, so that both
science and commerce profit in the mutually reinforcing ‘virtuous circle’ alluded to previously.4
In short, direct involvement of the very best academic scientists in commercialization of
cutting-edge discoveries is a key determinant of which firms will win the competitive race and
which will fall by the wayside. In high-technology, the race most often goes to the smartest.

8

II. Top Scientists and Entry of High-Technology Firms
We are beginning to investigate whether or not top scientists provide important top
innovators across the gamut of high-technology industries, or whether this is a characteristic only
of scientific areas undergoing very rapid change, like biotechnology and nanotechnology. We
report here on the results for whether or not the presence of top scientists in a region or country
generally lead to more entry there of firms in related technologies. Complete details of the
statistical procedures, data, and results can be found in Zucker and Darby (2006).
II.A. Data
This project is challenging because data are difficult and costly to obtain and far from
perfect for investigating entrepreneurial companies, particularly in the formative years of a new
technology when most of the firms are not publicly traded and hence not required to make public
disclosures. The entry of high-technology firms into a technology can be approximately dated
from the date of their first patent application or scientific-article publication. For NanoBank.org,
we developed as complete as possible a list of companies using nanotechnology (Zucker and
Darby 2007b; Zucker, Darby, Furner, Liu and Ma 2007). We verified that substituting entry
dates for those firms gave us essentially the same results as we obtained using the patentingpublication method of identifying firms.
We examine the pattern of firm entry for six science and technology areas (Biology,
Chemistry & Medicine; Computing & Information Technology; Semiconductors, Integrated
Circuits & Superconductors; Nanoscale Science & Technology; Other Sciences; and Other
Engineering). The five areas other than nanotechnology were developed for and detailed in
analyses reported in Darby and Zucker (1999) and Zucker and Darby (1999a) that span scientific
articles, patents, and university doctoral-programs data from the National Research Council

9

(1995). We were unable to find finer breakdowns that did not require data in greater detail in
one or more of these sources. Under National Science Foundation funding, we are developing a
public digital database Nanobank.org which permits us to extract specific articles and patents for
nanotechnology from the other five areas in which they would otherwise appear. See Zucker,
Darby, Furner. Liu and Ma (2007) for a discussion of the methodology used to define
nanotechnology articles and patents. Geographic units are alternatively the 179 US functional
economic regions or the 25 top science and technology countries in the world in terms of
patenting and publication.5
Another data challenge has been identifying star scientists across the broad range of
scientific and engineering disciplines. In our previous research, we have identified the stars
using measures of scientific productivity uniquely tailored to the particular science area and
independent of their direct involvement in the commercialization of their discoveries. In order to
generalize the star concept, we needed to find a criterion of scientific productivity which was
comparable across fields and not dependent on whether or not the star was actually involved in
commercialization.

(Since we are investigating star scientists who do commercialize their

inventions, we need to define top scientists independent of that involvement.)
The Institute for Scientific Information®, Inc. (ISI®) has developed the ISI Highly Cited
component of the ISI Web of Science® which is very close to what is needed.

The ISI

HighlyCited.com website (Institute for Scientific Information 2005b) offers a database of the top
250 individual researchers in terms of 20-year-rolling-window citation counts in each of 21
subject fields – 19 of which are science and engineering fields. Information for each highly cited
author includes a curriculum vitae (usually full but sometimes abbreviated6), a list of
publications taken from the author’s curriculum vitae, and links for those publications in ISI-

10

listed journals to the full bibliographic information indexed in the ISI Web of Science® (Institute
for Scientific Information 1981-1997, 2005a). Altogether we thus identify 5,401 star scientists,
one or more of who are credited with authorship of some 520,839 articles that appear in the ISI
Web of Science® database. The articles are used to identify where the stars are active based on
those 299,583 cases (52.5 percent of the appearances of stars as authors) where their affiliation is
unambiguous.7 We have used these addresses to identify each US region or non-US country in
which these star scientists were active 1981-2004. We code the stars as active in a region from
two years before their first publication there until they move to another location.

During

transitional phases they are coded as active for up to two years in both locations. Stars who
maintain long-term affiliations in multiple countries also are coded as active in each location.
II.B. Empirical Results
Figures 3 and 4, taken from Zucker and Darby (2006), illustrate the relationship between
stars ever active and cumulative firm entry 1981-2004 for US regions for the largest science and
technology area (biology-chemistry-medicine) and the newest (nanoscale science & technology),
respectively. In each case there is a high correlation between the number of star scientists and
the number of firms that have entered the corresponding area of science and technology.
However, the actual number of stars is much smaller relative to the number of new firms in the
nanoscale S&T area than in the biology-chemistry-medicine area.

We believe that this

difference reflects the speed with which discoveries with nanotechnology application are being
commercialized versus the slowness of recognition of star scientists in this new multidisciplinary
area based on counts of citations to their work relative to other publications in the same preexisting discipline as the journals in which most of an author’s articles appear.

11

Figures 5 and 6, also taken from Zucker and Darby (2006), illustrate the relationship
between stars ever active and cumulative firm entry 1981-2004 for the top-25 science and
technology countries in the world for the same two science and technology areas as Figures 3
and 4. The pattern is strikingly similar to what was seen for US regions. It would take literally
hundreds of maps to cover all six science and technology areas for entry and star presence each
year at the US regional level and nationally. Furthermore, maps cannot adequately account for
other variables which may account for the correlation. In Zucker and Darby (2006) we have
used advanced statistical methods to simultaneously take account of other measures of scientific
base and economic geography. We were particularly concerned with including measures of the
actual discoveries in a region (patents, highly-cited articles, other articles) to distinguish the
effect of the stars personally from that of their discoveries.
The statistical results are clear: Holding other measures of scientific base and economic
geography constant, regions or countries with more of these top scientists present in one of the
six S&T areas also exhibit a significantly higher rate of firm entry in that S&T area. The effects
are quite large in magnitude as illustrated in Figure 7, adapted from Zucker and Darby (2006).
The left half of the figure refers to estimates based on data for US regions for each year, 19812004. The right half of the figure refers to estimates based on the 24 non-US countries among
the top 25 S&T countries in the world. Separate estimates on the effects of star scientists on the
rate of firm entry by region per year and by country per year are obtained for each of the 6 S&T
areas which are abbreviated at the bottom of the horizontal axis. The height of the bar indicates
the predicted rate of entry for a particular assumed number of stars in the region or country given
that all the other determinants are at their mean values relative to the same rate if the number of
stars was also equal to its mean value. The first bar in the quartet for a given S&T area gives the

12

relative probability assuming there is one star scientist in the S&T area & region/country a given
year. The second bar – always equal to 1 – is the relative ratio if the assumed number of stars
equals the mean value. The third and fourth bars increase the number of stars above the mean by
one and by two standard deviations, respectively. The associated increase in the rate of firm
entry is substantial – in several cases astonishing so – for all cases except for the anomalous
negative effect for Other Sciences in the top-24 non-US S&T countries. That anomalous case,
semiconductors for both samples and computing/IT for the US case are not statistically
significantly different from zero, but all the other estimates are significantly positive. If we
consider the estimates – not illustrated in Figure 7 – for all top-25 S&T countries (including the
US) then entry has a significant positive impact in every case. However, since the data may
impart a US-centric bias and since the much higher number of stars in the US than in any of the
other countries may pick up any institutional advantages for entrepreneurial entry, we will not
consider those estimates further.
We have conducted various experiments to test the robustness of the results. One set of
questions concerns our use of the date of the first patent application or scientific-article
publication in a region/country and S&T area to measure the entry date of high-technology firms
in that place and technology area. We do it because there is generally no alternative. However,
for NanoBank.org, we developed as complete as possible a list of companies using
nanotechnology using industry directories, web searches and other archival sources (Zucker and
Darby 2007b). We verified that substituting entry dates for those firms gave us essentially the
same results as we obtained using the patenting-publication method of identifying firms.
Another concern was that the ISI Highly Cited numbers were large relative to previously
used techniques for identifying star scientists in particular technology areas. We restricted our

13

list of stars to the first third reported in ISI – roughly the top 100 in each of the 19 science and
engineering fields – and obtained slightly improved results illustrated in Figure 8, drawn from
results reported in Tables A.2 and A.4 in Zucker and Darby (2006). The headline results are
very similar to those in Figure 7, but this is surprising unless the impact of the remaining stars is
higher than those whose information we have discarded from the statistical analysis.
These results are only a first step in demonstrating that the very best and brightest
scientists frequently become involved in commercializing their discoveries, often as a founder or
cofounder of an entrepreneurial firm. We believe that it is a large first step in the direction of
showing that these extraordinary individuals play a role in innovation and growth across the full
spectrum of high technology industries.

III. Emergence and Migration of Top Scientists
Given the right institutional conditions, a significant fraction of star scientists become
star innovators who drive growth and progress via creating and transforming high-technology
industries, usually while continuing to make major contributions to science. These individuals
are true geniuses in the original sense – not just having extraordinary intelligence and
transcendent creativity but actively using it to transform their world and ours. Finding time and
resources to do all that they are doing is an ongoing struggle and they rarely become involved in
starting new companies or transforming existing ones very far from where they are doing the rest
of their work. Therefore, the geographies of technological progress and star scientists tend to
coincide. In this section we will consider where the stars begin their professional careers, change
regions or locations of residence and/or enter new scientific fields.

14

Economic geography provides us with the useful concepts of agglomeration and
diffusion, which are two sides of the same coin. Agglomeration occurs with respect to a
particular measure of interest if concentration is increasing over time: regions or countries with
larger values of this measure have disproportionately high growth rates for the same measure
while those with lower values have disproportionately low growth rates.

High-technology

industries, for example, tend to concentrate over time or agglomerate in a relatively few centers,
and knowledge in a specialty or subspecialty tends to grow faster in centers which have achieved
a ‘critical mass’ of scholars (Zucker, Darby, Furner, Liu and Ma 2007). Diffusion is the mirror
image of agglomeration: regions or countries with smaller values have disproportionately high
growth rates for the measure being considered while those with higher values have
disproportionately low growth rates. Diffusion is the goal of many economic development
schemes, notably in the European Union, as well as a natural process for the spread of
knowledge.
The correlation coefficient of the level and growth rate of a variable measured across
regions or countries and over time is a direct index of agglomeration or diffusion. If the
correlation coefficient (which ranges from -1 to 1) is positive, the variable is agglomerating
while a negative correlation coefficient shows that the variable is diffusing over time. In Table
2, adapted from Table 5 in Zucker and Darby (2007c) and Table 8 in Zucker and Darby (2006),
we present these correlation coefficients for a number of variables of interest and for different
sets of countries. Whether we look at US regions or any of the listed combinations of the top-25
S&T countries in the world, university article publication is diffusing, with traditionally weaker
regions and countries tending to catch up with traditional scientific leaders. This suggests that
more regions and countries will over time provide a fertile ground for new star scientists to

15

emerge where before it would be very difficult. This observation is confirmed – but more
weakly – by the tendency for high impact articles (those that are very highly cited by other
scientists) to diffuse, although that diffusion is statistically significant only where the US is not
included in the set of countries.
The third line for each geographical comparison tells us that firm entry is in fact
agglomerating across the gamut of broad high-technologies both across US regions and across
the non-OECD [developing] countries among the top-25 S&T countries. On the other hand, this
tendency toward concentration of broad high-technologies is not statistically significant or
nonexistent for the geographic comparisons including 18 (without US) or 19 (with US) of the
OECD [developed] countries. Whether or not high-technology firm entry is agglomerating
seems to be determined in substantial part by whether or not star scientists are agglomerating,
with that tendency is strongest across US regions and across the non-OECD countries among the
top-25 S&T countries. Star scientists entry shows strong agglomeration and tends to drive
agglomeration of the number of star scientists resident in a region or country unless offset by
migration (Zucker and Darby 2007c).
Overlaying this pattern during the last quarter century, however, are movements of many
US trained foreign students who build successful careers in American academe, perhaps moving
from lower to higher ranked US universities but choose to return home when their native
countries develop sufficient strength in their disciplines to both seek them out and to be attractive
(Saxenian 2005). This weakens the tendency toward concentration when the US is in the country
data set, but not when it is out. Since this effect is present to a somewhat similar degree in all
American universities, the reverse brain drain of expatriate stars affects the average growth rate
of stars in the US without weakening the positive correlation across countries.

16

Table 3, from Table 6 in Zucker and Darby (2007c), presents novel evidence on the
location and migration of star scientists and engineers among the top-25 S&T countries. About
93 percent of the world’s star scientists and engineers in the world have residences in the top-25
S&T countries at the end of 2004 – 62 percent in the US alone.8 It should be noted that non-US
scientists suspect that ISI citation measures and therefore the ISI Highly Cited are inherently
biased in favor of English-speaking and particularly American scientists (and, in fact, there must
be published English translations of titles and abstracts for a non-English language to be ISIlisted). The dominant factor determining the number of stars resident in a country at the end of
the period or at any time during the period is the number of professional debuts made in the
country. Future stars are more likely to get their first job where they want to live and they tend
to stay there. However, migration does make a difference for some countries and losing even
one or two dominant firms founded by emigrants to other countries can be a significant
economic event.
Table 3 shows clear evidence of reversal of the traditional brain drain from other
countries, particularly less developed ones, to the US and other science powerhouses like Britain
and Germany. The four largest net immigrations of star scientists over the last quarter century
were registered by the United Kingdom (-27 or 4.6 percent of all stars resident in the country at
any time 1981-2004), the United States (-23 or 0.6 percent), Canada (-23 or 7.7 percent) and
Germany (-11 or 3.0 percent). Recall that Table 1 showed that for biotechnology stars (defined
by genetic-sequence discoveries, not citations) 1973-1989, the US and Germany had inward net
migration of 2.9 and 8.3 percent, respectively; so for these countries there is evidence of a
reversal of direction.9

17

For the six developing countries near the bottom of Table 3, round-trip inward migration
(where a star moves there for more than two years but later leaves) provides a significant source
of brain power and innovation accounting for from 33 to 79 percent of all star scientists ever
resident in those countries, 1981-2004. Moreover, about 20 percent of all inward migrant stars to
these countries had not returned as of 2004, mostly due to those remaining in China and Taiwan.
At this point we read the evidence on migration of stars as cautionary for the US, but
alarming for some other countries (such as Canada, Germany, Israel and the United Kingdom).
We also see hope for some developing countries that inward migration (frequently of native
born, foreign-educated stars) can provide an important supplement to home-grown stars if
working and living conditions are right to attract and retain them (Zucker and Darby 2007c).

IV. Conclusions
From the bare economic point of view the importance of geniuses is only
beginning to be appreciated. How can we measure the cash-value to France of a Pasteur,
to England of a Kelvin, to Germany of an Ostwald, to us here of a Burbank? One main
care of every country in the future ought to be to find out who its first rate thinkers are
and to help them. Cost here becomes, irrelevant, the returns are sure to be so
incommensurable.
- William James (1911, pp. 363-364)
William James – the father of American psychology and a first rate thinker – apparently
foresaw the extraordinarily high estimates of the return current in the economics of S&T
literature and perhaps the coming of the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of
Health and their sister institutions in the US and other countries. However, democratic values
largely trumped the study – much less appreciation or even mention – of geniuses as a politically
incorrect vestige of the ‘great man theory’ which should be consigned to the dustbin of history.

18

It is only the accumulation of stubborn facts that has persuaded us that this view is fundamentally
wrong so far as it comes to understanding innovation.
Innovation is mostly not about the accumulation of small changes – inching up as the
Japanese would have it – but about the rare occurrence of very large improvements in how to do
things or what can be done. Inching up may be better done by 100 journeyman engineers than 1
or 2 scientific geniuses but great innovations are much more likely to come from the geniuses.
The star scientists in this paper are remarkably energetic, and when they see that one of
their discoveries has substantial commercial value and the incentives (including funding more
research) are right, they find a way to sell their idea to an existing firm or create a new one to
commercialize it. They are opportunists in the best senses of the word: creating opportunity,
seeing it where others do not and carrying forward with a drive that gets things accomplished
despite an already overfull agenda. James calls on the government to help them, but often it is
enough to simply stay out of their way. They are quite used to helping themselves and smart
enough to speak of team work, generally relying on small teams of extraordinary scientists or
scientists-in-training (Zuckerman 1977).
The American system of research universities has been remarkably effective in providing
a flexible home base for star innovators to work from. For decades America attracted the best
and brightest from around the world to come for a doctoral education. The very best of these
often never left, contributing to US growth. A century and a half ago Germany benefited from
its similar role as the center of science. James included among his four exemplars of genius with
obviously great cash value Wilhelm Ostwald (1853-1932), the 1909 Nobel Laureate for
Chemistry for his work on catalytic reactions and Professor of Physical Chemistry at Leipzig
University in Germany 1887-1906. In the commercial realm, the Ostwald process for producing

19

nitric acid remains a mainstay of the modern chemical industry. We should note that Ostwald, a
native of Riga, Latvia, was also an exemplar of the value of brain drain to the receiving country.
Our earlier research has shown the importance of star scientists in their commercial role
of star innovators creating the dominant firms in important industries driven by rapid scientific
progress. Our results on firm entry suggest that this is true across the broad range of hightechnology industries. The individuals at the very top of their scientific discipline are the ones
most likely to fundamentally change how things are done in their science and in its commercial
applications.

America has profited greatly from providing a seed bed for producing and

retaining most of these people for the last sixty years. There is evidence that recent policy
changes such as on student visas have endangered that privileged status. It would be a very
costly loss.

20

Endnotes
1

Baumol, Litan and Schramm (2007) argue persuasively that both small entrepreneurial firms and

large dominant firms play important roles in growth and prosperity. Darby and Zucker (2006) argue
that the prospect of a small entrepreneurial firm’s becoming a large dominant firm provides part of
the incentive to bear the costs of turning a great idea into a commercial innovation in a startup firm.
2

This market-based model is an alternative – and empirically superior as discussed below –

explanation for clustering of high-tech industries around universities to positive externalities (such
as quicker knowledge diffusion through attending seminars) as advocated Jaffe (1986), Dorfman
(1988), Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson (1993), Bania and Fogarty (1993), and Saxenian (1996).
It also differs from the Crane (1969, 1972) invisible colleges view in which geography and benchscience interaction have vanishing importance.
3

These knowledge spillovers play a central role in the economics literature as causes of geographic

agglomeration (local concentration) of particular industries and of endogenous growth in the ‘New
Growth Theory Models’ (Romer 1986, 1990; Grossman and Helpman 1991; Eaton and Kortum
1996, 1999; Jones 1995) though the empirical search for their existence has proved difficult
(Griliches 1992). Demonstration of statistically significant positive effects on a firm's productivity
of being near great universities and other sources of scientific discovery also have been taken as
fingerprints of such spillovers by Acs and Audretsch 1988 and 1993, Acs, Audretsch, and Feldman
1994, and Mansfield 1995.
4

The stars’ contributions to open science are measured in Zucker and Darby (2007a) by the

number of articles published per year, given that the citations per article increase in the US and
are insignificantly different in Japan.
5

The US Bureau of Economic Analysis defines the 179 regions as functional economic areas such

21

that each US county is assigned to a region which includes the major metropolitan center for which
commuting, shopping, and newspaper readership predominates (Johnson and Kort 2004). The 25
countries are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, France,
Israel, India, Italy, Japan, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, South Korea, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the USSR & Russia
counted as the same country.
6

The curriculum vitae supplied to ISI author appears to be in an abbreviated (apparently NSF or

NIH) format for 41.0 percent of these stars, with 37.8% reporting exactly 10 ISI articles and 3.2
percent reporting 5-9 ISI articles. Since the NSF and NIH formats impose strict 10-publications
and 1-3 pages limits (the latter depending on the grant program), listed publications and
affiliations are chosen strategically to enhance the odds of funding. Less prestigious, especially
commercial, affiliations are also not infrequently omitted from full academic curricula vitae so
we chose to identify location by those listed at the time of publication of articles rather than rely
on the ones reported retrospectively.
7

ISI article data do not distinguish which address (normally an organization) goes with which

author except for a possible single author designated corresponding author who then matches (at
least) to the corresponding address). The cases indicated in the text are those for which the star
scientist can be definitively located with an address because they are the corresponding author,
the sole author, or there is only 1 listed corresponding or research address for a journal that
reports multiple addresses on other articles in the same year.

The 299,583 authorships

corresponded to 276,182 different articles, with the difference (23,401) all accounted for by
multiple star authors on articles with a single address.
8

A small number of the stars have residences in two countries, judging from their publications

22

and patents, and a handful made their professional debut simultaneously in two countries,
presumably reflecting the locations of their doctoral work and first job.
9

On the other hand, the United Kingdom and Canada had large outward migration rates in Table

1 (32.3 and 30.0 percent, respectively) so those countries were already experiencing a brain
drain. Switzerland reversed its direction in a favorable direction for that country between the
two tables.

23

References
Acs, Zoltan J. and David B. Audretsch (1987), ‘Innovation, Market Structure, and Firm
Size’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 (4), 567-574.
Acs, Zoltan J. and David B. Audretsch (1993), ‘Innovation and Technological Change:
The New Learning’, Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and
Economic Growth, 6, 109-142.
Acs, Zoltan, David B. Audretsch and Maryann P. Feldman (1994), ‘R&D Spillovers and
Innovative Activity’, Managerial and Decision Economics, 15, 131-138.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962), ‘Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
Invention’, in Richard R. Nelson (ed), The Rate and Direction of Inventive
Activity: Economic and Social Factors, NBER Special Conference Series vol. 13,
Princeton, US: Princeton University Press, pp. 609-625.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1974), The Limits of Organization, New York, US: W.W. Norton &
Company.
Audretsch, David B. and Maryann P. Feldman (1994), ‘The Geography of Innovation and
Production’, in Consorcio de la Zona Franca di Vigo (ed), The Location of
Economic Activity: New Theories and Evidence, London: Centre for Economic
Policy Research.
Audretsch, David B. and Maryann P. Feldman (1996), ‘R&D Spillovers and the
Geography of Innovation and Production’, American Economic Review, 86 (3),
630-640.
Audretsch, David B. and Paula E. Stephan (1996), ‘Company-Scientist Locational Links:
The Case of Biotechnology’, American Economic Review, 86 (3), 641-652.
Bania, Neil, Randall Eberts and Michael Fogarty (1993), ‘Universities and the Startup of
New Companies: Can We Generalize from Route 128 and Silicon Valley?’,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 75, 761-766.
Baumol, William J., Robert E. Litan and Carl J. Schramm (2007), Good Capitalism, Bad
Capitalism, and the Economics of Growth and Prosperity, New Haven, US and
London, UK: Yale University Press.
Cooke, Philip (2001), ‘Regional Innovation Systems, Clusters, and the Knowledge
Economy’, Industrial and Corporate Change, 10 (4), 945-974.
Cooke, Philip (2004), Globalisation of Bioregions: The Rise of Knowledge Capability,
Receptivity & Diversity, Regional Industrial Research Report 44, Cardiff, UK:
Centre for Advanced Studies.
Cooke, Philip (2005), ‘Rational Drug Design, the Knowledge Value Chain and
Bioscience Megacentres’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 29 (3), 325-341.
Crane, Diana (1969), ‘Social Structure in a Group of Scientists: A Test of the Invisible
College Hypothesis’, American Sociological Review, 34 (3), 335-52.
Crane, Diana (1972), Invisible Colleges: Diffusion of Knowledge in Scientific
Communities, Chicago, US: University of Chicago Press.
Darby, Michael R., Qiao Liu and Lynne G. Zucker (2004), ‘High Stakes in High
Technology: High-tech Market Values as Options’, Economic Inquiry, 42 (3),
351-369.

24

Darby, Michael R. and Lynne G. Zucker (1999), California's Science Base: Size, Quality
and Productivity, Sacramento, US: California Council on Science and
Technology.
Darby, Michael R. and Lynne G. Zucker (2001), ‘Change or Die: The Adoption of
Biotechnology in the Japanese and U.S. Pharmaceutical Industries’, Comparative
Studies of Technological Evolution, 7, 85-125.
Darby, Michael R. and Lynne G. Zucker (2003), ‘Growing by Leaps and Inches: Creative
Destruction, Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up’, Economic Inquiry, 41 (1), 119.
Dorfman, Nancy S. (1988), ‘Route 128: The Development of a Regional High
Technology Economy’, in David Lampe (ed.), The Massachusetts Miracle: High
Technology and Economic Revitalization, Cambridge, US: The MIT Press, pp.
240-274.
Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker (2006), ‘Innovation, Competition, and WelfareEnhancing Monopoly’, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 12094.
Darby, Michael R. and Lynne G. Zucker (2007), ‘Grilichesian Breakthroughs: Inventions
of Methods of Inventing in Nanotechnology and Biotechnology’, Annales
d’Economie et Statistique, 79-08, in press.
Di Gregorio, Dante and Scott Shane (2003), ‘Why do some universities generate more
start-ups than others?’, Research Policy, 32 (2), 209-227.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (1996), ‘Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity
in the OECD’, Journal of International Economics, 40 (3-4), 251-78
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (1999), ‘International Technology Diffusion:
Theory and Measurement’, International Economic Review, 40 (3), 537-570.
Griliches, Zvi (1957), ‘Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
Change’, Econometrica, 25 (4), 501-522.
Griliches, Zvi (1992), ‘The Search for R&D Spillovers’, Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 94 (Supplement), 29-47.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy, Cambridge, US: The MIT Press.
Harberger, Arnold C. (1998), ‘A Vision of the Growth Process’, American Economic
Review, 88 (1), 1-32.
Head, Keith, John Ries and Deborah Swenson (1995), ‘Agglomeration Benefits and
Location Choice: Evidence from Japanese Manufacturing Investment in the
United States’, Journal of International Economics, 38 (3-4), 223-247.
Institute for Scientific Information (1981-1997), Science Citation Index, machinereadable data bases, Philadelphia, US: Institute for Scientific Information.
Institute for Scientific Information (2005a), Science Citation Index Expanded, Social
Sciences Citation Index, Arts & Humanities Citation Index and High Impact
Papers, machine-readable data bases, Philadelphia, US: Institute for Scientific
Information.

25

Institute for Scientific Information (2005b), ISI HighlyCitedSM, on-line machine-readable
data base, Philadelphia, US: Institute for Scientific Information,
http://isihighlycited.com/.
Jaffe, Adam B. (1986), ‘Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D; Evidence
from Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value’, American Economic Review, 76
(5), 984-1001.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg and Rebecca Henderson (1993), ‘Geographic
Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 63, 577-598.
James, William (1911), ‘Stanford’s Ideal Destiny’, Memories and Studies, New York,
US: Longmans, Green & Co., pp. 356-367.
Jensen, Richard and Marie Thursby (2001), ‘Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Tale of
University Licensing’, American Economic Review, 91 (1), 240-259.
Johnson, Kenneth P. and John R. Kort (2004), ‘2004 Redefinition of the BEA Economic
Areas’, Survey of Current Business, November, pp. 68-75.
Jones, Charles I. (1995), ‘R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth’, Journal of Political
Economy, 103 (4), 759-784
Klevorick, Alvin K., Richard C. Levin, Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G. Winter (1995),
‘On the Sources and Significance of Interindustry Differences in Technological
Opportunities’, Research Policy, 24 (2), 185-205.
Mansfield, Edwin (1995), ‘Academic Research Underlying Industrial Innovations:
Sources, Characteristics, and Financing’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 77
(1), 55-65.
Marshall, Alfred (1920), Principles of Economics, 8th ed., London, UK: Macmillan.
National Research Council (1995), Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States:
Data Set, machine-readable data base, Washington, US: National Academy Press.
Nelson, Richard R. (1959), ‘The Economics of Invention: A Survey of the Literature’,
Journal of Business, 32 (2), 101-127.
Nelson, Richard R. and Sidney G. Winter (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change, Cambridge, US: Harvard University Press.
Nelson, Richard R. and Edward N. Wolff (1997), ‘Factors behind Cross-Industry
Differences in Technical Progress’, 8 (2), 205-220.
Romer, Paul M. (1986), ‘Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth’, Journal of Political
Economy, 94 (5), 1002-1037.
Romer, Paul M. (1990), ‘Endogenous Technological Change’, Journal of Political
Economy, 98 (5, Part 2–Supplement), S71-S102.
Rosenberg, Nathan (1982), Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Saxenian, AnnaLee (1996), Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon
Valley and Route 128, Cambridge, US: Harvard University Press.
Saxenian, AnnaLee (2005), ‘From Brain Drain to Brain Circulation: Transnational
Communities and Regional Upgrading in India and China’, Studies in
Comparative International Development, 40 (2), 35-61.

26

Thursby, Jerry G. and Marie Thursby (2002), ‘Who Is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources
of Growth in University Licensing’, Management Science, 48 (1), 90-104.
Yarkin, Cherisa (2000), ‘Assessing the role of the University of California in the state’s
biotechnology economy’, in John de la Mothe and Jorge Niosi (eds), The
Economic and Social Dynamics of Biotechnology, Boston, US: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (1996a), ‘Costly Information: Firm
Transformation, Exit, or Persistent Failure’, American Behavioral Scientist, 39
(8), 959-974.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (1996b), ‘Star Scientists and Institutional
Transformation: Patterns of Invention and Innovation in the Formation of the
Biotechnology Industry’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93
(23), 12709-12716.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (1997a), ‘Individual Action and the Demand for
Institutions:
Star Scientists and Institutional Transformation’, American
Behavioral Scientist, 40 (4), 502-513.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (1997b), ‘Present at the Biotechnological
Revolution: Transformation of Technical Identity for a Large Incumbent
Pharmaceutical Firm’, Research Policy, 26 (4&5), 429-446.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (1999a), California's Inventive Activity: Patent
Indicators of Quantity, Quality, and Organizational Origins, Sacramento, US:
California Council on Science and Technology.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (1999b), ‘Star Scientist Linkages to Firms in
APEC and European Countries: Indicators of Regional Institutional Differences
Affecting Competitive Advantage’, International Journal of Biotechnology, 1 (1),
119-131.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (2001), ‘Capturing Technological Opportunity
Via Japan's Star Scientists: Evidence from Japanese Firms' Biotech Patents and
Products’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 26 (1/2), 37-58.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (2006), ‘Movement of Star Scientists and
Engineers and High-Tech Firm Entry’, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 12172, April, revised October.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (2007a), ‘Virtuous Circles in Science and
Commerce’, Papers in Regional Science, 86 (3), 468-471.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (2007b), ‘Socio-economic Impact of Nanoscale
Science: Initial Results and NanoBank’, in Mihail C. Roco and William S.
Bainbridge (eds), Nanotechnology: Societal Implications II — Individual
Perspectives, Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Zucker, Lynne G. and Michael R. Darby (2007c), ‘Science, Knowledge, and Firms in
Developing Economies’, paper presented at the Micro Evidence on Innovation in
Developing Economies, MERIT, United Nations University, Maastricht, The
Netherlands, May 31-June 1.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby and Jeff Armstrong (1998), ‘Geographically Localized
Knowledge: Spillovers or Markets?’, Economic Inquiry, 36 (1), 65-86.

27

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby and Jeff Armstrong (2002), ‘Commercializing
Knowledge: University Science, Knowledge Capture, and Firm Performance in
Biotechnology’, Management Science, 48 (1), 138-153.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby and Marilynn B. Brewer (1998), ‘Intellectual
Human Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises’, American
Economic Review, 88 (1), 290-306.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, Jonathan Furner, Robert C. Liu and Hongyan Ma
(2007), ‘Minerva Unbound: Knowledge Stocks, Knowledge Flows and New
Knowledge Production’, Research Policy, 36 (6), 850-863.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby and Máximo Torero (2002), ‘Labor Mobility from
Academe to Commerce’, Journal of Labor Economics, 20 (3), 629-660.
Zuckerman, Harriet (1967), ‘Nobel Laureates in Science: Patterns of Productivity,
Collaboration, and Authorship’, American Sociological Review, 32 (3), 391-403
Zuckerman, Harriet (1977), Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United States, New
York, US: Free Press.

28

Table 1
Star Bioscientists, Their Ties to Firms and Migration Rates
Top-10 Countries, 1973-1989

Countries

Share of
starsa

Fraction
tied to firmsb

Migration Rate__
Grossc
Netd

United States
Japan
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Switzerland
Australia
Canada
Belgium
Netherlands

50.2
12.6
7.5
6.1
5.8
3.6
3.4
2.4
1.7
1.2

33.3
42.3
9.7
0.0
0.0
20.0
7.1
0.0
14.2
20.0

22.2
40.4
58.1
20.0
50.0
93.3
35.7
50.0
42.9
80.0

2.9
9.6
-32.3
4.0
8.3
-40.0
7.1
-30.0
14.3
0.0

Total for top 10

94.7

14.9

35.4

-0.8

Source: Adapted from Zucker and Darby (1999b), Table 1.
Notes: a. Total stars ever publishing a genetic-sequence discovery article 1973-1989 in this country as a
percentage of total stars ever such an article 1973-1989 in any country. This involves some
double-counting of multiple-country stars. Countries in the omitted rest of world with any stars are
Denmark, Finland, Israel, Italy, Sweden and the USSR.
b. Percentage of stars ever publishing a genetic-sequence discovery article 1973-1989 in the country
that ever published such an article in which the star or a coauthor was affiliated with a firm in the
country.
c. Gross migration rate = 100 x (immigration + emigration of stars)/(number of stars ever publishing
in the country)
d. Net migration rate = 100 x (immigration - emigration of stars)/(number of stars ever publishing in
the country)

29

Table 2
Agglomeration or Diffusion? Correlation Coefficients for the Levels and Growth Rates of
Articles, Firm Entry and Star Scientists & Engineers
a

Correlation Coefficients of Level and Growth Rate across Years and Regions/Countries by S&T Field
Bio/Chem/Med Computing/IT Nanotechnology Semiconductors Other Sciences Other Engineering
US Regions
b
University Articles
b
High Impact Articles
Firm Entry
Star Scientists & Engineers
Star Scientist Entry

-0.07**
-0.02
0.09***
0.04^
0.29***

-0.08**
-0.04
0.16***
0.08**
0.53***

-0.09**
-0.03
0.22***
0.19***
0.85***

-0.08**
-0.03
0.20***
0.07**
0.60***

-0.04^
-0.03
0.17***
0.11***
0.73***

-0.04^
-0.04
0.04*
0.19***
0.73***

Top-25 S&T Countries
b
University Articles
b
High Impact Articles
Firm Entry
Star Scientists & Engineers
Star Scientist Entry

-0.16***
-0.08^
-0.04
-0.05
0.01

-0.18***
-0.06
-0.01
0.04
0.12*

-0.18***
-0.08
0.00
-0.01
0.53***

-0.21***
-0.05
-0.02
0.00
0.13*

-0.08*
-0.05
-0.02
0.02
0.18**

-0.16***
-0.05
-0.04
0.01
0.28***

Top-24 Non-US S&T Countries
b
University Articles
b
High Impact Articles
Firm Entry
Star Scientists & Engineers
Star Scientist Entry

-0.29***
-0.15***
-0.03
-0.06
0.19***

-0.29***
-0.01
0.10*
0.04
0.73***

-0.23***
-0.13*
0.10^
0.20***
0.93***

-0.27***
-0.09*
0.05
0.08^
0.64***

-0.15***
-0.11*
0.06
0.08
0.73***

-0.26***
-0.09^
-0.05
0.17**
0.83***

Non - OECD Countries:
b
University Articles
b
High Impact Articles
Firm Entry
Star Scientists & Engineers
Star Scientist Entry

-0.42***
-0.10
0.13
0.00
0.65***

-0.18*
0.22**
0.28**
0.05
0.84***

-0.16^
-0.08
0.45***
0.67***
0.90***

-0.32***
-0.12
0.29**
0.31***
0.83***

-0.19*
-0.11
0.42***
0.75***
0.96***

-0.39***
-0.12
0.03
0.42***
0.95***

OECD Countries (Including US)
b
University Articles
b
High Impact Articles
Firm Entry
Star Scientists & Engineers
Star Scientist Entry

-0.16***
-0.08^
-0.05
-0.02
0.00

-0.20***
-0.07
-0.01
0.06
0.13*

-0.19***
-0.09
0.00
-0.02
0.52***

-0.21***
-0.08^
-0.02
0.00
0.13*

-0.17***
-0.06
-0.03
-0.01
0.17*

-0.16***
-0.05
-0.04
0.00
0.25**

OECD Countries (Excluding US)
b
University Articles
b
High Impact Articles
Firm Entry
Star Scientists & Engineers
Star Scientist Entry

-0.3***
-0.17***
-0.03
-0.02
0.19***

-0.32***
-0.03
0.08
0.06
0.72***

-0.24***
-0.15*
0.09
0.19**
0.94***

-0.26***
-0.14**
0.07
0.07
0.63***

-0.29***
-0.12*
0.04
0.02
0.72***

-0.24***
-0.09^
-0.05
0.15*
0.81***

Notes:

Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
a. The science and engineering areas are Biology/Chemistry/Medicine; Computing & Information Technology;
Semiconductors, Integrated Circuits & Superconductors; Nanoscale Science & Technology; Other Sciences; and Other
Engineering. Nanoscale Science & Technology articles and patents as defined for NanoBank.org are removed from the
other five areas into which they would otherwise be classified.
b. University and high impact articles are measured as knowledge stocks computed as perpetual inventories with the input
series the current year's publication of all university or high impact articles, respectively, and the depreciation rate set at
20 percent per year. These variables were among those used in the analysis of firm entry and accordingly articles with
authors affiliated with firms were excluded in counting the input series.

30

Table 3
Star Scientists’ Professional Debuts and Migration Rates
Top-25 Science and Technology Countries, 1981-2004
Professional
Debutsb
OECD Member Countries
Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Europe

a

APEC Member Countries
Non-U.S. APEC Countries
Australia
Canada
Japan
South Korea
a
Non-U.S. APEC
United States

Outward Migration
One-wayc Round-tripd

Inward Migration
One-wayc Round-tripd

Net Inward
Migratione

Net
Stockf

Unique
Personsg

14
37
29
14
135
222
60
78
12
6
13
70
80
424

6
7
5
2
20
35
14
10
2
4
1
12
17
70

1
1
3
1
19
17
11
4
1
3
1
7
7
31

2
2
5
0
22
24
16
8
3
1
8
5
27
43

20
15
15
7
114
123
47
30
13
15
29
40
45
122

-4
-5
0
-2
2
-11
2
-2
1
-3
7
-7
10
-27

10
32
29
12
137
211
62
76
13
3
20
63
90
397

36
54
49
20
265
362
120
115
27
22
49
112
148
581

1194

205

107

166

635

-39

1155

1960

97
201
176
1
475

15
51
5
0
71

10
13
15
0
38

25
28
18
4
75

49
72
76
7
204

10
-23
13
4
4

107
178
189
5
479

170
300
266
12
748

3354

142

276

119

216

-23

3331

3670

APEC Countries

a

3829

213

314

194

420

-19

3810

4418

OECD Member Countries

a

5023

418

421

360

1055

-58

4965

6378

1
4
10
57
7
3

1
1
3
13
4
1

0
0
1
5
0
0

3
11
3
4
4
5

15
26
14
28
27
6

2
10
0
-9
0
4

3
14
10
48
7
7

19
39
27
86
36
14

82

23

6

30

116

7

89

221

5105

441

427

390

1171

-51

5054

6599

1751

299

151

271

955

-28

1723

2929

OECD Nonmember Countries
Brazil
China
India
Israel
Russia/USSR
Taiwan
OECD Nonmember Countries
Top-25 S&T Countries

a

Top-24 Non-U.S. S&T Countriesa
Source:
Notes:

a

Zucker and Darby (2007c)
a. Totals of individual country values have not been adjusted for doublecounting due to within-region migration.
b. Each person who publishes or patents giving an address in the country the first year that person publishes or patents
anywhere is counted as making a professional debut in the country. It is possible for one star to make a professional
debut in more than one country and in a country other than the country of his or her birth or citizenship.
c. One-way immigration refers to the person stopping publishing or patenting in a country where they had been doing so
and starting doing that in another country with no subsequent return to the first country. "Visits" of 2 years or less do
not count for inward or outward migration.
d. Round-trip immigration refers to the person stopping publishing or patenting in a country where they had been doing so
and starting doing that in another country and subsequently returning to the first country. "Visits" of 2 years or less do
not count for inward or outward migration.
e. Net inward migration is one-way inward migration minus one-way outward migration. Round-trip inward and outward
migration leave the stock of stars unchanged.
f. The net stock of stars is the number making professional debuts in the country plus one-way inward migration minus
one-way outward migration, with no adjustment for death or retirement due to lack of information on when that occurs.
g. Unique persons is a count of the number of stars who have ever published or patented with an address in the country.

31

Figure 1. Estimated Effects of Number of University Star-Firm Linked Articles on Success of
Californian and Japanese Biotechnology-Using Firms

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Products in
Development
California

Products on the
Market California

Employment Growth
(in 100s)-Cal.
Products in
Development Japan

5 Sta

Products on the
Market Japan

2 Sta

U.S. Patents
Granted (x10)-Japan

Sources: Zucker, Darby and Armstrong (1998) for
California and Zucker and Darby (2001) for Japan

32

0 Sta

r A rt

r A rt

i cl e s

r A rt

icles

Link

i cl e s

Link

ed to

Link

ed to

F i rm

e d to

F i rm

F i rm

Figure 2. Success of US Biotech by Ties to Star Scientists, Links to Top-112-Research-University Faculty,
and Venture-Capital Funding Levels

Mean Success by
Tied Star Articles

Mean Success by
Linked Top-112
Articles

25
20

Mean Success by
Venture-Capital
Funding Levels

15
10

Source: Zucker, Darby and
Armstrong (2002)

5

33

Products on the Market

Products in Development

Biotech Patents

Products on the Market

Products in Development

Biotech Patents

Products on the Market

Products in Development

0
Biotech Patents

Mean Values for Innovation
Measures

30

11 +
Artic
les o
1-10
r A bo
Artic
ve-M
l
es o r
0 Art
e di a n
Belo
icles
VC F
w
or No
-Med
un di n
ia n V
VC F
g
C Fu
undin
nding
g

Figure 3. Biology/Chemistry/Medicine Star Scientists & Firm Entry, US Regions, 1981-2004

Source: Zucker and Darby (2006)

34

Figure 4. Nanoscale Science and Technology Star Scientists & Firm Entry, US Regions, 1981-2004

Source: Zucker and Darby (2006)

35

Figure 5. Biology/Chemistry/Medicine Star Scientists & Firm Entry, 25 Countries, 1981-2004

Source: Zucker and Darby (2006)

36

Figure 6. Nanoscale Science and Technology Star Scientists & Firm Entry, 25 Countries, 1981-2004

Source: Zucker and Darby (2006)

37

Figure 7. Star Scientists and Engineers Increase the Probability of Firm Entry into New Technologies
Relative Probabilities with Different Numbers of Active Stars, All Other Variables = Mean Values
Active Stars = 1

Active Stars = Mean

Active Stars = Mean + 1 Standard Deviation

Source: Zucker and Darby (2006)

3
Probaility of Firm Entry Relative to That for All Variables = Mean Values

Active Stars = Mean + 2 Standard Deviations

Estimates based on 179 U.S.
functional economic regions

Estimates based on top-24
S&T nations excluding U.S.A

2

1

38

S

ee
ri n
g

-N

on
-U

S
on
-U
-N
th
er
En
gi
n
O

O

th
er

Sc
i

or
s

en
ce
s

-N
on
-U
S

on
-U
S
-N
ic
on
du
ct

ol
og
y

Se
m

N

an
ot
ec
hn

tin
g/
IT

-N
on
-

U
S

U
S
-N
on
C
om
pu

ne
er
in
g

Bi
o/
C
he
m

/M
ed

-U
S

S
th
er
En
gi

O

O

th
er

Sc
ie
nc
es

or
s

-U

-U
S

S
ic
on
du
ct

Se
m

ol
og
y

-U

-U
S
IT

an
ot
ec
hn

N

in
g/
C
om
pu
t

Bi
o/
C

he
m

/M

ed

-U
S

0

Figure 8. Star Scientists and Engineers Increase the Probability of Firm Entry into New Technologies
Stars Defined as First 1,838 (First 34%) in ISI HighlyCitedSM
Relative Probabilities with Different Numbers of Active Stars, All Other Variables = Mean Values
Active Stars = 1

Active Stars = Mean

Active Stars = Mean + 1 Standard Deviation

Source: Zucker and Darby (2006)

3
Probaility of Firm Entry Relative to That for All Variables = Mean Values

Active Stars = Mean + 2 Standard Deviations

Estimates based on 179 U.S.
functional economic regions

Estimates based on top-24
S&T nations excluding U.S.A

2

1

-N
m
on
ic
on
-U
du
S
ct
or
s
O
-N
th
on
er
-U
Sc
S
ie
nc
es
O
th
-N
er
on
En
-U
gi
ne
S
er
in
g
-N
on
-U
S

Se

te
ch
n

ol
og
y

-N
N

an
o

tin
g/
IT
C

om
pu

/M
m

on
-U

on
-U
ed

-N

g
En
gi
ne
er
in

Bi
o/
C
he

39

S

S

-U
S

S
O

th
er

es

-U
th
er
Sc
ie
nc

O

ct
or
s
ic
on
du
m

Se

-U

S

S
-U
ol
og
y

ec
hn

an
ot
N

om
pu
C

Bi
o/
C

he
m

/M

tin
g/
IT

ed

-U

-U
S

S

0

