                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SEX DIFFERENCES IN OBESITY RATES IN POOR COUNTRIES:
                         EVIDENCE FROM SOUTH AFRICA

                                             Anne Case
                                          Alicia Menendez

                                        Working Paper 13541
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13541


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




This research has been supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging (R01 AG20275-01,
P01 AG05842-14, and P30 AG024361). We thank Dr. Ingrid le Roux and the Philani Nutrition Programme,
without whose generous help and guidance this project would not have been possible. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Anne Case and Alicia Menendez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Sex Differences in Obesity Rates in Poor Countries: Evidence from South Africa
Anne Case and Alicia Menendez
NBER Working Paper No. 13541
October 2007
JEL No. D13,I10

                                            ABSTRACT

Globally, men and women face markedly different risks of obesity. In all but of handful of (primarily
Western European) countries, obesity is more prevalent among women than men. In this paper, we
examine several potential explanations for this phenomenon. We analyze differences between men
and women in reports and effects of the proximate causes of obesity -- physical exertion and food
intake -- and the underlying causes of obesity -- childhood and adult poverty, depression, and attitudes
about obesity. We evaluate the evidence for each explanation using data collected in an African township
outside of Cape Town. Three factors explain the greater obesity rates we find among women. Women
who were nutritionally deprived as children are significantly more likely to be obese as adults, while
men who were deprived as children face no greater risk. In addition, women of higher adult socioeconomic
status are significantly more likely to be obese, which is not true for men. These two factors can fully
explain the difference in obesity rates we find in our sample. Finally (and more speculatively), women's
perceptions of an 'ideal' female body are larger than men's perceptions of the 'ideal' male body, and
individuals with larger 'ideal' body images are significantly more likely to be obese.


Anne Case
367 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1022
and NBER
accase@princeton.edu

Alicia Menendez
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
menendez@uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

People living in developing countries are burdened not only by the infectious diseases of

the developing world, but increasingly by the chronic diseases of the developed world.

The incidence of obesity is on the rise in many poor countries (Popkin and Doak 1998).

Globally, men and women face different risks of obesity. Data from the World Health

Organization (WHO) suggest that, in all but of handful of (primarily Western European)

countries, obesity is more prevalent among women than men. In 138 of 194 countries for

which the WHO reports obesity statistics, women were more than 50 percent more likely

to be obese than were men (WHO Global InfoBase: obesity and overweight, available

online at http://www.who.int/topics/obesity/en/). The prevalence of obesity among

women in Southern Africa is particularly high (Martorell et al 2000). In South Africa,

Puoane et al. (2002) find that 60 percent of African (Black) women in 1998 were either

overweight or obese, with rates of obesity five times higher for Black women than for

Black men.1

    Chronic health risks associated with obesity include, inter alia, hypertension,

coronary heart disease, stroke and diabetes. Recent work concludes that overweight

Africans are not immune to these risks. In one rural demographic surveillance site in

South Africa, where nearly 50 percent of women are overweight or obese, women with

higher body mass indices (BMI) were found to be at higher risk of hypertension (Case

and Deaton 2006). The two largest killers in that field site, among residents aged 50 and




1
  We follow World Health Organization classifications that a person is overweight if his or her body mass
index (BMI) – a measure of weight for height (kilograms per meter squared) – lies between 25 and 30, and
is obese if his or her BMI is greater than 30. For example, a person 5 foot 4 inches tall would be classified
as overweight if her weight were above 145 pounds, and obese if her weight were greater than 175 pounds.


                                                      1
above, are stroke and congestive heart failure – both diseases associated with obesity

(Kahn et al. 1999).

       Recent literature points to several risk factors for obesity in developing countries.

The focus of this work is generally on factors that shift the calorie intake-expenditure

balance, including increased urbanization, which can lead to a reduction in physical

activity; the availability of lower priced calories, which can lead to greater calorie

consumption; and a “Westernization” of diets (Popkin 1994, WHO 2000). FAO (2006)

cites the importation of high-fat foods into low income countries as a central underlying

cause of the pandemic.

   All of these factors may contribute to the increased prevalence in obesity in the

developing world. However, by themselves these factors cannot explain why the rates of

obesity are significantly higher for women than for men in developing countries. In this

paper, we examine several potential explanations for the much higher obesity rate

observed for African women in South Africa. Specifically, we analyze differences

between men and women in reports and effects of the proximate causes of obesity—

physical exertion and food intake—and underlying causes of obesity—childhood and

adult poverty, depression, and attitudes about obesity. We evaluate the evidence for each

explanation using data collected in 2004 and 2005 on the health, mental health and

socioeconomic circumstances of individuals living in Khayelitsha, an African township

outside of Cape Town, South Africa.

   Three factors explain the greater obesity rates we find among women. Women who

were nutritionally deprived as children are significantly more likely to be obese as adults,

while men who were deprived as children face no significantly greater risk of obesity. In




                                              2
addition, women of higher adult socioeconomic status (SES) are significantly more likely

to be obese, which is not true for men. These two factors can fully explain the difference

in obesity rates between men and women in our sample. Finally (and more speculatively),

women’s perceptions of an ‘ideal’ female body are larger than men’s perceptions of the

‘ideal’ male body, and individuals with higher ‘ideal’ body images are significantly more

likely to be obese. On average, South African Black women report that their body size

accords with their ‘ideal’ at a body mass index (BMI) of 30 – the lower bound of the

World Health Organization’s definition of obesity.

   In what follows, we examine sex differences in obesity rates in South Africa. The

next section presents a model of the proximate and underlying causes of obesity. In

addition, it presents a decomposition of obesity into component parts, which we use to

discuss differences in obesity rates between men and women. Section 3 provides an

introduction to our data, and Section 4 presents results on the determinants of obesity in

South African women and men. Section 5 discusses mechanisms through which

childhood and adult SES appear to differentially affect women’s and men’s obesity, and

Section 6 highlights implications of these findings for health interventions and suggests

avenues for future research.



2. Proximate and Underlying Causes of Obesity

Proximate causes of obesity

Obesity results from an imbalance between calorie intake and expenditure. Adults

surveyed in Khayelitsha were asked many questions about food and drink, and about

physical activities. These behaviors ( xb ) are the observable components of energy intake




                                             3
and expenditure that we use to characterize the proximate causes of obesity. We write the

probability that an individual is obese ( y = 1 ) as a function of the observable proximate

causes:



(1)        P ( y = 1) = xbγ b + u .



The survey does not capture all calorie intake and expenditure. There are many questions

(for example, about the amount of oil that goes into the cooking pot, and more generally

the fat content of foods consumed) that are difficult to ask with any precision. The error

component of (1), then, will contain several measures of energy intake and expenditure

that influence obesity. We can re-write the error term to reflect this,



u = xb*γ b* + e ,



where xb* represent those elements of calorie intake and expenditure that are not captured

by the survey. We can then re-write equation (1) to reflect also the latent determinants of

obesity:



(2)        P ( y = 1) = xbγ b + xb*γ b* + e .



Underlying causes of obesity

Obesity may depend on factors individuals encounter at different points in the life course.

Childhood deprivation may change the probability of obesity in adulthood directly,


                                                4
through its effects on metabolic function. In addition, childhood poverty may determine

educational attainment and financial status in adulthood, which may affect consumption

patterns. Adults’ attitudes, and their dispositions toward depression, can also affect their

calorie balance. We refer to these collectively as the underlying factors affecting the

probability of obesity.

        We formalize this by representing the observable and latent components of energy

intake and expenditure as a function of vectors of childhood circumstances ( xc ), adult

socioeconomic status ( xs ), and adult attitudes, predispositions toward depression, and

perceptions of the ideal body ( xd ). That is



xb = xcα c + xsα s + xd α d + v
xb* = xcα c* + xsα s* + xd α d * + ω



Substitution of these underlying characteristics into (2) allows us to express the

association between obesity and its underlying causes as



(3)      P( y = 1) = xc β c + xs β s + xd β d + ε .



The coefficients on childhood and adult circumstances reflect both the observable and

latent determinants of obesity. The coefficients on childhood variables, for example,

measure the extent to which childhood circumstances affect relevant observable and

latent behaviors, interacted with the extent to which these behaviors change the

probability of obesity: β c = α cγ b + α c*γ b* .



                                                      5
          We can estimate equations (1) and (3) to quantify the proximate and underlying

causes of obesity. We can also use these equations to characterize the reasons for

women’s much greater rates of obesity. We quantify differences between men and

women in their endowments of variables that determine obesity, and differences in the

impact of these variables, by decomposing equations (1) and (3) using a Blinder-Oaxaca

decomposition. Re-writing equation (3) for women (F) and men (M) as



P k ( y = 1) = ∑ xi βik + e k for k = F , M ,
                i




the difference in obesity rates between women and men can be expressed as a severity

effect, which measures the differences between sexes in the extent to which individual

characteristics affect obesity; and a prevalence effect, which measures differences in

endowments of characteristics thought to influence obesity; and a residual, which picks

up any remaining differences in rates between men and women. The severity effect can

be written



(4)       severity effect = ∑ i ( β iF − βiM ) xi




where xi is the mean of characteristic i over the sample. The prevalence effect can be

written



(5)       prevalence effect = ∑ i ( xiF − xiM ) βi



                                                     6
where xik measures the mean of characteristic i for sex k in the sample, and β i is the

mean of the response to characteristic i averaged between that estimated for women and

that estimated for men. To the extent that one sex is more heavily endowed with a

characteristic that affects obesity, this will contribute to the prevalence effect. We

estimate the severity and prevalence effects for both the proximate and underlying causes

of obesity, and present them in Section 4.

       There are many reasons why childhood circumstance, adult SES, and adult

attitudes could lead to differences in obesity rates between men and women.



Childhood circumstance

In animal studies, males and females have been shown to respond differently to early

postnatal exposure to hypothalamic neuropeptides known to affect the appetite regulation

system. Varma et al. (2003), for example, find significant sex differences in early life

exposure to neuropeptide Y on adult weight control in rats. They suggest that differences

between males and females may be due to differential effects of sex steroids on

neuropeptide synthesis and/or release. Early life conditions may have permanent effects

on appetite regulation, feeding behaviors, and body weight gain patterns. In our data, we

can examine whether and to what extent men and women raised in poor households,

specifically those who report having gone hungry as children, face different risks of

obesity, which would be consistent with a differential impact of early life nutritional

deprivation on appetite and weight regulation in adulthood.




                                              7
Adult socioeconomic status

An extensive literature has documented the extent to which resource allocation can vary

by sex within households, in both developed and developing countries (see Bergstrom

1997 for a review). In many studies, women have been found to have a greater say in

household decisions when their incomes constitute a higher fraction of total household

income. When resources are scarce, women may choose not to eat, to guarantee that there

is enough food for children. Indeed, lack of household resources in South Africa has been

shown to be significantly correlated with adults missing meals there (Case 2004). In

addition, when resources are scarce, women may have less say in how money in the

household is spent. Making decisions on who should eat, and having the power to make

decisions on food spending, may result in differences in male-female obesity rates at

different levels of household SES. In our data, we can examine whether and to what

extent current household economic status is associated with differential obesity in men

and women, and whether differences in obesity rates by SES can be explained by

differences in women’s decision-making power in the household.



Depression

On average, South African women report suffering from a greater number of symptoms

of depression than do South African men (Case and Deaton 2006). Studies in the US have

generally found a positive association between obesity and depression in women, and

either a negative association, or no association, between obesity and depression in men

(See Onyike et al. 2003, and references there.) Depression may change eating patterns,

and may lead to differential weight gain between men and women. In our data, we can




                                            8
examine both the extent to which men and women differ in their reports of depression,

and the extent to which depression correlates differentially with obesity between men and

women.



Perceptions of body sizes

Women and men’s opinions on the relative attractiveness of different body shapes could

potentially affect the sizes to which they aspire. Across cultures, significant differences

have been found in evaluations of body images. Holdsworth et al. (2004) show that,

among Senegalese women, overweight figures are regarded as attractive and are

associated with positive personal characteristics. Furnham and Baguma (1994) find

significant differences in what is considered beautiful and healthy, in a comparison

between Ugandan and British college students. Ugandans rate more obese bodies as more

attractive and healthier than British student do, particularly in the case of female figures.

In our data, we can examine the extent to which differences in obesity rates are associated

with differences in male and female perceptions of what constitutes an ‘ideal’ male and

female body.

       In the following section, we introduce the data we collected in South Africa to

examine the difference we observe in obesity rates between men and women.



3. Data

In 2004 and 2005, we collected data on 500 randomly selected households in

Khayelitsha, an African township with a population in excess of 500,000 people. The

township contains both houses with access to water and electricity, and shacks with




                                              9
access to neither. Most households have a family connection to the Eastern Cape, one of

the poorest parts of South Africa (Leibbrandt et al. 2005), from which family members

originally migrated. Poverty rates in the township are high, and the community faces

major health problems in HIV and AIDS, TB, violence and malnutrition.

        We surveyed every adult living in our sampled households individually, asking

each about his or her family background, income and earnings, general health and mental

health, and health related behaviors. All adults were weighed and measured.2

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for 975 individuals, out of the 1001 adults in

our 2004 and 2005 samples, for whom we have a BMI reading.3 Our focus is largely on

the differences in obesity prevalence between the sexes, and for this reason we present

the p-value of the statistical significance of the difference in sample means between men

and women in column 3.

        Three-quarters of the women in our sample are either overweight or obese, true of

only thirty percent of men surveyed. The patterns observed between and within sexes are

similar to those found among urban Africans (Blacks) in the 1998 South African

Demographic and Health Survey. (Results available upon request.)

        The BMI-age profiles underlying these statistics are presented in Figure 1. Similar

to the patterns found in other parts of South Africa, we find BMI increasing with age

until age 40. Thereafter, BMI is approximately constant with age. For women,

2
  These households were originally interviewed in 2002 and 2003. In the 2004 and 2005 follow-up, we
succeeded in reinterviewing 427 original households, and 9 households where members had split from our
original sample.
3
  Sex is missing for one observation. Of the remaining 25 missing values, height measurements were
missing for 7 persons too ill to stand; 7 who did not want to be measured; and 6 persons for whom no
reason for refusal was given. In addition, weight measurements were missing for one person too large for
our scales (350 pounds), and 4 pregnant women.




                                                   10
stabilization in BMI occurs at a BMI well in excess of 30. For men, it occurs at a BMI

just shy of 25, the WHO lower bound for ‘overweight.’ From this cross-section, we

cannot know whether these patterns represent age or cohort effects. The cross-section

cannot tell us whether today’s 20 year old women, at age 35, will continue to have

average BMIs of 25 (as they do at age 20), or whether their BMIs will more closely

resemble those of today’s 35 year olds.

       In addition to the age pattern, the other obvious pattern observable in Figure 1 is

that, at every age, women’s BMIs are 5 to 8 points higher than men’s. Even the youngest

women in our sample are overweight on average, registering BMIs in excess of 25.

       Table 1 also presents summary statistics on variables we will use to examine

determinants of obesity and male-female differences in prevalence rates.



Proximate causes

We asked all individuals about their eating habits, and had them report on the sizes of

their meals. A significantly greater proportion of men than women report eating large

meals, based on their identification of the most accurate portion sizes among pictures

they were shown. Men are also more likely to report drinking soda, while women report

using more sugar in tea and coffee over the course of a day. There are large outliers in

reported sugar use. For this reason, in our analysis we will use a sugar index, equal to 0 if

no sugar is reported, equal to 1 if 1 to 9 spoonfuls per day are reported, equal to 2 if 10 to

19 spoonfuls are reported, and so on up to a measure of 5, if 40 or more spoonfuls per

day are reported.




                                              11
        Men are significantly more likely to report that they exercise and participate in

sports, although neither men nor women report much by way of physical activity. We

will examine below the extent to which these differences can explain women’s greater

obesity rates.4



Underlying causes: childhood circumstances

We did not observe these adults as children, and so it is not possible to measure with any

precision the nutritional risks they faced in early life. However, subjects had little

difficulty telling us whether, as children, there were times when they went to school

hungry, went to bed hungry, or ate at other people’s homes because there was not enough

food at home. More than a third of men and women report having gone to school and to

bed hungry, and just over a quarter report having gone to other homes to eat. Differences

between men and women in these reports are small, and are not statistically significant.

        In our analysis, we will use a ‘childhood hunger index,’ which we define as the

sum of reports that a respondent went to school hungry, went to bed hungry, and ate at

other people’s houses because there was not enough food at home. Almost 60 percent of

our sample report none of these events in childhood. Of the rest, approximately 10

percent report one of the three, 10 percent report two of the three, and 20 percent report

all three. The overall means for men (1.02) and women (0.98) are very similar.



Adult SES



4
  We asked all adults about alcohol consumption. However, rates reported were very low, and we believe
respondents may have been reluctant to talk about alcohol use. We will treat alcohol consumption as a
latent proximate determinant of obesity.


                                                  12
Both men and women have completed more than 6 years of schooling, with women

reporting an extra half year, on average, relative to men. Educational attainment provides

one of our measures of adult SES. An individual’s current financial situation, measured

using income per person and household-level expenditures per person, provides the other.

A ‘knowledgeable household member’ (KHM) was asked about earnings, social transfers

from the government (primarily pensions and grants), and private transfers coming into

the household in a typical month, from which we generate a measure of income per

person. In addition the KHM was asked about household-level expenditures in a normal

month, including spending on food, rent, utilities, fuel, household phones, and furniture,

from which we generate a measure of household-level expenditure per person.

       Income per person is substantially higher than expenditure per person, because we

have not included personal spending (clothing, personal cell phones, transportation, for

example) in our measure of household spending. On average, men are residing in slightly

wealthier households, with household-level expenditures per person 10 percent higher,

and income per person 20 percent higher, than those found for women.

       These two measures of resources available in the household were constructed in

different ways, with expenditures aggregated up from spending on such items as meat,

bread, electricity and paraffin, and incomes aggregated up from reported receipts of child

support grants, old age pensions, and earnings, for example. We are interested in whether

the SES-obesity patterns we observe are robust to the measure of SES that we choose.



Depression




                                            13
We are also interested in whether stress and depression play a role in obesity. We asked

each person whether he or she had experienced any of 8 symptoms of depression in the

last week and, if so, whether each occurred ‘most of the time,” “some of the time,” or

“hardly ever.” We asked about depression, sadness, crying, poor appetite, trouble

sleeping, everything being an effort, feeling miserable, and not feeling able to ‘get

going.’ From the answers received, we created a depression index, which is the sum of

the number of times a person reported he or she had felt this symptom ‘some of the time,’

or ‘most of the time.’ Women report significantly more depression symptoms than do

men in our sample. On average, women report that they had experienced three of these

symptoms ‘some’ or ‘most of the time’ in the past week, while men report two

symptoms.



Body images

Every person interviewed was asked their perceptions about body images. Following an

introduction that “Sometimes we have ideas about how we look, and how we might like

to look,” the respondents were shown pictures of eight people of their sex, whose images

varied from being bone thin (rated as a 1) to being morbidly obese (rated as an 8). These

figures were originally used by Ziebland et al. (2002), who gave us permission to use

them in our survey work. We reproduce them here, in Figure 2. Each respondent was

asked which best described their body size, and which best described the shape they

would most like to have. Women on average perceive themselves to have a body size of

‘4,’ and on average see a ‘4’ as the ‘ideal’ body. Men see themselves as somewhat

lighter, and on average would like to be a bit heavier.




                                             14
       In summary, women and men report significant differences in their food

consumption patterns, reports of sports and exercise, depression symptoms, and ideas of

an ‘ideal’ body shape. Women have slightly more education, but are living in households

that are marginally poorer, on average. We turn in the next section to evaluate the extent

to which these proximate and underlying causes can explain the patterns of obesity we

find in South Africa.



4. Determinants of obesity in South Africa

Table 2 presents estimates of the proximate causes of obesity from OLS regressions run

separately for men and women. All regressions include controls for age, age squared, an

indicator for the survey year, and a constant term. Standard errors, which allow for

correlation in the unobservables for individuals from the same households, are presented

in parentheses under the regression coefficients. (Marginal effects from probit regressions

are very similar. We focus on the OLS results because they allow an exact linear

decomposition of sex differences into component parts.)

       For women, meal sizes, drinking soda, and the sugar added to tea and coffee are

all significantly associated with obesity. Our sugar index is in increments of 10

spoonfuls, so that a woman who adds 15 teaspoons of sugar to her tea over the course of

a day is 10 percentage points more likely to be obese (2 times 0.05) than a woman who

reports adding no sugar. For men, neither large meal sizes nor reported sugar intake is

associated with obesity, while drinking soda is marginally significantly associated with

obesity. Reporting exercise or sports is not associated with lower probability of obesity

for either men or women.




                                            15
       Overall, women’s reported food intake is significantly associated with obesity (an

F-test of the joint significance of the food intake variables takes a value of 4.27, with a p-

value of 0.006). Women’s observable energy expenditure variables are not significantly

associated with obesity. For men, neither reported calorie intake nor calorie expenditure

is significantly associated with obesity.

       We can use the results in Table 2 to examine whether observable calorie intake

and expenditure can explain differences in obesity rates between women and men, by

decomposing the proximate causes of obesity into severity and prevalence effects. These

are presented in Table 3. Sugar intake can explain 6.0 percentage points of the difference

between obesity rates between men and women; large meals, 2.1 percentage points; and

soda, 1.1 percentage points. We find that, collectively, the observable proximate causes

can explain about 20 percent of the difference in obesity rates between men and women

(0.085/0.402). All of this explained difference is due to differences in the impact of

reported food intake on obesity in women (the severity effect). Men are more likely to

report sports and exercise. However, because these are not associated with obesity (or

lack of obesity) for men or women, the prevalence effects are very small.

       Too few observable energy intake and expenditure variables are available to

estimate the impact of different proximate causes with any precision. We turn to the

underlying causes of obesity, which indirectly pick up the effects of both observable and

latent energy variables.

   Table 4 presents evidence from a variety of specifications of the underlying causes of

obesity. For women and men separately, the first column regresses obesity on our

childhood hunger index, and on the log of income per household member, as well as




                                             16
education, and our depression index. The second column interacts log(income per

member) with the childhood deprivation measure, to test whether respondents who were

poor in childhood are at greater risk for obesity if they have greater access to resources

in adulthood. The third column replicates the second, but uses log(expenditure per

member) in place of income, to test the robustness of our findings.

   For women, childhood deprivation, measured using our childhood hunger index, is

positively and significantly associated with obesity. Women who reported going to bed

hungry, and to school hungry, and who ate at others’ houses because there wasn’t enough

food, are 15 percentage points more likely to be obese than are women who report none

of these. This result holds with or without controls for current socioeconomic status.

   Higher socioeconomic status in adulthood, measured using years of education, is

positively and significantly related to obesity in women. In addition, women in

households with greater resources, measured using the log of income per member, are

significantly more likely to be obese. Moving a woman from the 25th percentile to the

75th percentile of the distribution of income per person (measured at either the individual

or the household level) is associated with an increase in obesity among women of 10

percentage points.

   We examine the extent to which current household resources have differential effects

on women, depending on whether they were poor as children, by adding a child poverty-

household income interaction term in column 2. Neither the childhood deprivation

measure nor the interaction term is significant by itself. However, jointly they are

significant (F-test=4.67, p-value=0.010). This is consistent with a model in which greater

deprivation in childhood has larger effects in adulthood among those who are wealthier in




                                             17
adulthood. We find a similar pattern when we use log(expenditure per member) in place

of log(income per member), in column 3.

   Depression is not significantly associated with obesity in women. This continues to

be true when the 8 component pieces of the index are entered separately, and when we

divide responses into those reporting depression symptoms ‘some’ of the time, and those

reporting them ‘most’ of the time. (These results were estimated, but are not reported in

our tables).

   The association between obesity and individual and household characteristics is

altogether different for men. While men are equally likely to report having been raised in

poor households, such reports by men are not associated with higher rates of obesity

(column 4). In addition, current SES, measured using log(income per member) or

log(expenditure per member), has no significant association with obesity in men. Male

obesity is also orthogonal to reports of depression. We find a small, marginally

significant effect of education on obesity in men.

   We decompose the differences between women and men into severity and prevalence

effects in Table 5. As was true of proximate causes of obesity, the decomposition

underscores the fact that differences in obesity are not due to differences in endowments

of the economic variables examined here—the prevalence effect is very close to zero

(−0.001). Obesity differences between the sexes appear, instead, to be due to the

differences that socioeconomic status has on the probability of obesity. Aggregating the

effect of childhood hunger and its interaction effect with income, we find that childhood

hunger accounts for 13 percent of the difference in obesity rates between women and men

(0.053/0.402). The impact of education accounts for 16 percent of the difference




                                            18
(0.063/0.402). Two-thirds of the difference between men and women is due to the

difference in the impact of current household resources on obesity.

   Differences in the impact of current and past economic circumstances explain 100

percent of the difference in obesity rates by sex in our sample. We turn next to examine

what these differences in the impact of SES may reflect.



5. Understanding the effects of SES on obesity

Childhood deprivation

Our childhood hunger index measures the extent to which respondents went hungry in

childhood. We can distinguish whether its effects on women’s obesity in adulthood

appear to be due to nutritional deprivation, or to poverty more broadly, by examining

several other measures of childhood deprivation that we collected on each respondent.

We asked each whether his or her financial situation in childhood was “very comfortable,

comfortable, just getting by, poor or very poor.” Fifty percent of respondents answered

that their households were “just getting by,” and 37 percent that they were “poor” or

“very poor.” In addition, we asked respondents whether their fathers had stable

employment (a “regular pay job”) when they were children (true for approximately two-

thirds of respondents).

       Table 6 presents results of our childhood hunger index regressed against

indicators of financial status in childhood and of whether the respondent’s father had a

regular pay job. Our hunger index is highly correlated with these measures of childhood

economic status, as can be seen in the first two columns of the table. For both men and

women, father not having had a regular pay job is associated with an increase of 0.2 in




                                            19
our childhood hunger index. The associations between the childhood hunger index and

reports on childhood financial status are very similar between men and women. Adults

who report that their families’ financial situations were either “very comfortable” or

“comfortable” have a hunger index that is, on average, 2.2 points lower than those who

report that their families were “very poor,” the reference group for this regression. Those

whose families were “just getting by” report a hunger index that is 1.7 to 1.8 points

lower, and those whose families were “poor” report a hunger index that is 0.5 to 0.6

points lower than those whose families were “very poor.” The difference between

reporting that their families were “comfortable” and reporting that they were “just getting

by” is significant, as is the difference between reporting “just getting by” and being

“poor.” Jointly, the reports of childhood financial wellbeing are highly significant for

both women (F-test=101.3, p-value=0.000) and men (F-test=60.3, p-value=0.000).

       We test whether it is nutritional deprivation, or economic deprivation in childhood

more broadly, that is associated with obesity in adult women, by adding all three

measures of childhood SES to our obesity equations. Results from these regressions are

presented in the last two columns of Table 6. We find that the inclusion of indicators of

family financial status in childhood, and of whether the respondents’ fathers held regular

pay jobs, are not significantly associated with obesity for either women or men. The only

measure of childhood circumstance that is significantly associated with obesity in

adulthood is our indicator of hunger in childhood for women. With or without the

additional controls for childhood SES, we find that each unit increase in our childhood

hunger index is associated with a five percentage point increase in the probability that a

woman is obese.




                                             20
        Future work is warranted to see what aspects of childhood nutritional deprivation

are responsible for adult obesity in women. Such work must combine biology and social

science, if we are to understand why this effect in childhood affects only women. Such

work may also help us better understand the seemingly ironic finding that poor countries

struggling with malnutrition must also cope with obesity.



Adult SES

We find that, for women, obesity is associated with higher adult SES. The same is not

true for men. In this section, we examine potential explanations for this difference. We

present our findings in two parts. We find that women’s own incomes fully explain the

association between total household income and women’s obesity. Part of the association

between women’s incomes and their obesity appears to work through wealthier women’s

decision-making role in food spending: women with higher incomes appear to have

greater control over household food spending. After presenting these results, we ask why

women’s control over resources would lead them to be obese, while men’s control over

resources does not. Given that women and men have different perceptions of ‘ideal’ body

shapes, we examine whether they use the resources under their command to move toward

different ideals.



Women’s incomes, household decision-making, and obesity

Control over resources may be one of the mechanisms contributing to the relationship

between adult SES and women’s obesity. We examine this in Table 7, where we regress

the probability of being obese on different components of household income, with and




                                            21
without controls for who has the most say in food spending. In order to analyze different

parts of household income, we present results for income in levels, rather than in logs, so

that we do not lose observations for respondents who did not earn money.

         Consistent with the results presented in Table 4, we find that women residing in

households with greater total household income are significantly more likely to be obese.

Men face no increased risk of obesity with household income (column 4).

         Decomposing total household income into component parts (column 2) makes it

clear that the association between household income and a woman’s obesity is driven by

women’s own income. The two large sources of income for women in our survey are

women’s own earnings, and their receipt of child support grants. Fully a third of all

women earn income from working, and a third receives a child support grant from the

government.5 When we add women’s income from these sources, both women’s earnings

and their child grant receipt are positively and significantly correlated with obesity, while

the estimated effect of total household income becomes smaller and insignificantly

different from zero. On average, each additional R1000 per month in earnings is

associated with a 6.2 percentage point increase in obesity for women, holding all else

constant. Women receiving R170 in the form of a government child support grant are 5.7

percentage points more likely to be obese than are women not receiving a grant (0.337 ×

0.170). For men we find no effect of either total household income (column 4), or own

earnings (column 5), on obesity.

         5
           In contrast, only 5 percent of women report receipt of an old age pension (most are not age
eligible). Another 5 percent report a disability grant. With respect to child support grants, at the time of our
survey, children from ages 0 to 7 were eligible to receive between R160 to R180 per month through a
primary care giver, who is generally (but not restricted to be) the child’s mother, if the primary care giver’s
monthly income was less than R1100 and he or she was living in an informal house or shack. Men are only
rarely reported to be child grant recipients. In our data, 3 men were so named.



                                                      22
       Total household income is not significantly correlated with women’s obesity in

regressions that include both total household income and women’s own incomes, while

women’s incomes are significantly correlated with obesity. This suggests that a woman’s

own income, and income coming into her household from other sources, have different

effects on her calorie intake and expenditure, on average.

       Part of this difference appears to work through the fact that women are

significantly more likely to control household food spending when their own incomes are

higher. In the household module of our Khayelitsha survey, we asked the knowledgeable

household member which members of the household “had the most say in decisions

about spending on food.” Table 8 presents regression results for being identified as such a

decision-maker, for all adults living in households that contain both adult men and

women as members. We present regression results for having ‘the most say’ on food

spending regressed on total household income and its interaction with being female,

earnings from work and its interaction with being female, and child grant receipt (here

only interacted with being female, since men only rarely receive child support grants). In

this regression, we control for the member’s education, age, and age squared, which may

affect a member’s decision-making powers within the household, and for the number of

household members, which may reduce the odds that any given person is named as the

decision-maker.

       We find that women’s incomes make them significantly more likely to be

reported as the decision-maker for household food spending. Controlling for women’s

own incomes, the effect of total household income is small and insignificantly different




                                            23
from zero. A woman’s own income appears to increase her voice in household food

spending decisions.

       In turn, being the decision-maker for household food spending is significantly

associated with obesity in women. On average, women who have the most say in

household food spending are 10 percentage points more likely to be obese. (See column 3

of Table 7.) Inclusion of an indicator that the respondent has been identified as having the

most say on food spending reduces the estimated effects of own-earnings and child grant

receipt on women’s obesity by more than 20 percent. As was true of our earlier results,

we find no effects of total household income, or own-earnings, or having the most say on

food spending, on men’s obesity.

       Most of the effect of women’s incomes on obesity works through latent calorie

intake and expenditure variables. There is no significant association between women’s

own-earnings and reported meal sizes, or reported exercise or sports. Women who

receive child support grants report significantly higher sugar intake. Those who report

higher earnings are more likely to report that they drink soda. Taken overall, there must

be many unobserved energy variables that vary with women’s incomes.

       Why are women with higher incomes more likely to be obese? One possibility is

that women admire larger body sizes. When we ask women about their body size, we find

that women with larger BMIs are significantly more likely to report that they are larger,

measured using the body size pictures. On average, each one-unit increase in BMI is

associated with women stating that their own body size is 0.12 pictures larger. Figure 3

presents evidence that, on average in our survey, a woman’s perceived body size equals

her ideal body size at a BMI just below 30 – which is the WHO lower bound for obesity.




                                            24
Women with BMIs below thirty, on average, report that their ‘ideal’ is larger than their

actual body size, while women with BMIs above thirty believe their ideal is below their

actual size. On average, women’s ideal size is equal to her self-perceived body size at a

BMI of 29.45. In contrast, for men, ideal size is equal to self-perceived body size at a

BMI of 24.23. If women are targeting a BMI of 30, while men are targeting a BMI of 25,

this could lead to women with money using it, in part, to move their BMIs toward 30.



6. Conclusions

Using data from an African township in South Africa, we are able to identify the

underlying causes of differences between men’s and women’s obesity. We find that

poverty in childhood, and greater access to resources in adulthood, lead women to be at

significantly greater risk of obesity than are men. In adulthood, there is a significant and

substantial difference in the body sizes to which men and women aspire. Women with

more control over their resources may use these resources to reach and maintain larger

body sizes.

         Economic research has highlighted the positive child outcomes associated with

putting money into women’s hands. (See, for example, Hoddinott and Haddad 1995.)

However, this may come at a cost, if it increases the probability that women become

obese.

         Understanding the differences that men and women face in their risks of obesity is

a necessary and important first step for effective policy intervention. If women aspire to

large body sizes, then we would not expect a campaign to spread general information on

the calorie, fat and nutrition content of food would take us very far in reducing the




                                             25
obesity risk that women face. One way to address women’s high prevalence rates may be

to better educate women on the relevant risks that they face when their BMI becomes

large. In that way, women’s perceptions of an ideal body size may change.

        There may be an upper bound on the extent to which such campaigns will be

successful, however, if a woman’s ability to regulate her appetite is compromised by the

nutritional deprivation she endured as a child. Our results on the differences in obesity

risk faced by men and women, who reported similar childhood nutritional deprivation,

suggest that the biology of obesity risk cannot be fully understood without understanding

early-life economic disadvantage, and that the impact of socioeconomic status on obesity

cannot be understood without a biological framework that can explain why women and

men, facing the same nutritional deprivation as children, face quite different biological

risks as adults.




                                             26
REFERENCES

Bergstrom, T. C. 1997. “A survey of theories of the family,” Chapter 2 in Handbook of
Population and Family Economics, M. R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark (eds.). New York:
North Holland, 21-79.

Case, A. 2004. “Does money protect health status? Evidence from South African
pensions.” Chapter 7 in Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, D. Wise (ed.),
University of Chicago Press, 287-305.

Case, A. and A. Deaton. 2006. “Health and wellbeing in Udaipur and South Africa.”
Forthcoming in Developments in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise (ed) University of
Chicago Press for the NBER.

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2006. “The developing world’s
new burden: obesity,” accessed on line July 27, 2006 at
http://www.fao.org/FOCUS/E/obesity/obes1.htm .

Furnham, A. and P. Baguma. 1994. “Cross-cultural differences in the evaluation of male
and female body shapes.” International Journal of Eating Disorders 15(1):81-9.

Hoddinott, J. and L. Haddad. 1995. “Does female income share influence household
expenditures? Evidence from Cote D’Ivoire.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics 57: 77-96.

Holdsworth, M., A. Gartner, E. Landais, B. Maire and F. Delpeuch. 2004. “Perceptions of
healthy and desirable body size in urban Senegalese women.” International Journal of
Obesity 28: 1561-8.

Kahn, K., S.M. Tollman, M. Garenne, and J.S.S. Gear. 1999. “Who dies from what?
Determining cause of death in South Africa’s rural northeast.” Tropical Medicine and
International Health 4(6): 433-41.

Leibbrandt, M., L. Poswell, P. Naidoo, M. Welch, and I. Woolard. 2005. “Measuring
recent changes in South African inequality and poverty using 1996 and 2001 Census
data.” Working Paper 9629, Development Policy Research Unit, University of Cape
Town.

Martorell, R., L. Kettel Khan, M. L. Hughes, and L. M. Grummer-Strawn. 2000.
“Obesity in women from developing countries.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition
54(3): 247-52.

Onyike, Chiadi U., Rosa M. Crum, Hochange B. Lee, Constantine G. Lyketsos, and
William W. Eaton. 2003. “Is obesity associated with major depression? Results from the
Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 158(12): 1139-47.



                                          27
Popkin, B.M. 1994. “The nutrition transition in low income countries: An emerging
crisis.” Nutrition Reviews 52(9): 285-98.

Popkin B.M. and C. M. Doak. 1998. “The obesity epidemic is a worldwide
phenomenon.” Nutrition Reviews 56: 106-14.

Puoane, T., K. Steyn, D. Bradshaw, R. Laubscher, J. Fourie, V. Lambert, and N.
Mbananga. 2002. “Obesity in South Africa: The South African Demographic and Health
Survey.” Obesity Research 10: 1038-48.

Varma, Amit, Jing He, Lisa Weissfeld, and Sherin U. Devaskar, 2003. “Postnatal
intracerebroventricular exposure to neuropeptide Y causes weight loss in female adult
rats.” Am J Physiol Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol, 284:1560-1566.

World Health Organization. 2000. Obesity: Preventing and managing the global
epidemic. Report of a WHO consultation. Technical Report Series 894: 1-253.

Ziebland, S., J. Robertson, J. Jay and A. Neil. 2002. “Body image and weight change in
middle age: A qualitative study.” International Journal of Obesity 26: 1083-91.




                                           28
Figure 1. Body mass indices for men and women, Khayelitsha Survey 2004-05


                         BMI of Women and Men
                              From ages 18 to 60
        35
        30
  BMI
        25
        20




             20          30               40             50          60
                                        age

                                 women             men




                                   29
Figure 2. Body images by sex (Source: Ziebland et al. 2002)




                                     30
Figure 3. Perceived body shapes and desired body shapes for women


                                      Women's Desired and Perceived Body Images
                 6                       From 5th to 95th Percentile of Body Mass Index
  Desired and Perceived Images
       3       4 2       5




                                 20        25           30              35               40   45
                                                                  BMI

                                                      Desired                Perceived




                                                             31
                     Table 1. Summary Statistics by Sex

                                               Men        Women     p-value of
                                             (n=426)      (n=549)   difference

Age                                            35.49       36.14      0.454
Body mass index (BMI)
Indicator: underweight (BMI<18.5)             0.052        0.011      0.000
Indicator: normal (18.5≤BMI<25)               0.643        0.219      0.000
Indicator: overweight (25≤BMI<30)             0.204        0.268      0.021
Indicator: obese (BMI≥30)                     0.101        0.503      0.000
Proximate causes of obesity
Food consumption
Indicator: large breakfast                    0.209        0.075      0.000
Indicator: large lunch                        0.194        0.059      0.000
Indicator: large dinner                       0.292        0.142      0.000
Number of large meals per day                 0.698        0.272      0.000
Spoons of sugar per day                       4.337        6.579      0.000
Indicator: drinks soda                        0.308        0.255      0.070
Physical exertion
Any exercise                                  0.333        0.093      0.000
Any sports                                    0.188        0.035      0.000
Underlying causes of obesity
Childhood conditions
Indicator: Went to school hungry              0.380        0.368      0.687
Indicator: Went to bed hungry                 0.378        0.338      0.198
Indicator: Ate at other people’s homes        0.266        0.283      0.557
Child poverty index                           1.021        0.982      0.630
Adult socioeconomic status
Years of completed education                   6.26        6.77       0.010
Log(expenditure per member)                   5.490        5.361      0.003
Log(income per member)                        5.858        5.588      0.000
Depression index
‘Some’ or ‘Most of the time’                  1.977        2.756      0.000
Body shapes
Perceived current body shape                  3.314        4.106      0.000
Ideal body shape                              3.693        3.949      0.000




                                     32
                          Table 2. Proximate Determinants of Obesity

                    Dependent variable =1 if BMI>30, =0 otherwise
                                                     Women            Men
            Control variables:
            Number of large meals per day              0.039         –0.008
                                                      (0.034)        (0.018)
            Indicator: Drinks soda                     0.109          0.068
                                                      (0.044)        (0.036)
            Sugar index                                0.051         –0.013
                                                      (0.022)        (0.021)
            Reports exercise                          –0.008         –0.005
                                                      (0.065)        (0.044)
            Reports sports                            –0.017          0.010
                                                      (0.108)        (0.044)
            F-test: calorie intake variables            4.27           1.22
            (p-value)                                 (0.006)        (0.303)
            F-test: calorie expenditure variables       0.03           0.02
            (p-value)                                 (0.970)        (0.976)
            Number of observations                     536             404

OLS regression coefficients reported, with standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors
allow for correlation in the unobservables between individuals in the same household.
Also included in all regressions are controls for age, age squared, an indicator for the
survey year, and a constant term.




                                               33
         Table 3. Decomposition of the Proximate Determinants of Obesity


 Obesity rate, women                                              0.503
 Obesity rate, men                                                0.101
 Difference (women − men)                                         0.402


 Severity effect
                      ∑ (β − β ) x
                        i       i
                                 F
                                          i
                                           M
                                                i                 0.089
 Prevalence effect     ∑ (x − x ) β
                            i        i
                                      F
                                           i
                                            M
                                                    i            –0.004

 Fraction explained                                               0.211


 Decomposition by variable:                                  Severity Effect      Prevalence Effect

                                                             ( β iF − β iM ) xi     ( xiF − xiM ) βi

 Number of large meals per day                                    0.021                –0.007
 Indicator: Drinks soda                                           0.011                –0.005
 Sugar index                                                      0.060                 0.005
 Reports exercise                                                –0.001                 0.002
 Reports sports                                                  –0.003                 0.001
 All                                                              0.089                –0.004

Decomposition is based on OLS regression coefficients reported in columns 1 and 2 of
Table 2.




                                                        34
                      Table 4. Underlying Determinants of Obesity

                      Dependent variable =1 if BMI>30, =0 otherwise
                                           Women                               Men
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)       (5)          (6)
   Control variables:
   Childhood hunger index         0.048     0.044      0.008       –0.005      0.004     0.020
                                 (0.016)   (0.101)    (0.138)      (0.012)    (0.061)   (0.080)
   Childhood hunger index ×         --      0.001        --           --      –0.001         --
   log(income/member)                      (0.018)                            (0.010)
   Childhood hunger index ×         --          --     0.008          --         --     –0.005
   log(expenditure/member)                            (0.025)                           (0.014)
   F-test: childhood hunger         --      4.67        5.19          --       0.10       0.19
   variables (p-value)                     (0.010)    (0.006)                 (0.909)   (0.829)
   Log (income/member)            0.041     0.041        --        –0.011     –0.010         --
                                 (0.020)   (0.028)                 (0.014)    (0.019)
   Log (expend/member)              --          --     0.032          --         --     –0.020
                                                      (0.044)                           (0.025)
   Education                      0.019     0.019      0.019        0.009      0.009     0.008
                                 (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)      (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.005)
   Depression index              –0.003    –0.003     –0.004       –0.007     –0.007    –0.007
                                 (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)
   N observations                  528       528        540           402       402          417

OLS regression coefficients reported, with standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors
allow for correlation in the unobservables between individuals in the same household.
Also included in all regressions are controls for age, age squared, an indicator for the
survey year, and a constant term.




                                           35
         Table 5. Decomposition of the Underlying Determinants of Obesity


                                               Using                         Using
                                          log(income per               log(expenditure per
                                             member)                        member)
   Obesity rate, women                   0.503                         0.503
   Obesity rate, men                     0.101                         0.101
   Difference (women − men)              0.402                         0.402
   Severity effect                       0.414                         0.413
   Prevalence effect                    –0.001                         0.001
   Fraction explained                    1.027                         1.030


   Decomposition by variable:           Severity    Prevalence        Severity     Prevalence
                                         Effect       Effect           Effect        Effect
   Childhood hunger index                0.041       –0.001           –0.012        –0.001
   Childhood hunger × log(SES            0.012        0.000            0.066        –0.001
   measure)
   Log(SES measure)                      0.289       –0.004            0.278        –0.001
   Education                             0.063        0.007            0.073         0.007
   Depression index                      0.009       –0.004            0.008        –0.004
   All                                   0.414       –0.001            0.413         0.001

The decomposition in columns 1 and 2 is based on OLS regression coefficients reported
in columns 2 and 5 of Table 4, which uses log(income per member) as an SES control,
and the decomposition in columns 3 and 4 is based on regression coefficients reported in
columns 3 and 6 of Table 4, which uses log(expenditure per member) as an SES control.




                                           36
               Table 6. Childhood SES and Adult Obesity
                                         Dependent Variable:            Dependent
                                          Childhood hunger          Variable: Obesity in
                                                index                    adulthood
                                         Women         Men          Women        Men
  Childhood hunger index                    --           --          0.053      –0.008
                                                                    (0.022)     (0.016)
  Childhood family finances were:
     “very comfortable” or                –2.201      –2.164         0.076      –0.067
     “comfortable”                        (0.162)     (0.183)       (0.110)     (0.077)
     “just getting by”                    –1.799      –1.749        –0.004       0.006
                                          (0.166)     (0.177)       (0.091)     (0.069)
     “poor”                               –0.495      –0.597         0.017      –0.024
                                          (0.186)     (0.207)       (0.083)     (0.060)
  Father did not have a “regular pay       0.177       0.224        –0.002      –0.032
  job”                                    (0.117)     (0.123)       (0.046)     (0.034)
  F-test: joint significance of family    101.25       60.83          0.47       1.08
  finance indicator variables
  Number of observations                   502          399           502        399

Notes: Also included are age, age squared, an indicator for survey year, and a constant
term. All regressions allow for correlation in the unobservables for observations from the
same household.




                                            37
                Table 7. Own Income, Household Income and Obesity

                        Dependent variable: Obesity in adulthood
                                                   Women                            Men
                                        (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)
   Total household income per          0.033        0.019      0.021         0.005      –0.001
   month (R1000)                      (0.014)      (0.016)    (0.016)       (0.012)     (0.013)
   Own earnings from work per            --         0.062      0.052           --        0.015
   month (R1000)                                   (0.027)    (0.027)                   (0.024)
   Monthly child support grant           --         0.337      0.268           --           --
   receipt (R1000)                                 (0.169)    (0.172)
   Indicator: respondent has             --          --        0.102           --        0.022
   ‘most say’ on food spending                                (0.062)                   (0.045)
   F-test: joint significance of
   own-income and ‘most say’                                    2.94                      0.48
   variables (p-value)                                        (0.033)                   (0.617)
   Number of observations               511         511        511            375           375

Notes: Also included in all regressions are controls for age, age squared survey year,
number of household members, our childhood hunger index, and a constant term.
Standard errors that allow for correlation in the unobservables for observations from the
same household are presented in parentheses. The sample excludes 4 outliers for whose
reported total household monthly income exceeded R10,000.




                                              38
              Table 8. Decisions on Household Food Spending

                     Dependent variable =1 if this adult is reported
                       to have the “most say” on food spending


                       Female                             0.172
                                                         (0.053)
                       Total household income            –0.024
                       (R1000)                           (0.016)
                       Female × total household           0.012
                       income (R1000)                    (0.020)
                       Own-earnings from work             0.055
                       (R1000)                           (0.032)
                       Female × own-earnings from         0.126
                       work (R1000)                      (0.045)
                       Female × child support grant       0.822
                       receipt (R1000)                   (0.157)
                       Number of observations              649

Notes: Also included are controls for household size, respondents’ education, age, age
squared, an indicator for survey year, and a constant term. The sample is restricted to
adults living in households that contain both adult men and women. The sample excludes
4 outliers reporting total household monthly income above R10,0000. Standard errors
that allow for correlation in the unobservables for observations from the same household
are presented in parentheses.




                                           39
