                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      GLOBALIZATION AND INFLATION DYNAMICS:
                       THE IMPACT OF INCREASED COMPETITION

                                         Argia M. Sbordone

                                        Working Paper 13556
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13556


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




Prepared for the NBER Conference on International Dimensions of Monetary Policy held in Girona,
Spain, on June 11-13, 2007. I thank Mike Woodford for inspiration and for long conversations, my
discussant Tommaso Monacelli and all the Conference participants for their comments, and Krishna
Rao for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Argia M. Sbordone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Globalization and Inflation Dynamics: the Impact of Increased Competition
Argia M. Sbordone
NBER Working Paper No. 13556
October 2007
JEL No. E31

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the potential effect of global market competition on inflation dynamics. It does
so through the lens of the Calvo model of staggered price-setting, which implies that inflation depends
on expected future inflation and a measure of marginal costs. I modify the assumption of a constant
elasticity of demand, standard in this model, to provide a channel through which an increase in the
number of traded goods may affect the degree of strategic complementarity in price setting, and hence
alter the dynamic response of inflation to marginal costs. I first discuss the behavior of the variables
that drive the impact of trade openness on this response, and then I evaluate whether an increase in
the variety of traded goods of the size observed in the US in the `90s might have a sizable quantitative
impact. I find that it is difficult to argue that such an increase in trade should have generated an increase
in US market competition leading to a decline in the slope of the inflation-marginal cost relation.


Argia M. Sbordone
Macroeconomic & Monetary Studies
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045-0001
argia.sbordone@ny.frb.org
1     Introduction
The policy debate about the macroeconomic eﬀects of globalization has centered on two
main themes: that globalization has contributed to bring down US inflation, and that it
has aﬀected the sensitivity of inflation to output fluctuations. Several recent policymakers
speeches have addressed the issue of whether more intense competition, generated by the
increase in trade experienced since the ‘90s, has changed the role of domestic factors in
shaping the inflation process. Chairman Bernanke (2007), for example, has underlined how
the dependence of factor markets from economic conditions abroad might have reduced the
market power of domestic sellers, how the pricing power of domestic producers might have
declined, and how lower import prices both of final and intermediate goods might have
contributed to maintain overall inflation at low levels. Similarly, President Yellen (2006)
and Governor Kohn (2006) have discussed several direct and indirect impacts of more global
markets on US inflation.
    In this paper I explore how globalization might have impacted US inflation by using the
new Keynesian model of inflation dynamics as analytical framework. Within this framework,
I focus in particular on the eﬀects that an increase in market competition generated by an
increase in trade might have on the sensitivity of inflation to real marginal costs of production.
    The relationship between inflation and marginal cost is a key determinant of the overall
‘slope’ of the new Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC), which links the dynamics of inflation to
the level of economic activity. In the price setting model most often used to derive the NKPC
(the one based on the contribution by Calvo, 1983), this relationship depends primarily on
the frequency of price changes, but it is also aﬀected by strategic complementarity in price
setting. It is this last mechanism that provides a way of formalizing the ‘globalization’
argument, according to which the increase in the openness of the economy has aﬀected the
sensitivity of inflation to output variations.
    I depart here from the assumption of constant elasticity of substitution among diﬀerenti-
ated goods, which is typically made in the Calvo model, and adopt a specification where the
elasticity is a function of the firm’s relative share of the market. This implies that changes
in the importance of trade that aﬀect relative market shares aﬀect in turn the elasticity of
demand faced by firms, and hence their desired mark-ups, and so ultimately may have an
impact on the elasticity of aggregate inflation to real marginal costs and the slope of the
Phillips curve.
    To preview the results: I find that an increase in the number of goods traded is able to


                                                2
generate the sort of real rigidities that may lead to a change in the slope of the Phillips
curve. The sign of the change, however, depends on how fast the elasticity of substitution
among goods increases, and diﬀerent parametrizations of the demand function may lead to
diﬀerent answers. For large enough increases in the number of goods traded, the slope of the
Phillips curve is in general declining: however, the evidence on trade patterns so far provides
little ground to assume that we are yet in the declining portion of the curve.
     There are a number of caveats to these results. In particular, the elasticity of inflation
to marginal cost is only one of the determinants of the slope of the Phillips curve - the
overall response of inflation to output (or output gap) - and its increase or decline does
not necessarily imply that the latter is of the same sign. However, this is arguably the
component that is aﬀected the most by variations in the degree of market competition and
it is the one relied upon in discussions of the eﬀects of global competition on the "pricing
power" of domestic firms; hence it is the one where a study of these variations should be
centered. I return to this point in the conclusion.
     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews existing evidence about the change
in the slope of the Phillips curve and discusses the ensued debate. Section 3 analyzes the
channels through which the increased trade that characterizes globalization may aﬀect the
dynamics of inflation. Section 4 introduces the analytical framework that is used to pin
down these eﬀects, and section 5 adapts the framework to analyze the eﬀects of firms’ entry
on the dynamics of price adjustments. Sections 6 and 7 evaluate the quantitative impact of
trade increase on the marginal cost slope of the Phillips curve, and section 8 concludes.


2     Has the slope of the Phillips curve changed?
The policymakers’ concerns over a change in the slope of the Phillips curve in recent years
derive from its role in assessing the cost of disinflation. A flatter Phillips curve carries
the implication that, for a given degree of inflation persistence, reducing inflation involves
a higher ‘sacrifice ratio’ than otherwise, namely it requires enduring a longer period of
unemployment above the natural rate for every desired percentage point of reduction in
inflation. On the other hand, as noted by Mishkin (2007), a flatter Phillips curve also
implies that an overheated economy will tend to generate a smaller increase in inflation.
    Most of the empirical analyses supporting the policymakers’ concerns address the issue
of the flattening of the Phillips curve in the context of traditional ‘accelerationists’ Phillips
curves. Roberts (2006) and Williams (2006), for example, estimate smaller Phillips curves’


                                               3
slopes in samples covering the post-84 period. Williams in particular analyzes samples
with moving starting points - from 1980:1 to 1999:4, but with a fix end point (2006:4) and
finds evidence of a flatter curve and a higher sacrifice ratio in the samples that start in
the 1990s relative to those estimated in the full sample. However, he also finds that in
the more recent samples the unit sum restriction on the lag coeﬃcients, which defines the
accelerationist curve, is violated. Furthermore, when in these samples the lag coeﬃcients are
left unconstrained, the estimates of the slope coeﬃcient indeed increases.
    An alternative source of evidence that the slope of the Phillips curve has declined in
more recent samples is provided by estimates in the context of general equilibrium models.
Boivin and Giannoni (2006), for example, estimate that the coeﬃcient of marginal cost in
a new Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC) declines from .011 to .008 in the post ‘84 period;
Smets and Wouters (2007) in a similar general equilibrium model report that the estimated
interval between price changes is higher in the 1984-2004 sample relative to the 1966-1979
period, which imply that the slope declined in the more recent period.
    While the just cited studies aim at relating the change in the inflation-output trade-oﬀ to
the change in monetary policy that took place in the early ‘80s, in a recent BIS study Borio
and Filardo (2007) link instead variations in the slope of the Phillips curve to globalization.
Specifically, they estimate a traditional Phillips curve for many countries over the two periods
1980-1992 and 1993-2005, and document that in the more recent period there has been both
a decline in the autoregressive coeﬃcient - hence a decline in inflation persistence, and a
decline in the slope, hence a drop in the sensitivity of inflation to domestic output gap. For
the United States, in particular, the authors report a decline in the estimated coeﬃcient of
lagged inflation from .92 to .82 across the two samples, and a decline in the elasticity of
inflation to output gap from .13 to .09. They take this evidence as the starting point of the
investigation of a ‘global slack’ hypothesis, according to which the decline in the sensitivity
of inflation to domestic measures of output gap is explained by the fact that global measures
of demand pressure have become in the later period the main driving force of inflation
dynamics.
    A successor study (Ihrig et al. 2007) finds that the purported support for the global slack
hypothesis is not robust to the specification of the measures of global slack. For example,
the study finds that variables such as domestic output time the ratio of trade to GDP,
and import prices time the ratio of imports to GDP do not have statistically significant
coeﬃcients. The study, however, does not dispute the evidence that the Phillips curve
appears to have flattened since the ‘90s; it contests the interpretation that this is indeed


                                               4
an eﬀect of globalization. Overall, the authors in fact conclude that the estimated eﬀect
of foreign output gaps is in general insignificant, that there is no evidence that the trend
decline in the sensitivity of inflation to domestic output is due to globalization, nor they find
increased sensitivity of inflation to import prices.
    An IMF study (2006) also estimates traditional inflation regressions where the coeﬃcient
on the slack variable interacts with measures of central bank credibility and openness of
the economy. The study estimates a negative coeﬃcient on the interaction term between
domestic output gap and trade openness, measured by the share of non-oil imports in GDP,
and interprets this result as evidence that the increase in trade has contributed to the decline
of the slope of the Phillips curve. The study, however, examines the group of advanced
economies as a whole, and doesn’t present results for the US alone. Finally, in the context
of a similar traditional Phillips curve estimated for the U.S., Ball (2006) allows interaction
of the output coeﬃcient with trade, and finds only a modest eﬀect.
    In this paper I do not estimate the slope of the Phillips curve, but propose instead a way
to analyze the quantitative importance of globalization eﬀects on such a slope. Specifically
I lay down the channels through which an increase in market competition can generate
a flattening of the Phillips curve, in the context of the new Keynesian model of inflation
dynamics.


3     Channels of globalization eﬀects on inflation
The basic channel emphasized both in policy debates and empirical studies as potential car-
rier of globalization eﬀects on inflation dynamics is trade integration, which especially when
accompanied by policy incentives, is argued to bolster competition. Increased competition,
the argument goes, creates two eﬀects: a direct eﬀect of containment of costs, by restraining
increases in workers’ compensations and reducing real import prices, and a second, indirect
eﬀect of creating pressure to innovate, which contributes to increasing productivity. Higher
productivity in turn further lowers production costs: if markups are constant, lower produc-
tion costs reduce the pressure on prices. But the margins that firms are willing to charge
over their costs might be reduced as well, moderating the extent of price increases.
    To understand how these eﬀects work, it is useful to decompose the relation between
consumer price inflation and domestic output, the one typically analyzed in empirical studies,
in three distinct parts. First, there is the relation between CPI inflation and domestic
inflation. In an open economy, consumer price inflation reflects the price dynamics of goods


                                               5
produced both domestically and abroad that are consumed at home. Secondly, there is the
relation between domestic inflation and the marginal cost of production, and finally the
relationship between the marginal cost of production and domestic output.
    The central relationship, that describes how variations in marginal cost translate into
fluctuations in domestic prices, is the one most likely aﬀected by an increase in competition.
    When analyzed through the lenses of the new Keynesian approach to the construction
of a Phillips curve, the strength of this relationship depends on a number of factors. The
first is the frequency of price revisions: the longer prices are kept fixed, the more nominal
disturbances translate into real eﬀects, rather than aggregate inflation. This is referred to as
the nominal rigidity component. The second component is the sensitivity of the desired firms’
price to marginal costs versus other prices. If price setters take into account other firms’
prices when they set their own price, then the presence of even a small number of firms that
do not change their price induces flexible-price firms to change their price by a lesser amount.
A third component is the sensitivity of marginal costs to the own output of the firm (versus
its sensitivity to the average marginal cost): when marginal costs of the price setter are
increasing in its own output, the desired price increase is smaller because the firm takes into
account the decline in marginal cost due to the loss in demand when the price is increased.
Finally, the pricing decisions are aﬀected by the sensitivity of the firm’s own output to its
relative price, namely by how elastic is the demand curve of the individual producer. The last
three components are commonly referred to as ‘strategic complementarity’ or ‘real rigidity’
channels.1
    Both nominal and real rigidities are known to be important in assessing the size of the
‘slope’ of the new Keynesian Phillips curve with respect to marginal costs. They have
been analyzed in theoretical works and explored in empirical studies aiming at reconciling
estimated ‘slopes’ with reasonable degrees of nominal rigidity.2
    In this paper I focus on the real rigidity component and analyze how it can be aﬀected
by the openness of the economy, through the increase in competitiveness generated by an
increase in the number of goods traded in the economy.
    To do this I borrow from the new trade literature, and in particular from a recent con-
tribution by Melitz and Ottaviano (2005), who present a model of trade with monopolistic
competition and firm heterogeneity to study the eﬀect of trade liberalization on productivity
  1
      See Woodford (2003) ch. 3. The term ‘real rigidity’ was introduced, I believe, by Ball and Romer (1989).
  2
      See literature cited later.



                                                       6
and mark-ups. The authors show that import competition induces a downward shift in the
distribution of markups across firms. A key element of their model is the dependence of the
elasticity of demand upon the relative size of the market. This setting has been used in a
macro general equilibrium model by Bilbiie et al (2006a and 2006b) to study endogenous
entry as a propagation of business cycles, and the eﬃciency properties of the model, adopting
a framework of flexible prices.
     Here I study instead a model of staggered prices. I consider a monopolistically competitive
market where there is a fixed entry cost, and a given distribution of firms. A reduction
in the individual firms production costs moves up the firms’ distribution curve, making
profitable for more firms to enter the market. The resulting increase in the variety of goods
traded increases the overall degree of competition: this is captured in the model by making
the demand elasticity, and hence the mark-up, vary with the number of goods that are
traded. Variable mark-ups in turn impact the price setting process and the dynamics of the
relationship between inflation and marginal cost.
     My focus is specifically on how the process of new entries and the interaction of firms
in the price setting process aﬀect the relationship between aggregate inflation and marginal
costs. I will not discuss the other two components of the CPI inflation - domestic output
relationship that I described, the relation between domestic and CPI inflation, and the
relation between marginal cost and domestic output. These relationships obviously matter
for the assessment of the overall eﬀect of openness on the Phillips curve’s slope, and an
explicit modeling of the Phillips curve in open economy may as well illustrate that its slope
is lower than that of the closed economy.3 Nevertheless, understanding the channels through
which market entry changes the degree of real rigidity, and how that may emphasize or
reduce the inflation-output trade-oﬀ, is of primary importance.
     Similarly, I will not discuss eﬀects of globalization on inflation of the kind argued by
Rogoﬀ (2003, 2006), that in a global environment central banks have less incentive to inflate
the economy. Although this lower incentive is another eﬀect of the increased competitive-
ness of the economy, it is related to central banks’ incentives,4 rather than to the market
mechanisms to which I am interested in here.
   3
     Several aspects of the diﬀerence between open and closed economy are discussed by Woodford (2007, in
this volume).
   4
    The increase in competitiveness on one hand reduces the monopoly wedge that determines the inflation
bias of the central bank, and on the other makes prices and wages more flexible, reducing the real eﬀects of
unanticipated monetay policy, hence the gain from inflating.



                                                     7
4     A structural framework
The Calvo model of staggered prices provides a useful framework to disentangle the various
theoretical channels that compose the inflation-marginal cost relationship. Since the baseline
model is well known, here I summarize its main features to set the stage for the generalizations
that I discuss next.
   The model has a continuum of monopolistic firms, indexed by i, which produce diﬀer-
entiated goods, also indexed by i, over which consumers’ preferences are defined. Firms
produce with a constant returns to scale technology and have access to economy-wide factor
markets. The optimal consumption allocation determines the demand for each diﬀerentiated
good ct (i) as
                                               µ        ¶−θ
                                                 pt (i)
                                   ct (i) = Ct                                               (1)
                                                  Pt
for θ > 1; here pt (i) is the individual good i price, Ct indicates firm level output, defined by
the constant-elasticity-of substitution aggregator of Dixit and Stiglitz:
                                          ·Z                       ¸θ/(θ−1)
                                                    (θ−1)/θ
                                   Ct =        ct (i)         di              ,                      (2)

and Pt is the corresponding aggregate price (the minimum cost to buy a unit of the aggregate
                 £R             ¤1/(1−θ)
good Ct ): Pt =     pt (i)1−θ di         . The model further assumes random intervals between
price changes: in every period, only a fraction (1 − α) of the firms can set a new price,
independently of the past history of price changes, which will then be kept fixed until the
next time the firm is drawn to change prices again. By letting α vary between 0 and 1, the
model nests assumptions about the degree of price stickiness from perfect flexibility (α = 0)
to complete price rigidity (the limit as α → 1). The expected time between price changes is
then 1/(1 − α).
    The pricing problem of a firm that revises its price in period t is to choose the price pt (i)
that maximizes its expected stream of profits
                                        ©                    ª
                                      Et Σ∞
                                          j=0 Qt,t+j Pt+j (i) ,                                      (3)

where time t profits Pt (i) are a function P (pt (i) , Pt , yt (i) , Yt ; Γt ) ; yt (i) is firm’s output,
defined by (1), Qt,t+j is a stochastic discount factor, and the variable Γt stands for all other
aggregate variables. The first order condition for the optimal price is
                         ©                                                    ª
                       Et Σ∞               ∗
                           j=0 Qt,t+j P1 (pt , Pt+j , yt+j (i) , Yt+j ; Γt+j ) = 0,                  (4)

                                                        8
where the evolution of aggregate prices is
                                  £                     ¤ 1
                             Pt = (1 − α) p∗1−θ
                                           t
                                                     1−θ 1−θ
                                                + αPt−1      .                                          (5)

Log-linearizing these two equilibrium conditions around a steady state with zero inflation,
with usual manipulations, one obtains the familiar form of inflation dynamics as function of
expected inflation and real marginal costs st

                                          π t = ζb
                                                 st + βEt π t+1                                         (6)

where a hat indicates the log-deviation from a non-stochastic steady state, β is the steady
state value of the discount factor, and the ‘slope’ is defined as5
                                              (1 − αβ) (1 − α)
                                         ζ=                    .                                        (7)
                                                     α
   In this baseline framework, the extent of the nominal rigidity determines how marginal
costs translate into inflation fluctuations. In order to consider other potential channels of
the kind discussed above the model needs to be generalized.

4.1     The inflation/marginal cost relation: some generalizations
Generalizations of the baseline model can lead to changes in the nominal rigidity component
of the slope or introduce some form of real rigidity of the kind discussed previously by adding
new terms to expression (7).
    One instance in which the nominal rigidity term is modified, despite maintaining an ex-
ogenous probability of changing prices, occurs when one allows for a non-zero steady state
inflation. In this case the expression for inflation dynamics is derived as a (log) linear approx-
imation of the model equilibrium conditions (4) and (5) around a steady state characterized
by positive, rather than zero inflation, as it is the case in the baseline model. Such an ap-
proximation modifies the terms in the discount and the rigidity coeﬃcient in the slope (9).
As first shown by Ascari (2004), in such a case the slope coeﬃcient would be:
                                     ³           θ
                                                   ´³       θ−1
                                                                ´
                                       1 − αβΠ       1 − αΠ
                                 ζ=                 θ−1
                                                                  ,                            (8)
                                                 αΠ
where Π denotes the gross trend inflation rate. The slope in this case depends not only upon
the primitives of the Calvo model, the probability of changing prices 1 − α and the elasticity
   5
    Throughout the paper I will use the term slope to indicate the elasticity of inflation to marginal cost,
rather than to output.

                                                     9
of demand, but also upon the steady state level of inflation. In this case the NKPC has also
a richer dynamics, because it includes additional forward-looking terms, unless particular
forms of indexation are postulated.6
    A further modification of the nominal rigidity component is obtained by replacing the
assumption of a constant probability of price re-optimization with a state-dependent prob-
ability (see Dotsey, King and Wolman 1999).
    The generalizations that provide a more direct channel through which the competitive
eﬀect of more global markets integration can alter the Phillips curve’s slope are those that
introduce real rigidity factors in the slope coeﬃcient. Such modifications were at first in-
troduced with the purpose of reconciling empirical estimates of the slope with a degree of
nominal rigidity more in line with that documented in firms’ surveys.7 In fact, for any given
degree of nominal rigidity, the existence of strategic complementarity lowers the slope or,
alternatively, a given empirical estimate of the slope is consistent with a lower degree of
nominal rigidity.
    Assuming for example that some or all factor markets are firm-specific implies that the
marginal cost of supplying goods to the market is not equal for all goods at any specific point
in time. In such cases firms’ marginal costs depend not only on economy-wide factors, but
also on the firm’s own output8 and, for any given increase in marginal cost, this dependence
makes the desired price increase smaller. Returning to a baseline case with zero steady state
inflation, the slope ζ in these cases becomes

                                            (1 − αβ) (1 − α) 1
                                       ζ=                           ,                                        (9)
                                                   α        1 + θsy
                                            1
where the strategic complementarity term 1+θs  y
                                                 depends upon the demand elasticity θ, which
measures the sensitivity of the own output of the firm to its relative price, and the sensitivity
   6
     If one assumes that non re-optimized prices are indexed at least partly to trend inflation, this additional
dynamics is eliminated and the slope is unaﬀected by the steady state inflation Π. Models with positive trend
inflation can be generalized to the case of time-varying steady state inflation; in this case the model describes
the dynamics of inflation deviations from a time-varying trend: π   bt = ln(Πt /Πt )). Cogley-Sbordone (2005)
estimate a NKPC with time-varying trend inflation. Ireland (2006) and Smets and Wouters (2003), among
others, estimate general equilibrium models in the new Keynesian literature allowing for a time varying trend
inflation; their assumptions however deliver a time-invariant slope.
   7
       For evidence from survey data see for example, Blinder et al. (1998).
   8
    Sbordone (2002) discusses this case. A more sophisticated model assumes that capital is endogenously
determined, and its limited reallocation is due to the existence of adjustment costs. Woodford (2005)
discusses this model, and concludes that the hypothesis of a fixed capital is a good enough approximation.
For another empirical application, see Eichenbaum and Fisher (2007).


                                                       10
of the firm’s marginal cost to its own output, sy . The parameter sy in turn depends on other
model assumptions: for example, when labor is traded in an economy-wide labor market
but capital is firm specific and therefore cannot be instantaneously reallocated across firms,
a constant returns to scale production function implies that sy is equal to the ratio of the
output elasticities with respect to capital and labor.9 In a more general case where labor
markets as well are firm-specific, the parameter sy is a composite parameter that includes also
the elasticity of the marginal disutility of work with respect to output increases (Woodford,
2003).
    Another extension is the case in which each firm’s desired mark-up over its marginal cost
depends upon the prices of other firms. Since the desired mark-up depends on the firm’s elas-
ticity of demand, a variable desired mark-up requires a variable demand elasticity. Modeling
this case then requires departing from the constant elasticity of substitution assumption of
the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator. For example, the aggregator proposed in the macro literature
by Kimball (1995) allows for the elasticity of substitution between diﬀerentiated goods to be
a function of their relative market share.
    Kimball was interested in a variable elasticity of demand to generate countercyclical
movements in the firm’s desired mark-up, and suﬃcient real rigidity to make a model of
sticky prices plausible (i.e. without having to assume too large a percentage of firms with long
periods of unadjusted prices). His objective was to generate more flexible demand functions,
particularly ‘quasi-kinked’ demand functions, characterized by the property that for the
firm at its normal market share it is easier to lose customers by increasing its relative price
than to gain customers by lowering its relative price. By making the elasticity of demand
depend upon the firm’s relative sales, Kimball’s preferences generate another kind of strategic
complementarity that amplifies the eﬀect of nominal disturbances and, everything else equal,
reduces the size of the Phillips curve’s slope.10 Such property has spurred new research on
various implications of the assumption of a non-constant elasticity of substitution. Dotsey
and King (2005) use a specific functional form for the Kimball aggregator in a calibrated
DSGE model to study the dynamic response of inflation and output to monetary shocks
in the context of a state-dependent pricing model. Levin, Lopez-Salido and Yun (2006)
adopt the Kimball specification to analyze the interaction of strategic complementarity and
steady state inflation. In empirical work, Eichenbaum and Fisher (2007) use the same

   9
    For example, with a Cobb-Douglas production technology sy = a/ (1 − a) , where 1 − a is the output
elasticity with respect to labor.
  10
       See the discussion of these preferences in the context of models with price rigidities in Woodford (2003).


                                                        11
specification to pin down a realistic estimate of the frequency of price re-optimization in
the Calvo model. Finally, in the context of an open economy model, Gust et al. (2006)
extend these preferences to the demand of home produced and imported goods, to show that
with strategic complementarity lower trade costs reduce the pass-through of exchange rate
movements to import prices.
   Departing from the constant demand elasticity assumption along the lines of Kimball,
the consumption aggregate in (2) is replaced by an aggregate Ct implicitly defined by
                                    Z    µ        ¶
                                           ct (i)
                                       ψ            di = 1,                            (10)
                                     Ω      Ct
where ψ (¦) is an increasing, strictly concave function, and Ω is the set of all potential goods
produced (a real line). With this notation the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator corresponds to the
case where ψ (ct (i) /Ct ) = (ct (i) /Ct )(θ−1)/θ for some θ > 1. With an aggregator function
of the form (10) one can show11 that the Calvo model implies an inflation dynamics of the
baseline form, where the slope (again for simplicity, in the case of zero steady state inflation)
becomes
                                   (1 − αβ) (1 − α)          1
                             ζ=                                       .                      (11)
                                            α         1 + θ (sy + µ )
Here θ is the steady state value of the firm’s elasticity of demand, which is now a function
θ (x) of the firm’s relative sales (denoted by x); µ is the steady state value of the function
 µ (x) that represents the elasticity of the mark-up function µ (x) , which also depends on

the firm’s relative sales; sy is the steady state value of the elasticity of the firm’s marginal
cost with respect to its own sales. The interactions of the new variables in the strategic
complementarity term 1+θ(s1y + µ ) determines to what extent the slope ζ diﬀers from that of
the baseline case.
    Expression (11) formalizes all the channels discussed in section 3 as those through which
globalization may aﬀect the strength of the relationship between inflation and marginal costs.
It shows that the slope coeﬃcient depends upon a number of variables: (i) the frequency of
price revisions, represented by the coeﬃcient α : less frequent price revisions (a higher value
of α) correspond to lower ζ; (ii) the sensitivity of the desired firm’s price to marginal cost
versus other prices, the term µ : higher sensitivity reduces the slope; (iii) the sensitivity
of marginal cost to the own output of the firm, the term sy ; and (iv) the sensitivity of the
firm’s own output to the relative price, θ. In addition, the slope is possibly aﬀected by the
level of steady state inflation, which may interact with the demand elasticity, as in (8).
 11
      See the later derivation for the specific parametrization considered.

                                                       12
    The Calvo model enriched with these modifications is now a suitable framework for
discussing the eﬀects of globalization: the task is to relate the factors that drive the value of
the slope to the increase in trade openness, that is one of the characteristics of a more global
environment. This is what I consider next. Leaving aside the issue of whether globalization
aﬀects the frequency of price adjustments, and more generally the nominal rigidity term, in
the next section I focus on the eﬀects of an increase in trade on the strategic complementarity
term.


5      The eﬀect of firms’ entry
5.1     Kimball preferences with a variable number of goods
I extend Kimball’s (1995) model to an environment where the number of traded goods
is variable. The model implies that the elasticity of demand depends on the firm’s relative
output share: by relating this share to the number of goods traded the steady-state elasticity
of demand becomes function of the number of traded goods in steady state. This implies
that the degree of strategic complementarity varies with the number of traded goods, hence
so does the slope of the inflation-marginal cost curve.
     I assume that households’ utility is defined over an aggregate Ct of diﬀerentiated goods
ct (i), defined implicitly by (10), where ψ (¦) is an increasing, strictly concave function, and I
also assume that ψ (0) = 0. If the set of goods that happen to be sold is [0, N] , then ct (i) = 0
for all i > N, and Ct satisfies12
                                      Z N µ          ¶
                                              ct (i)
                                          ψ            di = 1.                                (12)
                                       0        Ct
The elasticity of demand, in this set-up, is defined as a function
                                                  ψ0 (x)
                                           θ (x) = −      ,                               (13)
                                                 xψ00 (x)
where x indicates the relative market share of the diﬀerentiated goods. In Kimball’s formu-
lation the elasticity of demand is lower for those goods that sell more because their relative
price is lower. Accordingly, the desired mark-up pricing over costs is as well a function of
the market share:
                                                  θ (x)
                                      µ (x) =             .                               (14)
                                               θ (x) − 1
  12
    Note that under this assumption changes in the number of goods available for sale involve no change in
preferences as the utility function is independent of N. This contrast with Benassy’s (1996) generalization
of the Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, that depend on the value N .

                                                    13
   The optimal consumption allocation across goods is the solution to the following problem:
                           Z N                       Z N µ           ¶
                                                              ct (i)
               min{ct (i)}     pt (i) ct (i) di s.t.      ψ            di = 1
                            0                          0       Ct
The first order conditions for this problem are
                                                         µ            ¶
                                                1 0          ct (i)
                                      pt (i) =       ψ                                      (15)
                                               Λt Ct          Ct
for each i [0, N] , where Λt is the Lagrange multiplier for constraint (12). The solution to
this minimization problem gives the demand for each good i as

                                    ct (i) = Ct ψ0−1 (pt (i) Λt Ct ) ,                      (16)

where Λt is implicitly defined by the requirement that
                               Z N
                                     ¡                   ¢
                                   ψ ψ0−1 (pt (i) Λt Ct ) di = 1.                           (17)
                                0

Expression (17) defines a price index Pet ≡ Λt1Ct for any set of prices {pt (i)} , which is
independent of Ct . We can then write the demand curve for good i as
                                                   µ        ¶
                                               0−1   pt (i)
                                 yt (i) = Yt ψ                .                        (18)
                                                      Pet

Note that the aggregate ‘price’ Pet is not in general the same as the conventional price index,
which here is defined, as in the case of Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, as the cost of a unit of the
composite good, that is
                            Z N                     Z N              µ        ¶
                          1                                      0−1   pt (i)
                   Pt =          pt (i) ct (i) di =     pt (i) ψ                di,          (19)
                         Ct 0                        0                  Pet

where the second equality follows from (18). Both Pt and Pet , however, are homogeneous of
degree one functions in {pt (i)} .

5.2    Steady state with symmetric prices
I am interested in the properties of the demand curve in a steady state with symmetric prices
pt (i) = pt for all i. In this case it follows from (12) that the relative demand ct (i) /Ct is
equal to                                                µ ¶
                                                     −1  1
                                      ct (i) /Ct = ψ                                      (20)
                                                         N

                                                   14
for all i, and from (15):
                                                     p
                                         Pet =    ¡ −1t ¡ 1 ¢¢ .
                                                  0                                                  (21)
                                                 ψ ψ     N

From the definition of Pt in (19) it also follows that
                                            ·       µ ¶¸
                                                 −1   1
                                   Pt = pt Nψ            .                                           (22)
                                                     N

       The elasticity of demand in such a steady state, denoted by θ, is

                                                       ψ0 (x)
                                            θ=−                ,                                     (23)
                                                      xψ00 (x)
                 ¡ ¢
where x = ψ−1 N1 denotes the relative share in the symmetric steady state. Note how this
elasticity diﬀers from the case of the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator, where the elasticity of demand
is a constant θ (x) = θ for all x. Here the demand elasticity depends upon the relative market
share of the good, and its value in steady state, θ, is a function of the number of goods traded
in steady state, N. I am interested in seeing how this steady state elasticity θ varies with
N. The extent of this variation depends on how the elasticity function θ (x) varies with x.13
    The assumptions made so far do not have implications for the sign of θ0 (x) . However,
if we assume, as Kimball (1995) does, that the function θ (x) is decreasing in x, then, since
     ¡ ¢
ψ−1 N1 is decreasing in N, it follows that θ is increasing in N. This is in line with the
general intuition that more goods are traded in a market, more likely it is for the demand
to decrease more in response to a small increase in prices.
    As θ varies with the number of goods traded, so does the desired mark-up of prices over
                                                                                            θ
costs, evaluated in steady state. I define the steady state desired mark-up as µ ≡ θ−1        : if
θ is increasing in N, then the steady state desired mark-up is decreasing in N. For what it
is discussed later on it is also important to evaluate the extent to which the mark-up itself,
as defined in (14), varies with the relative sales, and therefore with the number of traded
goods.
    The elasticity of the mark-up function is defined as

                                               ∂ log µ (x)   xµ0 (x)
                                     µ (x) =               =                                         (24)
                                                 ∂ log x      µ (x)

  13
    The function θ (¦) could also be expressed as a function of the relative price, rather than the market
share, as in Gust et al. (2006).




                                                      15
                                    ¡1¢
which, evaluated at x = ψ−1          N
                                          , is denoted as14

                                                         xµ0 (x)
                                                 µ   =           .                                                   (25)
                                                          µ (x)

The elasticity       µ   determines how much µ varies for a small variation in N.15 Since

                                ∂ log µ   ∂ log µ ∂ log x                         ∂ log x
                                        =        ¦        =               µ   ¦
                                ∂ log N   ∂ log x ∂ log N                         ∂ log N
               1
and, since     N
                   = ψ (x) ,
                                                              µ       ¶    µ     µ ¶¶
                          ∂ log N    xψ0 (x)                      1               1
                                  =−         = −Nψ−1                      ψ ψ 0
                                                                              −1
                                                                                      ,
                          ∂ log x     ψ (x)                       N               N

we have that
                                   ∂ log µ           −
                                           =      ¡ ¢ 0µ¡ −1 ¡ 1 ¢¢ .
                                                −1 1
                                   ∂ log N   Nψ    N
                                                     ψ ψ      N


The elasticity of µ with respect to N has therefore the opposite sign of the elasticity µ .
In turn we can determine how µ must vary with N by considering how µ (x) varies with
x. Since we can argue that log µ is a convex function of log x,16 it follows from definition
(24) that µ (x) is an increasing function of x : we can then conclude that µ is a decreasing
function of N .
    Finally, it can be shown that the steady state sensitivity of the firm’s marginal cost to its
own output, sy , is also a function of N. This elasticity depends upon assumptions about the
form of the production function and about consumer preferences, which I haven’t spelled out
yet. I make here some simplifying assumptions to illustrate the nature of the dependence of
sy on N. Let the production function of firm i be

                                            yt (i) = ht (i)1−a − Φ                                                   (26)

  14
       Note that this elasticity could alternatively defined as       µ (x)       = − θ (x)/ [θ (x) − 1] , where   θ (x)   =
∂ log θ(x)
 ∂ log x .
  15
   The value of µ is important to determine the degree of strategic complementarities in price setting, for
small departures from the uniform-price steady state (see Woodford 2003).
  16
     This follows from the hypothesis that θ0 (x) < 0, so that µ (x) is an increasing function of x. In this case
it is not possible for log µ to be a concave function of log x, because this would require log µ to be negative
for positive, and small enough x. But this can’t happen, no matter how large θ (x) gets for small x. If log µ
must be convex at least for small values of x, it is convenient to assume that it is a globally convex function
of log x.


                                                         16
where Φ is a fixed cost. This leads to a labor demand function
                                                              1
                                       ht (i) = (yt (i) + Φ) 1−a                            (27)

Assuming an economy -wide labor market, with nominal wage Wt , the total cost of production
of firm i is Wt ht (i) , and its real marginal cost is
                                MCt                    1 Wt                 a
                     st (i) =       (yt (i) ; Γt ) =          (yt (i) + Φ) 1−a .            (28)
                                 Pt                  1 − a Pt
where Γt indicates aggregate variables that enter into the determination of firms’ marginal
costs. The elasticity of the marginal cost to firm’s own output is then
                                                       ·           ¸
                                                    a      yt (i)
                              sy (yt (i) ; Γt ) =
                                                  1 − a yt (i) + Φ
which, evaluated at a steady state with symmetric prices, is
                                   ·       ¸          ·        ¸
                               a       xY         a          x
                        sy =                 =                   .                          (29)
                             1 − a xY + Φ      1 − a x + Φ/Y

where again x = ψ−1 (1/N) and I denoted the steady state of aggregate output by Y. Since
both x and Y are functions of N, so is sy : whether it increases or decreases with N depends
upon whether x or 1/Y decreases more sharply with N. I discuss this point with some detail
in the appendix.
    We have thus established that the steady state elasticity of demand θ is increasing in N,
while the elasticity of the desired mark-up evaluated in steady state µ is decreasing in N;
how the elasticity of the marginal cost to firm’s own output sy depends on N is established
numerically in the quantitative exercise. The overall role of N in the price/marginal cost
relationship is examined next.

5.3    The price setting problem
The firms pricing problem in this set up generalizes the one considered in section 4. Price
setting firms at t choose their price pt (i) to maximize the following expected string of profits
over the life of the set price:
            (∞             "                 Ã        !    Ã            Ã        !        !#)
              X                         0 −1   pt (i)              0 −1   pt (i)
                   j
         Et       α Qt,t+j pt (i)Yt+j ψ                 − C Yt+j ψ                 ; Γt+j
             j=0                               Pet+j                      Pet+j

where C (¦) is the firm’s cost function; generalizing (4), the FOC for this problem are

                                                  17
                                                      ³    ´h ³ ³            ´´       i     
                                 j                         pt (i)      pt (i)
                      X
                      ∞
                         α Qt,t+j Pt+j Yt+j x              Pht+j
                                                                θ x Ph           −1 ×
              Et      h              ³ ³          ´´ ³            0
                                                                       ³t+j ´             ´i  = 0
                          pt (i)            pt (i)                   −1 pt (i)
                 j=0     Pt+j
                                  − µ   x   Pht+j
                                                        s  Y t+j ψ        Pht+j
                                                                                  ; Γ t+j
                                  ³ ´        0
                                                   ³   ´
where the relative share is x Pph ≡ ψ −1 Pph . The functions θ (x) and µ (x) are the functions
defined in (13) and (14), and s (yt (i) ; Γt ) is the real marginal cost of producing quantity yt (i)
in period t, given aggregate state Γt , which is unaﬀected by the pricing decision of firm i.17
    Log-linearizing the FOC around a steady state with zero inflation one obtains:
                   ¡                    ¢           ³                           ³ ´         ´ 
                       ∗        j                       ∗     j                     Pt
       X∞
                     pbt −  Σ       π
                                k=1 t+k    +     µ θ  pbt − Σ     e
                                                                  π
                                                              k=1 t+k   +    log         − K   +
    Et      (αβ)j                  ³                            ³ ´           ´ Pht             =0 (30)
                                      ∗        j                  Pt
       j=0                     sy θ pbt − Σk=1 π    et+k + log Ph − K − sbt+j
                                                                      t

                       ³ ∗´           ¡p¢                                                           ³ ´
where pb∗t = log         pt
                         Pt
                              − log    P
                                                                   et ≡ ∆ log Pet ; K ≡ log
                                            |ss ; π t ≡ ∆ log Pt , π                                  P
                                                                                                      Ph
                                                                                                           |ss ; sy =
∂ log st (i)
           sbt = log s (Yt ; Γt )−log s (Y ; Γ) |ss , and the steady state values follow from previous
             | ,
∂ log yt (i) ss
calculations. In particular, from (22)
                                     µ ∗¶                ·        µ ¶¸
                                      p                        −1  1
                                 log       |ss = − log Nψ                ;
                                      P                            N

from (22) and (21)
                          µ ¶              ·       µ ¶ µ     µ ¶¶¸
                           P                    −1  1  0  −1  1
                      log        |ss = log Nψ         ψ ψ
                           Pe                       N         N
                        ³      ´
                             p
and, since log st ≡ log MCp P
                                  it follows that:
                                                                ·      µ ¶¸
                                                                    −1  1
                               log s (Y ; Γ) |ss = − log µ − log Nψ         .                                   (31)
                                                                        N

       Log-linearizing the dynamics of the price indices, one gets, for Pet
                      Z Nµ                           · µ     µ ¶¶¸¶
                                             e         0  −1   1
                            log pt (i) − log Pt − log ψ ψ                 di = 0
                       0                                       N

which, to a first order approximation, gives
                                Z                      · µ     µ ¶¶¸
                         e    1 N                        0  −1  1
                     log Pt =       log pt (i) di − log ψ ψ          .
                              N 0                               N

  17
       Note that the real marginal cost is defined as the ratio M Ct (i) /Pt , not the ratio M Ct (i) /Pet .


                                                            18
   For Pt , as defined in (19), we have
Z N½                          ·       µ ¶¸            µ                           µ       ¶ ¶¾
                                        1     ψ0 (x)                                p (i)
     log pt (i) − log Pt + log Nψ  −1
                                           +           log pt (i) − log Pet − log          |ss di = 0
 0                                      N    xψ00 (x)                                Pe
which, to a first order approximation, implies
                                 Z                       ·      µ ¶¸
                                1 N                          −1  1
                       log Pt =       log pt (i) di + log Nψ         .                  (32)
                                N 0                              N
Therefore, to a first order approximation,
                   ³      ´      ·      µ ¶¸      · µ     µ ¶¶¸
                                           1               1
               log Pt /Pet = log Nψ  −1             0
                                             + log ψ ψ −1
                                                                ≡K
                                           N               N
and therefore
                                            et = π t .
                                            π
   Under the assumption of Calvo staggered prices, we can also write the expression for the
general price level (32) as
                        µ Z N                ¶                      ·      µ ¶¸
                      1                                      ∗          −1  1
         log Pt =         α   log pt−1 (i) di + (1 − α) log pt + log Nψ
                      N     0                                               N
                                         µ              ·     µ ¶¸¶
                                                                1
                 = α log Pt−1 + (1 − α) log p∗t + log Nψ−1
                                                                N
                                           ∗
                 = α log Pt−1 + (1 − α) (bpt + log Pt )

where the last equality follows from the definition of pb∗t . We then have

                              α log Pt = α log Pt−1 + (1 − α) pb∗t .                    (33)

5.4    The slope of the NKPC
The log-linearized equilibrium conditions (30) and (33) can now be expressed, respectively,
as
                  X∞        h³              ³      Xj         ´       ´i
               Et    (αβ)j 1 + θ ( µ + sy ) pb∗t −       π t+k − sbt+j = 0            (34)
                                                          k=1
                  j=0

and
                                           1−α ∗
                                        πt =     pbt .                                (35)
                                              α
With typical transformations, (34) and (35) imply again an expression for inflation of the
form
                                   π t = ζb
                                          st + βEt π t+1

                                               19
where, however, the slope is now defined as in (11), and more explicitly as
                              (1 − αβ) (1 − α)               1
                         ζ=                                                .                          (36)
                                     α         1 + θ (N) [ µ (N) + sy (N)]
Through the terms µ , sy and θ the slope ζ depends upon the number of goods traded in
steady state.18 As we discussed, θ is increasing in N while µ is decreasing in N, and the
elasticity sy will be shown to be as well decreasing in N. The net eﬀect of a change in the
steady state value of traded goods on the slope depends on the relative size of the changes
in all these variables. This is what I analyze next.


6      Quantitative eﬀect of trade increase on the PC slope
In order to evaluate the quantitative impact of the trade increase on the slope ζ, I need to
parametrize the function ψ (x) . First, I choose a functional form along the lines of Dotsey
and King (2005), setting:
                                     1                            1
                       ψ (x) =             [(1 + η) x − η]γ −           (−η)γ ,
                                 (1 + η) γ                    (1 + η) γ
where the constant term is chosen to satisfy the condition ψ (0) = 0 stated above.
   For this form of ψ (x) the demand function (16) is derived as
                                           "µ       ¶ 1     #
                             ct (i)    1      pt (i) γ−1
                                    =                    +η ,
                              Ct      1+η       Pet
which is a sum of a constant and a Dixit-Stiglitz term, and where the parameters γ and η
control the elasticity and the curvature of the function. I discuss later the choice of particular
values for the parameters γ and η that I use for the quantitative exercise.
    Using the derivations of the previous section, I can now write explicit expressions for the
variables that enter the slope of the Phillips curve that show how they depend on N in a
steady state with symmetric prices. The steady state relative share x in (20) is
                             µ ¶             (µ                    ¶ γ1    )
                               1        1        (1 + η) γ
                    x ≡ ψ−1        =                       + (−η)γ      +η ;                  (37)
                               N      1+η           N

  18
    It should also be observed that N has an additional eﬀect on the inflation dynamics that can be seen by
rewriting (6) as
                                     π t = ζ (log st − log s) + βEt π t+1 .

                                                                               ¡ ¢¤ µ and the steady state
The steady state value of the marginal cost is function of the steady £state mark-up
relative price p/P, both functions of N : log s(N ) = − log µ (N ) − log N ψ −1 N1 .

                                                    20
the steady state elasticity (23) is
                                            η − (1 + η)ψ−1 (1/N)
                                       θ=                           ,                                      (38)
                                          (γ − 1) (1 + η) ψ−1 (1/N)
and the elasticity of mark-up (25) is the following function of N:

                                         η (γ − 1) (1 + η) ψ−1 (1/N)
                         µ   =¡                      ¢¡                  ¢.
                               η − (1 + η)ψ−1 (1/N) η − γ(1 + η)ψ−1 (1/N)
Finally, the steady state mark-up is
                                            η − (1 + η)ψ−1 (1/N)
                                        µ=                       .
                                           η − γ(1 + η)ψ−1 (1/N)
By calibrating values for the parameters η and γ, we can evaluate the quantitative eﬀect of
an increase in N on the slope of the inflation - marginal cost function.
    Unfortunately the literature doesn’t oﬀer much guidance for what are the most plausible
values for η and γ. One possibility is to choose a combination of these two parameters that
guarantees a desired value for the mark-up (hence for the demand elasticity) in a steady state
where the relative share x is equal to 1. Dotsey and King (2005), for example, set γ = 1.02,
and determine η so that θ (1) = 10 (or a mark up of 11%), which gives η = −6.19 Levin et
al. (2006), in order to have a markup of 16% in their baseline case, choose instead a lower
value for the demand elasticity at 1, setting θ (1) = 7, and set η = −2. In an open economy
model Gust et al. (2006) choose η to match their model’s implications for the volatility of
output, and then select γ to give a 20% markup pricing in steady state (and θ (1) = 6). This
implies setting γ = 1.15 and η = −1.87. The larger is η in absolute value, the more concave
is the demand function. This is shown in figure 1 for the case in which θ (1) = 7, and in
figure 2 for the case of θ (1) = 10. The red line with circles in each figure corresponds to
η = 0, which is the Dixit-Stiglitz constant elasticity case.
    I will start by considering the implications of the parametrization of Levin et al. (2006),
and then evaluate the case of a lower initial mark-up, as assumed in the parametrization
of Dotsey and King. Both these parametrizations assume an elasticity at the point of unit
market share relatively in line with constant elasticity estimates obtained from macro data.20
  19                                                 −1
       It follows from (23) that for x = 1: θ =   (γ−1)(1+η) .
  20
    At the macro level, Cogley-Sbordone (2005) estimate a Calvo model with a Dixit-Stiglitz specification
and time-varying inflation trend; they estimate the Dixit-Stiglitz elasticity using aggregate data on inflation,
unit labor costs, output and interest rates across subperiods (chosen a priori as representing periods of
diﬀerent steady state inflation). They do not find evidence that the elasticity diﬀers across the subsamples,
which cover pre and post 1990, and estimate an elasticity of about 10.

                                                           21
                                       θ(1) = 7
                 1.2
                                                       η = −3, γ = 1.07
                                                       η = −2, γ = 1.14
                1.15                                   η = 0, γ = 0.86


                 1.1


                1.05
            p




                  1


                0.95


                 0.9


                0.85
                   0.4   0.6     0.8               1    1.2               1.4
                                          x




Figure 1: Demand functions for various parametrizations; θ(x) = 7 at x = 1.




                                       θ(1) = 10
                1.12
                                                       η = −3, γ = 1.05
                 1.1                                   η = −2, γ = 1.10
                                                       η = 0, γ = .90
                1.08

                1.06

                1.04

                1.02
            p




                  1

                0.98

                0.96

                0.94

                0.92
                   0.4   0.6     0.8               1    1.2               1.4
                                          x




Figure 2: Demand functions for various parametrizations; θ (x) = 10 at x = 1.



                                         22
                                                      θ(1) = 3
                       1.4
                                                                        η = −3, γ = 1.16
                                                                        η = −2, γ = 1.33
                       1.3                                              η = 0, γ = 0.66


                       1.2


                       1.1
                   p




                        1


                       0.9


                       0.8


                       0.7
                         0.4        0.6         0.8              1       1.2               1.4
                                                         x




        Figure 3: Demand functions for various parametrizations; θ (x) = 3 at x = 1.

With micro data, however, the estimate of the elasticity of substitution depends on the level
of aggregation. Broda and Weinstein (2006), for example, estimate elasticities for a larger
number of goods at three diﬀerent levels of aggregation, and found higher elasticities for more
disaggregated sectors, showing that varieties are more close substitute when disaggregation
is higher. Although their estimated elasticities cover a wide range of values, the median
elasticities for the period 1972-88 range from 2.5 to 3.7, depending on the aggregation level.21
This suggests to investigate as well the eﬀects of parametrizations based on the assumption
of a much lower elasticity in the initial steady state: by identifying this state with the period
1972-1988, which represents a pre-globalization period, I consider the case of θ (1) = 3.
Figure 3 shows the demand functions for this case, in a manner analogous to figures 1 and
2.
    As for the choice of the two parameters η and γ, for each of the assumed initial values
of θ, I choose two alternative values for η, −3 and −2, as reported in the figures: more
negative values would make the demand curve too kinked. Given η, a value for γ follows
  21
    It’s also interesting to note that their estimated elasticities, across each disaggregation group, rather
than increase, appear to decrease, albeit slightly, in the 1990-2001 period versus the 1972-1988. Their
interpretation is that imported goods have become more diﬀerentiated over time.



                                                      23
from expression (23) evaluated at x = 1.
    Figure 4 shows the various components of the ‘strategic complementarity’ term of the
slope and the slope itself, for a given nominal rigidity component,22 adopting the parame-
trization of Levin et al. (2006).23 The graph on the top-left corner shows the market share
as function of traded goods, x = ψ−1 (1/N)); the following graphs show the steady state
demand elasticity θ, the mark up µ, the markup elasticity µ , the elasticity of the marginal
cost to output sy , and the Phillips curve slope ζ, all as functions of the number of traded
goods N, which is on the horizontal axis (the functions are all evaluated at x = ψ−1 (1/N)).
The curves with crosses depict the case of a more concave demand (η = −3, and γ = 1.07);
the starred curves correspond to a less concave demand function (η = −2, and γ = 1.14).
Note how the decline in the desired mark-up is consistent with the evidence that an increase
in trade is making the economy more competitive, as documented for example by Chen,
Imbs and Scott (2006) for European countries.
    The behavior of the real rigidity component of the slope depends on how the two products
θ µ and sy θ, which are on the denominator of expression (36), vary with the number of traded
goods N. For both the chosen parametrizations in the figure, the demand elasticity θ (graph
on the top right corner) increases almost linearly in N , and the elasticity sy (graph on the
bottom left of the figure) decreases almost linearly in N. The mark-up elasticity µ is a
convex function of N, which declines quite rapidly as N increases from low values in the
case of a more concave demand function (the blue curves with crosses). This sharp decline
in µ causes a decline in the product θ µ which, at low values of N, dominates the increase
in the term sy θ determining a moderate increase in the slope for these values. In the case of
a less concave function, as the green lines with stars show, the two terms θ µ and sy θ oﬀset
one another, so that at low values of N the slope curve is essentially unchanged, and then it
declines monotonically. For large enough values of N, however, the slope declines regardless
of the concavity of the demand function.
    To evaluate how sensitive this outcome is to diﬀerent specifications of the parameters of
the aggregator function, the next two figures plot the behavior of the same variables for the
two alternative parametrizations discussed: one obtained by imposing that the parameters
deliver a lower mark-up in the steady state with unit market share (the Dotsey-King case),

  22
    Recall that this term is defined as (1−α)(1−αβ)
                                             α      and doesn’t depend on N . I calibrate β = .99 and α = .7,
which corresponds to an average interval of 9-10 months between price changes.
  23
    That is, the combinations of the parameters η and γ are such that the demand elasticity in a steady
state with unit market share is equal to 7.


                                                     24
                            Market share                                                          Demand elasticity
         1.5                                                                  40
                                                      η = −3                             η = −3
                                                      η = −2                  30         η = −2
          1

                                                                              20




                                                                          θ
    x




         0.5
                                                                              10


          0                                                                    0
          0.8    1   1.2   1.4     1.6     1.8    2   2.2      2.4             0.8   1    1.2      1.4    1.6    1.8   2   2.2      2.4
                                    N                                                                    N
                                 Mark−up                                                          Mark−up elasticity
         1.4                                                                  2.5
                                                      η = −3                                                               η = −3
                                                      η = −2                   2                                           η = −2
         1.3
                                                                              1.5
                                                                      εµ




         1.2
    µ




                                                                               1
         1.1
                                                                              0.5

          1                                                                    0
          0.8    1   1.2   1.4     1.6     1.8    2   2.2      2.4             0.8   1    1.2      1.4    1.6    1.8   2   2.2      2.4
                                 N                                                                         N
                       Marginal cost elasticity                                                          Slope
         0.4                                                              0.025
                                                      η = −3
        0.38                                          η = −2               0.02

        0.36                                                              0.015
   sy




                                                                      ζ




        0.34                                                               0.01
                                                                                         η = −3
        0.32                                                              0.005
                                                                                         η = −2
         0.3                                                                   0
           0.8   1   1.2   1.4     1.6     1.8    2   2.2      2.4             0.8   1    1.2      1.4    1.6    1.8   2   2.2      2.4
                                   N                                                                      N




Figure 4: Parametrizations: η = −2, γ = 1.14, and η = −3, γ = 1.07




                                                                     25
                                     Market share                                                           Demand elasticity
                  1.5                                                                      60
                                                                 η = −3                                                              η = −3
                                                                                           50
                                                                 η = −2                                                              η = −2
                   1                                                                       40

                                                                                           30




                                                                                     θ
             x




                  0.5                                                                      20

                                                                                           10

                   0                                                                        0
                   0.8    1   1.2   1.4         1.6   1.8   2   2.2       2.4               0.8   1   1.2    1.4    1.6    1.8   2   2.2      2.4
                                             N                                                                     N
                                          Mark−up                                                           Mark−up elasticity
                 1.3                                                                        2
                                                                η = −3                                                               η = −3
                                                                                                                                     η = −2
                                                                η = −2                     1.5
                 1.2




                                                                                     εµ
                                                                                            1
             µ




                 1.1
                                                                                           0.5


                   1                                                                        0
                          1               1.5               2                               0.8   1   1.2    1.4    1.6    1.8   2   2.2      2.4
                                          N                                                                          N
                                Marginal cost elasticity                                                           Slope
                  0.4                                                                 0.025
                                                                 η = −3                                                              η = −3
                 0.38                                            η = −2                   0.02                                       η = −2

                 0.36                                                                 0.015
            sy




                                                                                 ζ




                 0.34                                                                     0.01

                 0.32                                                                 0.005

                  0.3                                                                       0
                    0.8   1   1.2   1.4         1.6   1.8   2   2.2       2.4               0.8   1   1.2    1.4    1.6    1.8   2   2.2      2.4
                                                N                                                                   N




           Figure 5: Parametrizations: η = −2, γ = 1.10, and η = −3, γ = 1.05.

the other where the initial steady state mark-up is very high (the case of Broda-Weinstein).
The specific calibrations of the parameters η and γ are indicated in each figure.
    Figure 5 plots the same variables as in figure 4 for a combination of parameters η and γ
that deliver a demand elasticity θ = 10 at x = 1. As the figure shows, this case is relatively
similar to the previous one, except that the term θ µ has a weaker eﬀects of the slope,
reducing the extent to which the slope increases when N increases near the low initial level.
    Larger diﬀerences can instead be observed for the case where the aggregator function
is parametrized to deliver a smaller elasticity in the steady state with unit market share
(θ (1) = 3) . This case is reported in figure 6.


                                                                                26
                                     Market share                                                 Demand elasticity
                   1.5                                                               20
                                                            η = −3                             η = −3
                                                            η = −2                   15
                                                                                               η = −2
                    1
                                                                                     10




                                                                                θ
              x



                   0.5
                                                                                     5

                    0                                                                0
                    0.8    1   1.2    1.4       1.6   1.8   2        2.2             0.8   1    1.2     1.4       1.6   1.8   2        2.2
                                         N                                                               N
                                      Mark−up                                                     Mark−up elasticity
                   1.6                                                               5
                                                            η = −3                                                            η = −3
                                                                                     4
                                                            η = −2                                                            η = −2
                   1.4
                                                                                     3




                                                                                εµ
             µ




                                                                                     2
                   1.2
                                                                                     1

                    1                                                                0
                    0.8    1   1.2    1.4       1.6   1.8   2        2.2             0.8   1    1.2     1.4       1.6   1.8   2        2.2
                                         N                                                                 N
                               Marginal cost elasticity                                                  Slope
                   0.4                                                           0.03
                                                            η = −3
                  0.38
                                                            η = −2               0.02
                  0.36
             sy




                                                                            ζ




                  0.34
                                                                                 0.01                                         η = −3
                  0.32                                                                                                        η = −2

                   0.3                                                               0
                     0.8   1   1.2    1.4       1.6   1.8   2        2.2             0.8   1    1.2     1.4       1.6   1.8   2        2.2
                                            N                                                                 N




           Figure 6: Parametrizations: η = −2, γ = 1.33, and η = −3, γ = 1.16.

    The figure shows that the elasticity of demand increases at a slower rate with the increase
in N, and the mark-up elasticity, which is very high at the initial steady state, declines very
sharply when N increases: this decline makes the term θ µ dominate once again the behavior
of the slope. As the graph on the bottom right shows, in this case the slope increases for
a larger range of values of N for both parametrizations, and more markedly so the more
concave is the demand function. Also, as N grows the slope eventually declines but, for the
range of values considered in the figure, it remains always above its initial value.




                                                                           27
6.1     Measuring the trade increase
The previous figures illustrate how moving from a steady state with low N to a steady state
with high N has a potential eﬀect on the slope of the NK Phillips curve. However, the
assessment of the magnitude of the change in the slope is sensitive to the parametrization
of the demand curve. And, within each parametrization, it matters how big is the level of
traded goods that characterizes the new steady state, because of the non monotonicity of
the slope function ζ. Hence, in order to make a quantitative assessment of the impact of
the increase in market competition on the new Keynesian Phillips curve trade-oﬀ, one has
to measure the size of the increase in trade associated with the globalization of the ‘90 in a
way appropriate to represent the variable N of the model.
    US goods imports have significantly increased in the 1960-2006 period. Figure 7 shows
that the share of goods imports on GDP went from a little more than 4 percent in 1960 to
about 22 percent by the end of 2006, with an increase from about 12 to 22 percent since
1989. For this latest period, however, the increase in import share excluding oil products is
more modest going from about 8 to 12 percent.
    The model however associates the increase in competition with an increase in the number
of goods traded in the economy. For this purpose a more appropriate measure is provided
by the number of varieties, as reported in the study by Broda and Weinstein (2006), which
addresses the issue of the eﬀect of globalization on trade.
    Broda and Weinstein study the period 1972-2001, which they divide in two sub-periods,
1972-1988 and 1990-2001, and for each of them they report the number of varieties traded.24
From 1990 to 2001 they register an increase in the total varieties of goods available to
consumers of about 42% : the number of varieties went from approximately 182,000 to about
259,000 (table I of the paper). They observe, though, that a large number of varieties have a
very small market share: to correct for a possible bias, they also provide a measure of value-
weighted varieties. Under this measure, the increase in varieties is much smaller, of the
order of 5 percent.25 In the quantitative exercise I conduct below I take these two numbers
as rough measures of the increase in the number of goods N to evaluate the eﬀect of such
  24
    They define a variety as “import of a particular good from a particular country” (p. 550) and use two
diﬀerent sources for each subperiod (data on 1989 are not included because of the unification of Germany in
that year, which makes the data not comparable with those of the following years).
  25
     This is obtained from the reported λ ratio in table VII of Broda-Weinstein (2006). The gross increase
in varieties is computed as the inverse of the (median) λ ratio reported for the corrected count and for the
one in table I.



                                                    28
0.22
                 goods imports
                 ex−oil goods imports
 0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

 0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02
   1960   1965     1970    1975   1980       1985   1990   1995   2000   2005



          Figure 7: Goods Imports / GDP ratios, 1960 - 2006




                                        29
                                        Slope ζ                                                 Slope ζ
                     0.03                                                     0.03
                                                        η = −3, γ=1.07                                          η = −2, γ=1.14
                    0.025                                                    0.025


                     0.02                                                     0.02


                    0.015                                                    0.015


                ζ




                                                                         ζ
                     0.01                                                     0.01


                    0.005                                                    0.005


                       0                                                        0
                       0.8   1    1.2   1.4       1.6   1.8        2            0.8   1   1.2   1.4       1.6   1.8        2
                                           N                                                       N



                                        Slope ζ                                                 Slope ζ
                     0.03                                                     0.03
                                                        η = −3, γ=1.16                                          η = −2, γ=1.33
                    0.025                                                    0.025


                     0.02                                                     0.02


                    0.015                                                    0.015
                ζ




                                                                         ζ
                     0.01                                                     0.01


                    0.005                                                    0.005


                       0                                                        0
                       0.8   1    1.2   1.4       1.6   1.8        2            0.8   1   1.2   1.4       1.6   1.8        2
                                           N                                                       N




                                 Figure 8: Eﬀect of N on the slope ζ

increases on the degree of competitiveness and on the slope of the Phillips curve.
    The first row of figure 8 reproduces the slope obtained under the two parametrizations of
the aggregator function reported in figure 4. Consider first the case of η = −3 (the graph on
the left): if we characterize the initial steady state as one where the relative share is x = 1,
then in this steady state the number of goods traded is approximately N = 1/ψ (x) = .96,
while by construction the elasticity of demand at that point is θ = 7. As discussed, the
increase in the quantity of traded goods documented by Broda and Weinstein (2006) is of
the order of 5 percent in terms of the value-weighted measure, but of about 42 percent
without the weight. The shaded area between the first two vertical lines (from left to right)
indicates the eﬀect of moving from the initial steady state to a new steady state with a
number of traded goods 5 percent higher. The vertical line farther to the right indicates
a new steady state where the number of traded goods is instead 42 higher than the initial
value. As the graph shows, a 5 percent increase in N is too small a change to aﬀect the size
of the slope: the decline in the product θ µ is almost entirely oﬀset by the increase in the


                                                           30
term sy θ, so that the slope is essentially unchanged for these low values of N (ζ = .0185). A
42 percent increase, on the other hand, generates an overall increase in the term ( µ + sy ) θ
(the decline in the component θ µ is more than oﬀset by the increase in sy θ) so that the
slope declines from about 0.0185 to 0.015. In the case of a less concave demand function
(graph on the upper right) even a small increase in the steady state value of N has the eﬀect
of lowering the value of the slope. In this case, in fact, the increase in the component sy θ
dominates the ‘real rigidity’ component of the slope, making ζ smaller for any value of N
larger than the initial value (the maximum decline of the slope is from 0.022 to 0.0181).
    The quantitative assessment that emerges from the second row of figure 8 is quite diﬀer-
ent. Here I report how the PC slope varies with N in the two parametrizations considered
in figure 6, which, relative to the previous case, start from a lower steady state elasticity
(θ (1) = 3). As in the row above, the slope in the left graph is obtained from a parametriza-
tion which corresponds to a more concave demand function, relative to the one on the right.
In both cases, as we observed from the discussion in the previous section, the slope tends to
raise with N for a large range of values. In the initial steady state the slope is about 0.019;
in a steady state where N is only 5 percent higher, the slope raises to 0.021, and in a steady
state where N is almost twice as high the slope would be 0.023. The result is very similar
in the case of a less concave demand function (graph on the bottom right of the figure),
although the size of the slope in this case is higher for all values of N.
    Overall, according to the model presented, it would be diﬃcult to argue that the increase
in trade observed in the ‘90s in the US should have generated an increase in competition
that could lead to a decline in the slope of the inflation/ marginal cost relation. It is indeed
quite possible that the increased competition has instead resulted in an increase in the slope.
Moreover, this conclusion is obtained without allowing for any increase in the frequency of
price adjustment in a more competitive environment, of the kind hypothesized by Rogoﬀ
(2003). Note, however, that since one is comparing two diﬀerent steady states, the results
depend very critically on the curvature of the demand function in the initial steady state,
and on how far the new steady state is from the initial one.


7    Conclusion
In this paper I discuss whether globalization, by generating an increase in market compe-
tition, has the potential of reducing the inflation output trade-oﬀ, namely whether it is
responsible for the flattening the Phillips curve that many empirical analyses suggest oc-


                                              31
curred in the past twenty years or so.
    I use the Calvo model of inflation dynamics to disentangle the components of this trade-
oﬀ, and focus on the relationship between inflation and marginal costs. To analyze how this
relationship, which I call the relevant ‘slope’, is aﬀected by trade and market competition I
depart from the model’s traditional assumption of a constant elasticity of demand, making
this elasticity depend instead on the relative market share of the diﬀerentiated goods. When
trade moves the economy from a steady state with low trade to one with higher trade, the
elasticity of demand facing the firms increases, but the elasticity of the desired mark-up
declines. The balance of these two forces is the key element determining how the degree of
strategic complementarity, and with it the inflation-marginal costs component of the Phillips
curve slope, vary.
    I argue that it is not clear that the trade increase observed in the globalization period is
strong enough to have generated a decline in this component of the slope. When marginal cost
is related to output, there is a further eﬀect of the trade increase on the overall slope, since
in the model the elasticity of marginal cost to aggregate output comprises the elasticity sy
which is indeed a decreasing function of traded goods. This eﬀect is, however, quantitatively
small, as the figures show.
    A proper analysis of all the eﬀects of a more integrated economy on the inflation-output
trade-oﬀ would require to move more clearly to an open-economy setup, which would allow
one to account for the price dynamics of goods produced abroad and consumed, as final
or intermediate goods, in the domestic economy. As it has been shown (see for example
Razin and Yuen 2002) the open economy Phillips curve is flatter than the curve of a closed
economy, even in the presence of a constant elasticity of marginal cost to output, because the
overall slope is declining in a trade openness parameter. My analysis could be interpreted
as an analysis of the eﬀects of increase in competition, for a given degree of openness of the
economy, when an increase in the actual trade takes place.
    That said, it doesn’t necessarily mean that globalization had no eﬀect on inflation dy-
namics. Throughout my analysis I maintain the nominal rigidity component of the slope
unchanged. This is not because the frequency of price changes is unaﬀected by a more global
environment. It is simply because it is reasonable to assume that it is not the amount of
trade per se that should induce a more frequent adjustment of prices. Price stickiness is
instead typically motivated by re-optimization costs, which are essentially driven by the cost
of gathering information.
    Moreover, the claims that globalization aﬀect the frequency of price adjustment go both


                                              32
ways. On one hand, Rogoﬀ (2003) argues that globalization has led to greater price flexibility
- in the model this translates in a lower α, hence in a steepening of the curve. On the other
hand, if globalization has brought an overall lower level of inflation, as argued by many, than
there is less incentive to revise prices often, because the cost of price misalignment is lower.
Endogeneizing the frequency of price adjustment is indeed an active area of research.


8    Appendix
This appendix explains how I compute the elasticity of marginal cost defined in expression
(29) as a function of the traded goods N. This involves computing how aggregate output
Y varies with N, and calibrating the parameter Φ. From expression (28), one derives the
steady state real marginal cost as
                                           1              a
                                     s=       w (xY + Φ) 1−a ,                             (39)
                                          1−a
where w denotes the steady state real wage. Assuming a fairly standard preference spec-
                               1
ification: u (C, h) = log C − 1+ν h1+ν , the real wage is wt = Htν Ct . Aggregate hours Ht
are                           Z N              Z N
                                                                 1
                         Ht =      ht (i) di =     (yt (i) + Φ) 1−a di,
                                 0                 0

where I used the definition of hours in (27). Steady state aggregate hours are then
                                                         1
                                      H = N (xY + Φ) 1−a ,

which, substituted in the expression for the equilibrium real wage, allows to rewrite (39) as
                                       1               ν+a
                                 s=       N ν (xY + Φ) 1−a Y.                              (40)
                                      1−a
From (31) in the text the steady state real marginal cost is s = 1/Nµx. Combining this
expression with (40) we obtain that
                                              ·          ¸ ν+a
                                                           1−a
                                            1−a
                                 xY + Φ =                        .                         (41)
                                          µxY N 1+ν

This expression defines a concave, increasing function Y = Y (N) . For a given calibration
of the parameters a, ν and Φ, any value of N determines a value of Y , which, together with
the value of x, allows to compute a value for the elasticity sy . I set the parameter ν to be
equal to 2, which corresponds to assuming a Frisch elasticity of labor supply of .5, the high

                                                  33
end of the range typically found in micro studies; 1 − a = .68, to roughly match the average
observed labor share for the U.S. To calibrate Φ I first use the entry condition to establish
a zero-profit upper bound to the fixed cost of production:
                                              µ           ¶
                                    u     1         1−a
                                  Φ = 1−a 1 −
                                        N             µ

Then I set Φ suﬃciently close but strictly lower than Φu to allow entry of new firms with
positive profits: Φ = .2. The results are not very sensitive to the range of values chosen
for these parameters, since they have mostly a scale eﬀect on sy , and hence on ζ, without
aﬀecting its curvature.


References
 [1] Bakhshi, H., Khan, H., Burriel-Lombart, P. (forthcoming) The new Keynesian Phillips
     curve under trend-inflation and strategic complementarity, Journal of Macroeconomics.

 [2] Ball, L., 2006. Has Globalization Changed Inflation?, NBER wp 12687.

 [3] Benassy, J-P., 1996. Taste for variety and optimum production patterns in monopolistic
     competition, Economics Letters 52: 41-47.

 [4] Bernanke, B. Globalization and Monetary Policy. Speech at the Fourth Economic Sum-
     mit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, March 2006.

 [5] Bilbiie, F.O., Ghironi, F., Melitz, M.J., 2006a. Endogenous Entry, Product Variety and
     Business Cycle, unpublished.

 [6] Bilbiie, F.O., Ghironi, F., Melitz, M.J., 2006b. Monopoly Power and Endogenous Variety
     in Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium: Distortions and Remedies, unpublished.

 [7] Borio, C., Filardo A., 2007. Globalization and Inflation: New cross-country evidence on
     the global determinants of domestic inflation. BIS, unpublished.

 [8] Broda,C., Weinstein, D., 2006. Globalization and the Gains from Variety, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 121(2)

 [9] Chen, N., Imbs, J., Scott, A., 2006. Competition, Globalization and the Decline of
     Inflation, CEPR discussion paper n. 4695.


                                             34
[10] Cogley, T., Sbordone A., 2005. A search for a structural Phillips curve. Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York Staﬀ Reports No. 203.

[11] Eichenbaum, M., Fisher, J., 2007. Estimating the frequency of price re-optimization in
     Calvo-style models. Journal of Monetary Economics.

[12] Dotsey, M., King, R., 2005. Implications of state-dependent pricing for dynamic macro-
     economic models. Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (1): 213-242.

[13] Dotsey, M., King, R., Wolman A., 1999. State-dependent pricing and the general equilib-
     rium dynamics of money and output. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 655-690.

[14] Gali, J., Monacelli, T., 2005. Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small
     Open Economy. Review of Economic Studies, 72: 707-734.

[15] Gust, C, Leduc S., Vigfusson, R.J., 2006. Trade Integration, Competition and the
     Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through, unpublished.

[16] Ihrig, J., Kamin, S.B., Lindner, D., Marquez, J. Some Simple Tests of the Globalization
     and Inflation Hypothesis. Board of Governors International Finance Discussion Paper
     n. 893, forthcoming.

[17] International Monetary Fund. 2006. “How Has Globalization Aﬀected Inflation?” World
     Economic Outlook, Chapter III, April.

[18] Ireland, P. 2005. Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and Conse-
     quences, unpublished.

[19] Levin, A., Lopez-Salido, D., Yun, T., 2006. Strategic Complementarities and Optimal
     Monetary Policy, unpublished.

[20] Kimball, M. S., 1995. The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model.
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol 27 (4): 1241-1277.

[21] Kohn, D.L., 2006. The Eﬀects of Globalization on Inflation and Their Implications
     for Monetary Policy, Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 51st Economic
     Conference, Chatam, Mass., June 16.

[22] Melitz, M., Ottaviano, G., 2005. Market Size, Trade and Productivity, unpublished.


                                             35
[23] Mishkin, R., 2007. Inflation Dynamics, NBER working paper n. 13147.

[24] Razin,A., Yuen, C. 2002. The “New Keynesian” Phillips Curve: Closed Economy vs.
     Open Economy. Economic Letters, 75: 1-9.

[25] Rogoﬀ, K., 2003. Globalization and Global Disinflation, Jackson Hole Symposium, Au-
     gust 28-30.

[26] Rogoﬀ, K., 2006. Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy, Jackson Hole Symposium,
     August 24-26.

[27] Sbordone, A., 2002. Prices and unit labor costs: a new test of price stickiness, Journal
     of Monetary Economics 49 (2).

[28] Woodford, M. 2003. Interest and Prices. Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
     Princeton University Press.

[29] Yellen, J. Monetary Policy in a Global Environment. Speech at the Conference ‘The
     Euro and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy’ University of California at Santa Cruz,
     May 2006.




                                             36
