                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MEASURING ANCIENT INEQUALITY

                                          Branko Milanovic
                                           Peter H. Lindert
                                        Jeffrey G. Williamson

                                        Working Paper 13550
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13550


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We acknowledge help with the data from Carlos Bazdresch, Luis Bértola, David Clingingsmith, Rafa
Dobado González, Jan Luiten van Zanden, Paolo Malanima, Leandro Prados de la Escosura, Jim Roumasset,
and Jaime Salgado. The paper has also been improved by the comments of Jan de Vries and other
participants at the EHA meetings (Austin, Texas: September 7-9, 2007.) Lindert and Williamson acknowledge
financial support from the National Science Foundation (SES-0433358 and SES-0001362) and, for
Williamson, the Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Branko Milanovic, Peter H. Lindert, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Ancient Inequality
Branko Milanovic, Peter H. Lindert, and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 13550
October 2007
JEL No. D3,N3,O1

                                              ABSTRACT

Is inequality largely the result of the Industrial Revolution? Or, were pre-industrial incomes and life
expectancies as unequal as they are today? For want of sufficient data, these questions have not yet
been answered. This paper infers inequality for 14 ancient, pre-industrial societies using what are known
as social tables, stretching from the Roman Empire 14 AD, to Byzantium in 1000, to England in 1688,
to Nueva España around 1790, to China in 1880 and to British India in 1947. It applies two new concepts
in making those assessments -- what we call the inequality possibility frontier and the inequality extraction
ratio. Rather than simply offering measures of actual inequality, we compare the latter with the maximum
feasible inequality (or surplus) that could have been extracted by the elite. The results, especially when
compared with modern poor countries, give new insights in to the connection between inequality and
economic development in the very long run.


Branko Milanovic                                      Jeffrey G. Williamson
World Bank                                            Department of Economics
1818 H. Street, NW                                    216 Littauer Center
Washington, DC 20433                                  Harvard University
bmilanovic@worldbank.org                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                      and NBER
Peter H. Lindert                                      jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu
                                   1. Good Questions, Bad Data?


           Is inequality largely a byproduct of the Industrial Revolution? Or, were pre-

industrial incomes and life expectancies as unequal as they are today? How does

inequality in today’s least developed, agricultural countries compare with that of ancient

societies dating back to the Roman Empire? Did some parts of the world always have

greater income inequality than others? Was inequality augmented by colonization? These

questions have not been answered yet, for want of sufficient data. Our effort to gather

these data has not been easy, even though we were well warned of the pitfalls facing any

attempt to explore pre-industrial income gaps between rich and poor.

           Simon Kuznets was very skeptical of attempts to compare income inequalities

across countries when he was writing in the 1970s. In his view, the early compilations

assembled by the International Labor Organization and the World Bank referred to

different population concepts, different income concepts, and different parts of the

national economy. To underline his doubts, Kuznets once asked (rhetorically) at a

University of Wisconsin seminar “Do you really think you can get good conclusions from

bad data?” Economists with interest in inequality are indebted to Kuznets for his sage

warning. 1 We are even more indebted to Kuznets for violating his own warning when,

earlier in his career, he famously conjectured about his Kuznets Curve based on a handful

of very doubtful inequality observations. His 1954 Detroit AEA Presidential Address

mused on how inequality might have risen and fallen over two centuries, and theorized

about the sectoral and demographic shifts that might have caused such movements. Over




1
    His Wisconsin seminar paper became a classic (Kuznets 1976).


                                                     3
the last half century, economists have responded enthusiastically to his postulated

Kuznets Curve, searching for better data, better tests, and better models.

       As we have said, Kuznets based his hypothetical Curve on very little evidence.

The only country for which he had good data was the United States after 1913, on which

he was the data pioneer himself. Beyond that, he judged earlier history from tax data

taken from the United Kingdom since 1880 and Prussia since 1854 (1955, p. 4). For these

three advanced countries, incomes had become more unequal between the late nineteenth

century and the 1950s. He presented no data at all regarding earlier trends, yet bravely

conjectured that “income inequality might have been widening from about 1780 to 1850

in England; from about 1840 to 1890, and particularly from 1870 on in the United States;

and from the 1840’s to the 1890’s in Germany” (1955, p. 19). For poor, pre-industrial

countries, he had only household surveys for India 1949-1950, Sri Lanka 1950, and

Puerto Rico 1948 (1955, p. 20). These are all bad data judged by the standards Kuznets

himself applied in the 1970s. They are also bad data judged by the modern World Bank

standards since those three surveys from the mid-20th-century would now be given low

grades on the Deininger-Squire scale assessing the quality of income distribution data

(Deininger and Squire, 1996: pp. 567-71). Meanwhile, world inequalities have also

changed. The convergence of incomes within industrial countries that so impressed

Kuznets has been reversed, and the gaps have widened again.

       We have reason, therefore, to ask anew whether income inequality was any

greater in the distant past than it is today. This paper offers five conjectures about

inequality patterns during and since ancient pre-industrial times:




                                              4
(1) Income inequality must have risen as hunter-gathers slowly evolved into

ancient agricultural settlements with surpluses above subsistence. Inequality rose

further as economic development in these early agricultural settlements gave the

elite the opportunity to harvest those rising surpluses.

(2) Yet, the evidence suggests that the elite failed to exploit their opportunity fully

since income inequality did not rise anywhere near as much as it could have.

While potential inequality rose steeply over the very long run, actual inequality

rose much less.

(3) In ancient pre-industrial times, inequality was driven largely by the gap

between the rural poor at the bottom and the landed elite at the top. The

distribution of income among the elite themselves, and their share in total income,

contributed far less to overall inequality, and never consistently.

(4) Ancient pre-industrial inequality seems to have been lower in East Asia than it

was in the Middle East, Europe, or the world as settled by Europeans, suggesting

long period persistence in region-specific distributions.

(5) While there is little difference in conventionally measured inequality between

modern and ancient pre-industrial societies, there are immense differences in two

other, less conventional, dimensions. First, the share of potential inequality

actually achieved today is far less than was true of pre-industrial times. Second,

life expectancy inequality was far greater two centuries ago than it is today. The

decline in survival inequality in the twentieth century has contributed mightily to

the convergence of lifetime incomes in the world economy.




                                      5
       Our data are subject to all the concerns that bothered Kuznets, other economists,

and the present authors. Our income inequality statistics exploit fragile measures of

annual household income, without adjustment for taxes and transfers, life-cycle patterns,

or household composition. None of our ancient inequality observations would rate a “1”

on the Deininger-Squire scale. Yet, like Gregory King in the 1690s and Simon Kuznets in

the 1950s, we must start somewhere. Section 2 begins by introducing some new concepts

that we use for the analysis -- the inequality possibility frontier and the inequality

extraction ratio, measures of the extent to which the elite extract the maximum feasible

inequality. These new measures open the door to fresh interpretations of inequality in the

very long run. The next section presents our ancient inequality evidence. Section 4

examines income gaps between top and bottom, and the extent to which observed

inequality change over the very long run is driven by those gaps as opposed to the

distribution of income among those at the top or the top’s income share. Section 5

explores how the stylized facts are changed when conventional annual income measures

are replaced by lifetime income measures. We conclude with a research agenda.



                          2. The Inequality Possibility Frontier



       The workhorse for our empirical analysis of ancient inequalities is a concept we

call the inequality possibility frontier. While the idea is simple enough, it has surprisingly

been overlooked by past authors. Suppose that each society, including ancient non-

industrial societies, has to distribute income in such a way as to guarantee subsistence

minimum for its poorer classes. The remainder of the total income is the surplus that is




                                              6
shared among the richer classes. When average incomes are very low, and barely above

the subsistence minimum, the surplus is small. Under those primitive conditions, the

members of the upper class will be few, and the level of inequality will be quite modest.

But as average incomes increase with economic progress, this constraint on inequality is

lifted; the surplus increases, and the maximum possible inequality compatible with that

new, higher, average income is greater. In other words, the maximum attainable

inequality is an increasing function of mean overall income. Whether the elite fully

exploit that maximum, and whether some trickle-down allows the subsistence minimum

to rise, is, of course, another matter entirely.

           To fix ideas intuitively, suppose that a society consists of 100 people, 99 of whom

are lower class. Assume further that the subsistence minimum is 10 units, and total

income 1050 units. The 99 members of the lower class receive 990 units of income and

the only member of the upper class receives 60. The Gini coefficient corresponding to

such a distribution will be only 4.7 percent. If total income improves over time to 2000

units, then the sole upper class member will be able to extract 1010 units, and the

corresponding Gini coefficient will leap to 49.5 percent. If we chart the locus of such

maximum possible Ginis on the vertical axis against mean income levels on the

horizontal axis, we obtain the inequality possibility frontier (IPF). 2 Note also that by

virtue of the fact that any progressive transfer must reduce inequality measured by the

Gini coefficient, we know that a less socially-segmented society must result in a lower

Gini. 3 Thus, IPF is indeed a frontier.


2
    The IPF concept was first introduced in Milanovic (2006).
3
  The reader can verify this by letting one subsistence worker’s income rise above subsistence to 20, and by
letting the richest person’s income be reduced to 1000. The new Gini would be 49.49.


                                                      7
         The inequality possibility frontier can be derived more formally. Define

s=subsistence minimum, μ=overall mean income, N=number of people in a society, and

ε=proportion of people belonging to a (very small) upper class. Then the mean income of

upper class people (yh) will be

                μN − sN (1 − ε ) 1
         yh =                   = [ μ − s (1 − ε )]                                                 (1)
                     εN          ε

where we assume as before that the (1-ε)N people belonging to lower classes receive

subsistence incomes.

         Once we document population proportions and mean incomes for both classes,

and assume further that all members in a given class receive the same income, 4 we can

calculate any standard measure of inequality from the distribution data. Here we shall

derive the IPF using the Gini coefficient.

         The Gini coefficient for n social classes whose mean incomes (y) are ordered in

an ascending fashion (yj>yi), with subscripts denoting social classes, can be written as in

equation (2)

                 n               n    n
                             1
         G = ∑ Gi piπi +         ∑ ∑( y − y ) p p + L
                                            j   i   i   j                                           (2)
                i =1         μ   i   j >i



where πi=proportion of income received by i-th social class, pi=proportion of people

belonging to i-th social class, Gi=Gini inequality among people belonging to i-th social

class, and L=the overlap term which is greater than 0 only if there are members of a

lower social class (i) whose incomes exceed that of some members of a higher social

class (j). The first term on the right-hand side of equation (2) is the within component

(part of total inequality due to inequality within classes), the second term is the between

4
 This is already assumed for the lower classes, but that assumption will be relaxed later for the upper
classes.


                                                        8
component (part of inequality due to differences in mean incomes between classes) and L

is, as already explained, the overlap term.

       Continuing with our illustrative case, where all members of the two social classes

(upper and lower) have the mean incomes of their respective classes, equation (2)

simplifies to

                1
        G=          ( yj − yi ) pi p j                                              (3)
                μ

Substituting (1) for the income of the upper class, and s for the income of lower class, as

well as their population shares, (3) becomes

                1 ⎡1
        G* =      ⎢  (μ − s(1 − ε ) ) − s ⎤⎥ε (1 − ε )                              (4)
                μ ⎣ε                       ⎦

where G* denotes the maximum feasible Gini coefficient for a given level of mean

income (μ). Rearranging terms in (4), we simplify

                1− ε
        G* =             [(μ − s(1 − ε ) ) − sε ] = 1 − ε ( μ − s)                  (5)
                    μ                                μ

Finally, if we now express mean income as a multiple of the subsistence minimum, μ=αs

(where α≥1), then (5) becomes

                1− ε             α −1
        G* =         s (α − 1) =      (1 − ε )                                      (6)
                 αs               α

       Equation (6) represents our final expression for the maximum Gini which will

chart IPF as α is allowed to increase from 1 to higher values. For example, when α=1 (all

individuals receive the same income), (6) reduces to 0 (as we would expect), while when

α=2, the maximum Gini becomes 0.5(1-ε). Let the percentage of population that belongs

to the upper class be one-tenth of 1 percent (ε=0.001). Then for α=2, the maximum Gini




                                                         9
will be 49.95 (expressed as a percentage). 5 The hypothetical IPF curve generated for α

values ranging between 1 and 5 is shown in Figure 1.

                                        [Figure 1 about here]

         The derivative of the maximum Gini with respect to mean income (given a fixed

subsistence) is

         dG * 1 − ε ⎛ α − 1 ⎞ 1 − ε
             =      ⎜1 −    ⎟=      >0                                                           (7)
          dα    α ⎝      α ⎠ α2

In other words, the IPF curve is increasing and concave. Using (7), one can easily

calculate the elasticity of G* with respect to α as 1/(α-1). That is, the percentage change

in the maximum Gini in response to a given percentage change in mean income is less at

higher levels of mean income.

         The inequality possibility frontier depends on two parameters, α and ε. In the

illustrative example used here, we have assumed that ε=0.1 percent. How sensitive is our

Gini maximum to this assumption? Were the membership of the upper class even more

exclusive, consisting of (say) 1/50th of one percent of population, would the maximum

Gini change dramatically? Taking the derivative of G* with respect to ε in equation (6),

we get

         dG * 1 − α
             =      <0                                                                           (8)
          dε    α

Thus, as ε falls (the club gets more exclusive), G* rises. But is the response big? Given

the assumption that mean income is twice subsistence and that the share of the top

income class is ε=0.001, we have seen that the maximum Gini is 49.95. But if we assume

instead that the top income group is cut to one-fifth of its previous size (ε=1/50 of one

5
 As the percentage of people in top income class tends toward 0, G* tends toward (α-1)/α. Thus, for
example, for α=2, G* would be 0.5 (or 50 percent).


                                                   10
percent), the Gini will increase to 49.99, or hardly at all. G* is, of course, bounded by 50.

For historically plausible parameters, the IPF Gini is not very sensitive to changes in the

size of the top income class.

         The assumption that all members of the upper class receive the same income is

convenient for the derivation of the IPF, but would its relaxation make a significant

difference in the calculated G*? To find out, we need to go back to the general Gini

formula given in (2). The within-group Gini for the upper class will no longer be equal to

0. 6 The overall Gini will increase by επhGh where h is the subscript for the upper (high)

class. The income share appropriated by the upper class is

                    1− ε
         π h = 1−
                     α

and the increase in the overall G* will therefore be

                  ⎛ 1− ε ⎞
         ΔG* = Gh ⎜1 −   ⎟ε .                                                                       (9)
                  ⎝    α ⎠

         This increase is unlikely to be substantial. Consider again our illustrative example

where α=2 and ε=0.001. The multiplication of the last two terms in (9) equals 0.0005.

Even if the Gini among upper classes is increased to 50, the increase in the overall Gini

(ΔG*) will be only 0.025 Gini points. We conclude that we can safely ignore the

inequality among the upper class in our derivation of the maximum Gini. Inequality

among the upper class is unlikely to make much difference since the assumed size of the

top income group is so small to start with. Thus, we think within-group inequality can be

safely ignored for IPF estimates since almost the entire inequality is due to the between-


6
  For the lower class, within-group inequality is zero by assumption since all of its members are taken to
live at subsistence.



                                                     11
group Gini component. 7 This inference should not imply a disinterest in actual

distribution at the top; indeed, we will assess the empirical support for it in section 4.



                           3. Social Tables and Inequality Measures



         Income distribution data based on household surveys are, of course, unavailable

for pre-industrial societies. The earliest household surveys of income and expenditures

date from the late eighteenth century in England and the mid nineteenth century in other

countries. We believe that the best estimates of ancient inequalities can be obtained from

what are called social tables (or, as William Petty (1676) called it more than three

centuries ago, political arithmetick) where various social classes are ranked from the

richest to the poorest with their estimated population (family or household head) shares

and average incomes. Social tables are particularly useful in evaluating ancient societies

where classes were clearly delineated and the differences in mean incomes between them

were substantial. Theoretically, if class alone determined one’s income, and if differences

in income within classes were small, then all inequality would be explained by the

between-class inequality. One of the best examples of social tables is offered by Gregory

King’s famous estimates for England and Wales in 1688 (Barnett 1936; Lindert and

Williamson 1982). King’s list of classes summarized in Table 1 is fairly detailed (31

social classes). King (and others listed in Table 1) did not report inequalities within each

social class so we cannot identify within-class inequality for 1688 England and Wales or

for any other of the Table 1 observations. However, within-class inequalities can be

7
  Moreover, in the empirical work below, we shall be using mean incomes of social classes to calculate the
estimates of ancient inequalities, thus making an assumption equivalent to the one made in the derivation of
the inequality possibility frontier.


                                                    12
roughly gauged by calculating two Gini values: a lower bound Gini1 which estimates

only the between-group inequality and assumes within-group or within-social class

inequality to be zero; an upper bound Gini2 which estimates the maximum inequality that

is compatible with the grouped data from social tables assuming that all individuals from

a higher social group are richer than any individual from a lower social group. In other

words, where class mean incomes are such that yj>yi, it also holds true that ykj>ymi for all

members of group j, where k and m are subscripts that denote individuals. Thus, in

addition to the between-class inequality component, Gini2 includes some within-class

inequality (see equation 2), but under the strong assumption that mean incomes for all

members of a given social class are poorer or richer than those respectively above or

below them. This strong assumption is unlikely to be fulfilled in any actual social table,

but it allows us to move beyond an accounting limited only to between-class inequality. 8

In the empirical work that follows, we shall depend almost entirely on social tables or tax

census data obtained from secondary sources, including some estimates of our own.

Detailed explanations for each country’s social table are provided in the Appendix 1.

                                           [Table 1 about here]
         Table 1 lists 14 ancient pre-industrial societies for which we have calculated

inequality statistics. 9 These societies range from early first-century Rome (Augustan

Principate) to India just prior to its independence from Britain. Assuming with Angus


8
  Gini2 is routinely calculated when published income distribution data are only reported as fractiles of the
population and their income shares are the only data given. In that case, of course, any member of a richer
group must have a higher income than any member of a lower group. This is unlikely to be satisfied when
the fractiles are not income classes but rather social classes as is the case here. The Gini2 formula is due to
Kakwani (1980).
9
  Joseph Massie’s famous social tables for 1759 England and Wales are not used here since he did not give
them in a form consistent with our needs. In addition, we excluded 1752 Jerez (Andalusia) since it was
primarily an urban observation. In the near future, we expect to augment the sample by adding 1861 Chile,
1924 Java, late Tokugawa and early Meiji Japan, 1427 Tuscany, 1788 France, Tsarist Russia and others.


                                                      13
Maddison an annual subsistence minimum of $PPP 400 per capita, 10 and with GDI per

capita ranging from about $PPP 500 to $PPP 2,000, then α would range from 1.3 to 5. A

GDI per capita of $PPP 2,000 is a level of income not uncommon today, and it would

place 1732 Holland or 1801-03 England and Wales in the 40th percentile in the world

distribution of countries by per capita income in the year 2000. With the possible

exception of 1732 Holland and 1801-3 England, countries in our sample have average

incomes that are roughly compatible with contemporary pre-industrial societies that have

not yet started significant and sustained industrialization. The urbanization rate in our

sample ranges from less than 10 to 45 percent (the latter, again, for Holland). Population

size varies even more, from an estimated 983,000 in 1561 Holland to 350 million or more

in India 1947 and China 1880. Finally, the number of social classes into which

distributions are divided, and from which we calculate our Ginis, varies considerably.

They number only three for 1784-99 Nueva España (comprising the territories of today’s

Mexico, Central America, Cuba and parts of the western United States) and 1880 China.

In most cases, the number of social classes is in the double digits. The largest number is

in Brazil, where the data from the 1872 Brazilian census include 813 occupations.

           The estimated inequality statistics are reported in Table 2. The calculated Ginis

display a very wide range: from 23.9 in 1880s China to 63.5 in 1784-99 Nueva España.

The latter figure is higher than the inequality reported for some of today’s most unequal

countries like Brazil and South Africa (Table 2). The average Gini (using Gini2 where

available, otherwise Gini1) from these 14 data points is 45.7, while the average Gini from

the nine modern comparators is 43.3. These are only samples, of course, but there is very

little difference on average between them, 45.7 (ancient) - 43.3 (modern) = 2.4. In
10
     All dollar data, unless indicated otherwise, are in 1990 Geary-Khamis PPPs.


                                                      14
contrast, there are very great differences within each sample: 58.8 (Brazil 2002) - 27.3

(Sweden 2000) = 31.5 among the modern comparators, while 63.5 (Nueva España 1784-

99) - 24.5 (China 1880) = 39 among the ancient economies. In short, inequality

differences within the ancient and modern samples is many times greater than the

difference between them.

            The Gini estimates are plotted in Figure 2 against the estimates of GDI per capita

on the horizontal axis. They are also displayed against the inequality possibility frontier

constructed on the assumption of a subsistence minimum of $PPP 400 (solid line). 11 In

most cases, the calculated Ginis lie fairly close to the IPF. In terms of absolute distance,

the countries falling farthest below the IPF curve are the most “modern” pre-industrial

economies: England and Wales in 1688 and 1801-3, and Holland in 1732. The maximum

possible Ginis in these cases range from 72 to 80 while the estimated Ginis are between

45 and 63. 12

                                     [Table 2 and Figure 2 about here]

            If we used Maddison’s subsistence level of $400, then four estimated Ginis would

be significantly greater than the maximum Gini (at their level of income) implied by the

IPF: three of these are based on data from India, and the fourth is from Nueva España. 13


11
   This is based on Maddison’s (1998, p.12) assumed subsistence minimum. Note that a purely
physiological minimum “sufficient to sustain life with moderate activity and zero consumption of other
goods” (Bairoch 1993, p.106) was estimated by Bairoch to be $PPP 80 at 1960 prices. Using the US
consumer price index to convert Bairoch’s estimate to international dollars yields $PPP 355 at 1990 prices.
Maddison’s estimate allows in addition for expenses above the bare physiological minimum. Our minimum
is also consistent with the World Bank absolute poverty line which is 1.08 per day per capita in 1993 $PPP
(Chen and Ravallion 2007, p. 6). This works out to be about $PPP 365 per annum in 1990 international
prices. Another justification for a subsistence minimum between $PPP 350 and 400 was recently provided
by Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005), who, in calculation of multidimensional inequality (income times
life expectancy), use a calibration to transform these two variables into one.
12
     Naples, with very low inequality, also lies deeply inside the Inequality possibility frontier.
13
     The Old Castille is also slightly above the IPF.


                                                         15
Recalling our definition of the IPF, these four cases can only be explained by one or more

of these five possibilities: (i) a portion of the population cannot even afford the

subsistence minimum, (ii) the actual ε is much smaller than the assumed ε=0.001, (iii)

inequality within the rich classes is very large, (iv) our estimate of inequality is too high,

and/or (v) the subsistence minimum is overestimated. We have already analyzed and

dismissed the first three possibilities. The fourth possibility is unlikely: since our

estimates of inequality are based only on a few classes, they are likely to be biased

downwards, not upwards. The last possibility offers the more likely explanation. It could

well be that the subsistence minimum was less than $PPP 400 for some societies. 14 In

particular, this is likely to be the case for subtropical or tropical regions where calorie,

housing and clothing needs are considerably less than those in temperate climates.

Indeed, in his pioneering study of world incomes, Colin Clark (1957, pp. 18-23)

distinguished between international units (the early PPP dollar) and oriental units, the

dollar equivalents which presumably hold for Asia and other poor areas but not for the

rest of the world. If the true subsistence minimum is less than Maddison’s assumed value

of $PPP 400, the IPF would move upwards (see the new IPF shown by a broken line in

Figure 2). Thus, the average income of $PPP 800 would no longer be equivalent to 2

subsistence minima (α=2) but, assuming the subsistence minimum of $PPP 300, the mean

income of $PPP 800 would amount to α=2⅔. If the IPF is drawn under the s=300

assumption, it shifts the frontier upwards enough to encompass at or below it all our

estimated inequalities, with the possible (and modest) exceptions of Moghul India and

Nueva España.

14
  Another possibility is that our Maddison-based estimates of mean incomes for these four cases are too
low. If that was true, all four points should be moved horizontally to the right, thus falling inside the IPF.



                                                      16
        How do country inequality measures compare with the maximum feasible Ginis at

their estimated income levels? Call the ratio between the actual (measured using Gini2)

and the maximum feasible inequality the inequality extraction ratio, indicating how much

of the maximum inequality was actually extracted: the higher the inequality extraction

ratio, the more (relatively) unequal the society. 15 The median ratio in our sample is 94

percent, the mean 102 percent. The countries with the lowest ratios are 1811 Naples and

1688 England and Wales (60-62 percent).

        The inequality possibility frontier allows us to better situate these estimates of

ancient inequality in modern experience. Using the same framework that we have just

applied to ancient societies, the bottom panel of Table 2 provides estimates of inequality

in several contemporary societies. Brazil and South Africa have often been cited as

examples of extremely unequal societies, both driven by long experience with racial

discrimination, tribal power and regional dualism. Indeed, both countries display Ginis

comparable to those of the most unequal pre-industrial societies included in our sample.

But Brazil and South Africa are several times richer than the richest pre-industrial society

in our sample. Consequently, the maximum feasible inequality is much higher than

anything we have seen in our ancient sample. Thus, the elite in both countries have

extracted only about two-thirds of their maximum feasible inequality, and their inequality

extraction ratios are about the same as what we found for the most egalitarian ancient

societies (1688 England and Wales, and 1811 Kingdom of Naples).

        In the year 2000, countries near the world median GDI per capita (about $PPP

3,500) or near the world mean population-weighted GDI per capita (a little over $PPP

15
   The term “relative” is used here, faute de mieux, to denote conventionally calculated inequality in
relation to maximum possible inequality at a given level of income; not whether the measure of inequality
itself is relative or absolute.


                                                   17
6,000), had maximum feasible Ginis of 89 and 93 respectively. The median Gini in

today’s world is about 35, having thus extracted just a bit over a third of feasible

inequality, vastly less than did ancient societies. Using this measure, China’s present

inequality extraction ratio is 47 percent, while that for the United States is 41 percent,

and that for Sweden 28 percent. Only in the extremely poor countries today, with GDI

per capita less than $PPP 600, do actual and maximum feasible Ginis lie close together

(2003 Nigeria, 2004 Congo D. R., and 2000 Tanzania). Thus, while inequality in

historical pre-industrial societies is equivalent to that of today’s pre-industrial societies,

ancient inequality was much greater when expressed in terms of maximum feasible

inequality. Compared with the maximum inequality possible, today’s inequality is much

smaller than that of ancient societies.

        Our new measure of inequality (the inequality extraction ratio) may possibly

reflect more accurately societal inequality, and the role it plays, than does any actual

measure. This new view of inequality may be more pertinent for the analysis of power in

both ancient and modern societies. For example, Tanzania (denoted TZA in Figure 3)

with a relatively low Gini of 35 may be less egalitarian than it appears since measured

inequality lies so close to (or indeed above) its inequality possibility frontier (Table 2 and

Figure 3). On the other hand, with a much higher Gini of almost 48, Malaysia (MYS) has

extracted only about one-half of maximum inequality, and thus is farther away from the

IPF.

                              [Table 2 and Figure 3 about here]

        Another implication of our approach is that it considers jointly inequality and




                                              18
development. As a country becomes richer, its feasible inequality expands. Consequently,

if recorded inequality is stable, the inequality extraction ratio must fall; and even if

recorded inequality goes up, the ratio may not. This can be seen in Figure 4 where we

plot the inequality extraction ratio against GDI per capita. Thus, the social consequences

of increased inequality may not entail as much relative impoverishment, or as much

perceived injustice, as might appear if we looked only at the recorded Gini. This logic is

particularly compelling for poor and middle-income countries where increases in income

push the maximum feasible inequality up relatively sharply, since the IPF curve is

concave. The farther a society rises above the subsistence minimum, the less will

economic development lift its inequality possibility frontier, and thus the inequality

extraction ratio will be driven more and more by the rise in the Gini itself. This is best

illustrated by the United States where the maximum feasible inequality already stands at

a Gini of 98.2. Economic development offers this positive message: the inequality

extraction ratio will fall with GDI per capita growth even if measured inequality remains

constant. However, economic decline offers the opposite message: that is, a decline in

GDI per capita, like that registered by Russia in the early stages of its transition from

Communism, drives the country’s maximum feasible inequality down. If the measured

Gini had been stable, the inequality extraction ratio would have risen. If the measured

Gini rose (as was indeed the case in Russia), the inequality extraction ratio would have

risen even more sharply. Rising inequality may be particularly socially disruptive under

these conditions.

                                   [Figure 4 around here]




                                              19
                4. Looking at Different Parts of the Income Distribution



       How much of the inequality observed in ancient societies can be explained by the

economic distance between the rural landless poor at the bottom and the rich landed elite

at the top? How much can be explained by the distribution among the elite at the top?

How much by the share of that elite in the total?



Life at the Top: Income Distribution among the Elite

       An impressive amount of recent empirical work has suggested that the evolution

of the share of the top 1 percent yields a good approximation to changes in the overall

income distribution in modern industrial societies (Piketty 2003, 2005; Piketty and Saez

2003, 2006; Atkinson and Piketty forthcoming). These studies find that most of the action

takes place at the top of the income distribution pyramid and that differences in the top 1

percent income share account for much of the differences in overall inequality. These top

share studies have also been performed on poor pre-modern India (since 1922: Banerjee

and Piketty 2005), Indonesia (since 1920: Leigh and van der Eng 2006) and Japan (since

1885: Moriguchi and Saez 2005), but it is important to stress that they do not find this

result, but rather assume it. So, are differences in the share of the top 1 percent also a

good proxy for differences in overall income distribution in ancient pre-industrial

societies?

       The share of top 1 percent is estimated here under the assumption that top

incomes follow a Pareto distribution. Our approach is basically the same as that recently

used by Atkinson (forthcoming) and by others writing before him (see the references in




                                              20
Atkinson). The estimation procedure is explained in detail in Appendix 3 where several

caveats are listed since our social tables are different from the usual income distribution

data sources.

       Table 3 reports two key results: the estimated income share of the top 1 percent of

recipients, and the cut-off point, that is the income level (relative to the mean) where the

top one percent of recipients begins. The countries are listed in descending order

according to the top 1 percent share. In sharp contrast with modern studies, the

correlation between the top 1 percent share and the Gini is negative, small (-0.13), and

statistically insignificant. This implies that differences in the top percentile share do not

reflect differences in overall inequality very well, a result consistent with what we report

on the average income to rural wage ratio below. Consider, for example, the Roman and

Byzantine empires. Their estimated Ginis are very similar (39.4 and 41) but the top

percentile share in Byzantium (30.6, the highest in our sample) is almost twice as great as

in Rome (16.1). Consider another top-heavy society like China in 1880 where the top

percentile share of 21.3 is second only to Byzantine 1000, but where the Gini is the

lowest in the sample (24.5).

                               [Table 3 and Figure 5 about here]

       The location of the cut-off point -- where the top percentile begins -- tells us a lot

about the organization of societies. Figure 5 displays the top percentile share and the cut-

off point (relative to mean income). At one end of the spectrum is the Byzantine Empire

with a very rich top one percent, but also with an unusually low cut-off point. This would

seem to indicate the absence of a middle class, that is, of those who would normally fill

in the “space” between the mean income and (say) an income 3 to 4 times greater than




                                              21
the mean. The results for China display the same pattern. 16 On the other hand, the top

percentile was very rich in the Roman Empire (16.1 percent of total income), but the cut-

off point was very high too: 12.4 times the mean. This suggests a Roman income

distribution with a long tail of rich people such that the 2nd-5th percentiles were also quite

rich. This interpretation is supported by Figure 6 which shows the empirical income

distributions and the estimated top percentile share calculated using the Pareto

interpolation (see the dashed line). 17 While the income share after the first, and up to the

4th and the 5th percentile in Byzantium rises very slowly, the line rises more steeply in

Rome, indicating that Romans in these percentiles were relatively wealthy. For

comparative purposes, we also show the English 1801-3 data where the top 1 percent

share, as well as the steepness of the line after the top percentile, are similar to those of

Rome. It seems that the main difference among the very rich in Rome 14 and England

1801-3 was that the people just below the very top of the income pyramid were, relative

to the mean, somewhat less rich in England than in Rome. Finally, notice that in all three

cases, the top 5 percent of income recipients received between 30 and just over 40

percent of total income. In contrast, the top 5 percent received about a quarter of total

income in modern United States and United Kingdom, while the share is 27 percent in

modern Chile and a third in Brazil.

         Table 3 also reports several modern comparators. In all cases but one (Mexico),

their top 1 percent share is less, and for most cases, much less, than that estimated for our



16
  The Chinese result is driven in part by the available data which focus on the income of Chinese gentry,
the top 2 percent of the population.
17
   Note that the high intercept of the line indicates a very high income share of the very top (people even
richer than the top 1 percent).



                                                     22
sample of ancient societies. The low top 1 percent share combined with a low cut-off

point (characteristic of advanced societies) betokens a distribution where, first, the richest

1 percent are not extravagantly rich (in contrast with the American Bill Gates or the

Roman Marcus Licinus Crassus), and where, second, they are not very different from the

rest of the population. Since we have already noted that Gini coefficients between the

ancient and contemporary poor societies are not very different, this difference in the

average top 1 percent shares between the ancient and modern implies that the link

between top income share and overall inequality is not very strong among ancient

societies.



Life at the Bottom: The Unskilled Rural Wage Relative to Average Income

        For eleven of the fourteen countries in our ancient inequality sample, we can

measure the economic distance between the landed elite and landless labor by computing

the ratio of average family income (or average income per recipient, y) to that of landless,

unskilled rural laborer (w). Figure 7 plots the relation between the overall Gini and the

y/w ratio (Appendix 2). 18 The simple bivariate correlation is positive (standard errors in

parentheses):

        Gini =      29.79 + 6.27 y/w, R2 = 0.51                      (n = 11)
                    (4.83) (3.04)

The estimated relationship also implies an elasticity of the Gini with respect to the y/w

ratio of 0.4. For every 10 percent increase in y/w, the Gini rose by 4 percentage points.

Low measured inequalities in China 1880 and Naples 1811 (Ginis of 24.2 and 28.3) were

consistent with small gaps between poor rural laborers and average incomes (y/w of 1.32

18
  This simple y/w index has been shown to be a good proxy for inequality among nineteenth and twentieth
century poor economies (Williamson 1997, 2002).


                                                  23
and 1.49), or with a rural wage two-thirds to three-quarters of average income. High

measured inequalities in Nueva España 1784-99 and England 1801-03 (Ginis of 63.5 and

51.5) were consistent with large gaps between poor rural laborers and average incomes

(y/w of 2.94 and 4.17), or with a rural wage only one-quarter to one-third of average

income. There appears to be only one true outlier to the otherwise tight relationship in

Figure 7, British India in 1947. Still, the overall relationship does suggest that the gap

between poor landless labor and the landed elite, whose incomes raise the average

considerably, drives the Gini, not conditions at the top.



                   5. Unequal Life Expectancy and Lifetime Incomes



       Thus far, this paper has followed convention by considering inequality of annual

income. Yet, differences in the ability to consume should be gauged by lifetime income,

not just annual income. The fact that some die much younger than others matters in

gauging inequality, and it matters even more if morbidity and mortality are correlated, so

that short lives are also low quality lives. How are comparisons between ancient and

modern pre-industrial societies affected when we adjust for inequality in life expectancy?

       We are interested in two concepts of life expectancy inequality: inequality in

group survival rates, and inequality in individual survival rates. The first speaks to

debates over the injustice of the rich living longer, while the second speaks to debates

about the distribution of individual income and consumption. We think it is useful to

measure historical movements in both kinds of life expectancy inequality, even without

trying to tote up lifetime consumption levels.




                                             24
         Public interest in group survival rates tends to focus on differences between

nations, social classes, and genders. 19 The difference in average survival between nations

first rose and then fell over the last five hundred years. Before the sixteenth century, the

average life span from birth was in the 21-29 year range the world over. Subsequently,

western Europeans began to undergo an increase in life spans beyond 30 years while the

rest of the world continued to die younger. This gap between longer-living rich countries

and others continued to widen until the early twentieth century, thus causing world

lifetime income inequality to rise more steeply than world annual income inequality.

Over the past century, the life span gap between poor and rich countries has narrowed

dramatically. Despite current concern about infectious diseases in poor countries, the fact

is that spectacular progress has already been made there.

         The resulting transformation in international inequalities is illustrated by Figure 8,

which plots average life expectancies at birth (e0) against GDP per capita. The two e0

curves with black markers trace out long histories for England and Wales (later, the

United Kingdom) since the late sixteenth century and France since the early eighteenth

century. British and French citizens, and those in the rest of Western Europe, were, of

course, much richer and lived much longer than their distant ancestors. The same has also

been true of the Japanese since the early nineteenth century, even though they have

always lived longer than Western Europeans at similar incomes. The distinction between




19
   On the gender front, we will only note that since about 1800, females have outlived males throughout the
world. Before then, the gender life balance could tip either way. Males outlived females in some, but not
all, of the pre-1800 averages for China, Japan, England, and Scandinavia. The global shift toward relatively
longer-lived females is probably explained largely by the decline in female infanticide and in maternal
deaths during childbirth.



                                                    25
shifts in the e0 curve in Figure 8 and movements along it is important. 20 It is far harder to

argue that shifts in the curve are driven by improvements in living standards than for

movements along it (Preston 1980; Williamson 1984). While we know a great deal about

the connections between individual living standards and longevity along the e0 curve

(Fogel 2004), we know far less about the public health forces accounting for the shift in

the e0 curve.

          The most dramatic historical shift in international survival rates, however, has

taken place in today’s developing countries, seven of which are portrayed in Figure 8.

People in today’s poor countries live much longer than did Western Europeans before the

twentieth century, at comparable income levels. For example, at the end of the twentieth

century China had an average life expectancy of almost 70 years, compared with 47 years

for the French in 1900 who received comparable real incomes. Similarly, Africans south

of the Sahara survive a bit longer today (e0 = 47 years, even including the impact of

AIDS), than did the English in the early nineteenth century when they had the world’s

longest life spans (e0 = 45 years). The global spread of better health care and public

victories over many pathogens and parasites in the twentieth century created a dramatic

life expectancy convergence between nations. Thus, we now live in a world where

nations no longer differ anywhere near as much in life expectancies than they did a

century ago. What separates nations today is the quality of life, not the length of life

(Clark 2007, p. 108). What separated them a century ago was both.

          Group survival rates were always correlated with average incomes in the past. We

have not yet found any century in which the poor out-lived the rich (apart from episodes


20
     The upward shift over time in the e0 curve was emphasized by Samuel Preston (1980).



                                                    26
of civil violence and war), while there are plenty of historical examples where the rich

out-lived the poor. Thus, in Roman Italy two millennia ago, adult mortality was worse for

former slaves than for magistrates. 21 Several estimates from early modern Europe show

that aristocrats outlived commoners, especially female aristocrats. The same correlation

with socio-economic status persists today, both for infant and adult mortality, even in

countries with comprehensive national health services. While survival rate gaps between

different socio-economic groups may have been eternal, we lack enough evidence to say

exactly when they widened or narrowed.

           Survival inequalities across individuals deserve at least as much attention as

survival inequalities across classes or nations. History offers two clear insights on the

issue. First, inequality among individual lifetime incomes has always been greater than

inequality among individual annual incomes. Second, the historical trend in the inequality

of lifetime incomes must have been sharply downward to the extent that those five

hundred years of improvement in life spans illustrated in Figure 8 were driven in large

part by improvements in infant and child survival. For example, infant mortality in Africa

south of the Sahara today is only 10 percent, while it was over 12 percent in the United

States in 1900 and 17 percent in England in the late eighteenth century.

           People today in modern pre-industrial societies are endowed with much more

equal life span (and morbidity) chances than were their distant ancestors in ancient pre-

industrial societies. It follows that lifetime-adjusted inequality is a lot less in today’s pre-

industrial societies.




21
     This point has been previously noted by Jackson (1994) and Hoffman et al. (2005).



                                                     27
       The trend toward more equal survival rates has an interesting East Asian twist.

Ancient China and Japan both had higher infant mortality than did the rest of the world,

but children also had better survival chances after infancy, so that until the late eighteenth

century overall life expectancy at birth was as good in East Asia as in Europe and even

England. This demographic fact has had two important implications for the long-run

evolution of East Asian inequality. First, those suggestions of ancient East Asian

egalitarianism in Table 2 and Figure 2 were offset by highly unequal survival chances for

East Asian newborns. Second, the twentieth century convergence in life expectancies was

more dramatic for East Asia than it was for the rest of the Third World. For example, the

share of Japanese infants dying in the first year of life dropped from 25 percent in 1776-

1815, to 5 percent in the early 1950s, and to only 0.4 percent today. Ancient East Asia

has moved from being relatively equal in income, but relatively unequal in life span, to

being relatively equal in both today.



               6. New Inequality Insights and an Agenda for the Future



       We conclude by stressing three key aspects of inequality that ancient pre-

industrial experience has uncovered. First, as measured by the Gini coefficient, income

inequality in still-pre-industrial countries today is not very different from inequality in

distant pre-industrial times. In addition, the variance between countries then and now is

much greater than the variance in average inequality between then and now. Second, the

extraction ratio – how much of potential inequality was converted into actual inequality –

was significantly bigger then than now. We are persuaded that much more can be learned




                                              28
about inequality in the past and the present by looking at the extraction ratio rather than

just at actual inequality. The ratio shows how powerful and extortionary are the elite, its

institutions, and its policies. For example, in a regression using ancient inequality

evidence (not included in the text) a dummy variable for colony has a strong positive

impact on the extraction ratio. Furthermore, while a relation between conflict and actual

inequality has proven hard to document on modern evidence (see Collier and Hoeffler,

2004), we conjecture that the introduction of the inequality possibility frontier and the

extraction ratio might shed brighter light on that hypothesis. Third, differences in lifetime

survival rates between rich and poor countries and between rich and poor individuals

within countries were much higher two centuries ago than they are now, and this served

to make for greater lifetime inequality in the past. Fourth, unlike the findings regarding

the evolution of the 20th century inequality in advanced economies, our ancient inequality

sample does not reveal any significant correlation between the income share of the top 1

percent and overall inequality. Thus, an equally high Gini could and was achieved in two

ways: in some societies, a high income share of the elite coexisted with a yawning gap

between it and the rest of society, and small differences in income amongst the non-elite;

in other societies, the very top of income pyramid was followed by only slightly less rich

people and then further down toward something that resembled a middle class. Why were

some ancient societies more hierarchal while others were more socially diverse? While

this paper has focused on inequality description in ancient societies, it has not explored

the social structure underpinning inequality or its determinants.

       We hope to fill these social structure blanks in a sequel to this paper. In addition,

the sequel, with an augmented ancient inequality sample, will explore determinants of




                                             29
actual inequality and the extraction ratio. Three forces are likely to explain most of the

variance in an augmented ancient inequality sample. First, initial resource endowments

should matter, especially for ancient agricultural settlements. Different endowments

imply different food crops, and different food crops imply different technologies. Some

agrarian technologies imply constant returns (rice) and some increasing returns (wheat).

The difference may matter for the inequality configuration of ancient inequalities.

Second, whether the country is the colonizer or the colonized should matter. Throughout

history, colonial powers have ruled by rewarding indigenous elites, not by mollifying the

masses. Third, a mixture of political and market forces must have been at work,

especially the former. More political power and patronage implies more inequality. The

frequent claim that inequality promotes accumulation and growth does not get much

support from history. On the contrary, great economic inequality has always been

correlated with extreme concentration of political power, and that power has always been

used to widen the income gaps through rent-seeking and rent-keeping, forces that

demonstrably retard economic growth. 22




22
  For a theoretical restatement and fresh international evidence on the growth costs of unequal political
power, see Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Shleifer (2003).


                                                     30
                                       References



Atkinson, Anthony B. (forthcoming), “Measuring top incomes: Methodological issues,”

       in A. Atkinson and T. Piketty (eds.), Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century,

       Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Thomas Piketty (eds.) (forthcoming), Top Incomes over the

       Twentieth Century, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bairoch, Paul (1993), Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes, New York:

       Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Thomas Piketty (2005), “Top Indian Incomes, 1922-2000,”

       World Bank Economic Review 19 (1), pp. 1-20.

Barnett, G. E. (1936), Two Tracts by Gregory King, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University

       Press.

Becker, Gary, T. Philipson and R. Soares (2006), “The quantity and quality of life and

       the evolution of world inequality,” American Economic Review 95 (1): 277-91.

Chen, Shaohua and Martin Ravallion (2007), “Absolute poverty measures for the

       developing world, 1981-2005,” World Bank Research Development Group,

       Washington, D. C.

Clark, Colin (1957), The Conditions of Economic Progress, London: Macmillan and Co.

Clark, Gregory (2007), Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World.

       Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Deininger, Klaus and Lynn Squire (1996), “A New Data Set Measuring Income

       Inequality,” World Bank Economic Review vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 565-91.




                                           31
Fogel, Robert W. (2004), The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100:

       Europe, America, and the Third World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Glaeser, Edward, José Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer (2003), “The Injustice of

       Inequality,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50: 139-65.

Hoffman, Philip T., David Jacks, Patricia Levin, and Peter H. Lindert (2005), “Sketching the

       Rise of Real Inequality in Early Modern Europe.” In Robert C. Allen, Tommy

       Bengtsson, and Martin Dribe (eds.), Living Standards in the Past: New Perspectives

       on Well-Being in Asia and Europe, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 131-72.

Jackson, R.V. (1994), “Inequality of Incomes and Lifespans in England since 1688,”

       Economic History Review 47 (August): 508-24.

Kakwani, Nanak (1980), Income, inequality and poverty: methods of estimations and

       policy applications, Oxford and Washington, D.C., Oxford University Press and

       World Bank.

Kuznets, Simon (1955), “Economic Growth and Income Inequality,” American Economic

       Review 45 (March): 1-28.

Kuznets, Simon (1976), “Demographic Aspects of the Size Distribution of Income: An

       Exploratory Essay,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 25 (October):

       1-94.

Leigh, Andrew and Pierre van der Eng (2006), “Top Incomes in Indonesia, 1920-2004,”

       unpublished, Australian National University (February 11).

Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1982), “Revising England's Social Tables,

       1688-1812,” Explorations in Economic History 19 (October): 385-408.

Maddison, Angus (1998), Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Paris: OECD




                                           32
       Development Centre.

Maddison, Angus (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris: OECD

       Development Centre.

Maddison, Angus (2004), World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2001 AD,

       available at http://www.ggdc.net/Maddison/content.shtml.

Milanovic, Branko (2006), “An estimate of average income and inequality in Byzantium

       around year 1000,” Review of Income and Wealth 52 (3): 449-70.

Moriguchi, Chiaki and Emmanuel Saez (2005), “The Evolution of Income Concentration in

       Japan, 1885-2002: Evidence from Income Tax Statistics,” unpublished, University

       of California, Berkeley.

Petty, William (1690; written circa 1676), Political arithmetick, or, A discourse

       concerning the extent and value of lands, people, buildings … London: Clavel

       and Mortlock.

Piketty, Thomas (2003), “Income Inequality in France, 1901-1998,” Journal of Political

       Economy 111 (5), pp. 1004-42.

Piketty, Thomas (2005), “Top income shares in the long run: an overview,” Journal of

       European Economic Association, April-May 2005, pp. 1-11.

Piketty, Thomas and Emanuel Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States,

       1913-1998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), pp. 1-39.

Piketty, Thomas and Emanuel Saez (2006), “The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical

       and International Perspective,” NBER Working Paper 11955, National Bureau of

       Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.




                                            33
Preston, Samuel H. (1980), “Causes and Consequences of Mortality Decline in Less

       Developed Countries during the Twentieth Century.” In Richard A. Easterlin

       (ed.), Population and Economic Change in Developing Countries, Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. (1984), “British Mortality and the Value of Life: 1781-1931,”

       Population Studies 38 (March): 157-72.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. (1997), “Globalization and Inequality, Past and Present,” World

       Bank Research Observer 12 (August): 117-35.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2002), “Land, Labor and Globalization in the Third World 1870-

       1940,” Journal of Economic History 62 (March): 55-85.




                                           34
Appendix 1: Data Sources

                                    Bihar (India) 1807

Expenditure class      Percentage of     Average monthly              Average monthly
                       population        expenditure per capita (in   expenditure relative to
                                         rupees)                      mean
          1                 15.24                  0.68                         0.43
          2                 4.85                   0.83                         0.53
          3                 16.18                  0.88                         0.56
          4                 6.68                   0.97                         0.61
          5                 8.52                   1.03                         0.65
          6                 10.39                  1.42                         0.90
          7                 8.91                   1.56                         0.99
          8                 11.21                  2.06                         1.30
          9                 9.89                   2.64                         1.67
         10                 8.13                   4.45                        2.82
        Total                100                   1.58                          1

Income distribution data: A household census survey was made by a British official
(Hamilton) of Patna city and 16 rural districts in the region surrounding it, all of which
we take to be representative of Bihar. He recorded family size and monthly family
expenditures in rupees. The data are summarized by approximate deciles (Martin 1838).

Population and area: Population of 3,362,280 and area in km2 from Martin (1838).

Urbanization rate: We use the rate for India (Jean-François Bergier and Jon Mathieu
2002: Table 1, 9-12% for 1800, based on Bairoch and Chandler).

Mean income in $PPP: 1820 GDP per capita in 1990 international dollars (Maddison
2001: 264).

REFERENCES

Bergier, Jean-François and Jon Mathieu (2002), “The Mountains in Urban Development:
       Introduction,” paper presented at the IEHA XIII World Congress, Buenos Aires,
       July 22-26, 2002.
Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspectives, Paris: OECD
       Development Centre.
Martin, Robert M. (1838), The history, antiquities, topography, and statistics of eastern
       India. Surveyed under the orders of the supreme government, and collated from
       the original documents at the E.I. house, London: W. H. Allen and Co.




                                            35
                            Brazil 1872


 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
           72                   223                      0.23
          100                1065836                     0.32
          108                  1586                      0.35
          109                    15                      0.35
          118                 64263                      0.38
          120                 62662                      0.38
          126                   140                      0.40
          132                    15                      0.42
          144                 14261                      0.46
          155                 45229                      0.50
          157                  6736                      0.50
          161                   239                      0.52
          163                   426                      0.52
          175                 677987                     0.56
          177                 411664                     0.57
          178                    86                      0.57
          179                   874                      0.57
          180                 292066                     0.58
          191                   150                      0.61
          199                   261                      0.64
          206                  1466                      0.66
          207                 16160                      0.66
          208                    22                      0.67
          213                   109                      0.68
          214                     7                      0.69
          215                 57619                      0.69
          218                    60                      0.70
          229                   142                      0.73
          232                 272965                     0.74
          233                    82                      0.75
          236                 67294                      0.76
          237                   182                      0.76
          240                  6717                      0.77
          245                  2872                      0.79
          247                   962                      0.79
          250                 18778                      0.80
          251                    81                      0.81
          255                    31                      0.82
          262                 120545                     0.84
          266                 623196                     0.85
          269                  6088                      0.86
          270                 64280                      0.87
          271                  1925                      0.87
          272                     2                      0.87
          282                 24835                      0.90



                                 36
 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
          283                   777                      0.91
          286                  1305                      0.92
          287                   321                      0.92
          288                    35                      0.92
          293                    69                      0.94
          295                 10478                      0.95
          297                    31                      0.95
          300                460770                      0.96
          306                   104                      0.98
          309                  9423                      0.99
          310                 54157                      0.99
          312                   161                      1.00
          319                  2156                      1.02
          323                  1671                      1.04
          327                  1254                      1.05
          340                    31                      1.09
          343                   848                      1.10
          348                399884                      1.12
          350                  3236                      1.12
          354                179708                      1.14
          356                  1499                      1.14
          359                    86                      1.15
          360                 41102                      1.15
          366                     1                      1.17
          370                  2410                      1.19
          377                  1051                      1.21
          379                   161                      1.22
          383                    31                      1.23
          387                  7699                      1.24
          391                     1                      1.25
          394                     8                      1.26
          397                   620                      1.27
          406                  4818                      1.30
          408                   440                      1.31
          413                    42                      1.32
          424                   217                      1.36
          425                  5494                      1.36
          431                  7091                      1.38
          432                   706                      1.39
          436                    15                      1.40
          439                   856                      1.41
          443                 33797                      1.42
          445                    11                      1.43
          450                 10174                      1.44
          459                  1181                      1.47
          460                    69                      1.48
          464                 81407                      1.49
          468                   161                      1.50
          472                  9195                      1.51


                                 37
 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
          475                   468                      1.52
          476                     3                      1.53
          479                     8                      1.54
          480                226013                      1.54
          490                  3655                      1.57
          502                    17                      1.61
          503                    34                      1.61
          531                 93744                      1.70
          533                  2078                      1.71
          534                   180                      1.71
          538                   597                      1.73
          540                  1782                      1.73
          544                    80                      1.74
          545                   161                      1.75
          546                   723                      1.75
          549                    65                      1.76
          550                   941                      1.76
          552                     6                      1.77
          554                   181                      1.78
          565                   597                      1.81
          572                    75                      1.83
          574                    34                      1.84
          576                   104                      1.85
          580                 19272                      1.86
          585                    69                      1.88
          586                   155                      1.88
          587                     3                      1.88
          591                 18874                      1.90
          593                     7                      1.90
          594                   659                      1.91
          595                  4322                      1.91
          600                  9123                      1.92
          612                  3003                      1.96
          613                    35                      1.97
          619                  3849                      1.99
          620                   498                      1.99
          623                   303                      2.00
          628                   103                      2.01
          637                   155                      2.04
          641                    16                      2.06
          646                   239                      2.07
          648                  3544                      2.08
          650                   546                      2.08
          654                   261                      2.10
          658                   787                      2.11
          659                     5                      2.11
          663                   161                      2.13
          664                  1214                      2.13
          668                    75                      2.14


                                 38
 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
          679                    31                      2.18
          680                     6                      2.18
          689                   802                      2.21
          696                 28907                      2.23
          701                    69                      2.25
          708                 37669                      2.27
          709                  1878                      2.27
          712                  3243                      2.28
          713                   798                      2.29
          718                   706                      2.30
          719                   119                      2.31
          720                 40182                      2.31
          722                     1                      2.32
          732                    46                      2.35
          750                   113                      2.41
          753                   550                      2.42
          763                    75                      2.45
          764                    62                      2.45
          768                    36                      2.46
          771                   981                      2.47
          774                  1925                      2.48
          778                    61                      2.50
          788                    31                      2.53
          793                  1641                      2.54
          797                  1183                      2.56
          815                  1287                      2.61
          816                     2                      2.62
          817                  1305                      2.62
          819                  8138                      2.63
          820                  4024                      2.63
          828                  1501                      2.66
          829                     1                      2.66
          831                    26                      2.67
          832                  2291                      2.67
          840                  1419                      2.69
          849                   248                      2.72
          850                   354                      2.73
          859                    75                      2.76
          861                   239                      2.76
          864                  1355                      2.77
          878                   787                      2.82
          880                  1555                      2.82
          885                 41939                      2.84
          886                  3698                      2.84
          890                  4593                      2.85
          899                  3272                      2.88
          900                    70                      2.89
          919                   394                      2.95
          928                  9636                      2.98


                                 39
 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
          929                   962                      2.98
          934                   991                      3.00
          941                   884                      3.02
          945                   151                      3.03
          950                   432                      3.05
          954                   528                      3.06
          955                  2532                      3.06
          956                  1006                      3.07
          958                     4                      3.07
          984                   335                      3.16
          985                     8                      3.16
          992                   556                      3.18
         1019                  1809                      3.27
         1026                   155                      3.29
         1034                  1139                      3.32
         1050                   787                      3.37
         1056                   155                      3.39
         1062                 14715                      3.41
         1063                   156                      3.41
         1068                  1261                      3.43
         1076                   955                      3.45
         1077                    17                      3.45
         1080                   737                      3.46
         1082                   731                      3.47
         1088                     1                      3.49
         1089                    30                      3.49
         1092                  2713                      3.50
         1093                   671                      3.51
         1097                   394                      3.52
         1098                     5                      3.52
         1151                   502                      3.69
         1153                   139                      3.70
         1160                  4818                      3.72
         1166                   139                      3.74
         1173                   311                      3.76
         1181                  8972                      3.79
         1182                    12                      3.79
         1187                    65                      3.81
         1190                 11526                      3.82
         1200                   103                      3.85
         1210                   692                      3.88
         1223                   643                      3.92
         1242                   214                      3.98
         1245                    90                      3.99
         1246                   155                      4.00
         1273                    31                      4.08
         1296                  1969                      4.16
         1299                    36                      4.17
         1320                   437                      4.23


                                 40
 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
         1327                   543                      4.26
         1328                  2166                      4.26
         1349                   741                      4.33
         1358                    31                      4.36
         1365                   362                      4.38
         1386                   181                      4.45
         1392                  2409                      4.46
         1417                  1731                      4.55
         1424                  1171                      4.57
         1425                    26                      4.57
         1431                   377                      4.59
         1436                   388                      4.61
         1441                   104                      4.62
         1464                    22                      4.70
         1466                   155                      4.70
         1477                   569                      4.74
         1487                  3872                      4.77
         1512                   813                      4.85
         1526                    75                      4.89
         1558                   322                      5.00
         1560                   254                      5.00
         1576                     4                      5.06
         1587                    13                      5.09
         1594                  1204                      5.11
         1600                  1984                      5.13
         1614                   119                      5.18
         1631                   214                      5.23
         1634                   522                      5.24
         1638                  3436                      5.25
         1639                   335                      5.26
         1661                    13                      5.33
         1662                    26                      5.33
         1717                   151                      5.51
         1728                  1575                      5.54
         1729                    69                      5.55
         1759                   155                      5.64
         1771                 17197                      5.68
         1772                   949                      5.68
         1780                   450                      5.71
         1784                   630                      5.72
         1795                    17                      5.76
         1799                   716                      5.77
         1800                   451                      5.77
         1830                     5                      5.87
         1868                   450                      5.99
         1890                    42                      6.06
         1899                    26                      6.09
         1908                   604                      6.12
         1948                   502                      6.25


                                 41
 Occupational income     Number of people in   Average annual income
(in milreis per annum)      occupation            relative to mean
         1953                    13                      6.26
         1970                     4                      6.32
         1984                   246                      6.36
         2000                 14255                      6.42
         2039                   164                      6.54
         2052                   155                      6.58
         2077                    78                      6.66
         2125                   300                      6.82
         2136                   180                      6.85
         2153                   716                      6.91
         2154                    51                      6.91
         2160                  1181                      6.93
         2184                   904                      7.01
         2186                  1341                      7.01
         2279                   123                      7.31
         2290                   226                      7.35
         2362                    73                      7.58
         2363                   285                      7.58
         2374                   103                      7.61
         2379                    90                      7.63
         2400                  1190                      7.70
         2457                   181                      7.88
         2491                    90                      7.99
         2492                   180                      7.99
         2500                   132                      8.02
         2592                   787                      8.31
         2600                    66                      8.34
         2656                  1852                      8.52
         2691                   119                      8.63
         2732                   335                      8.76
         2833                   100                      9.09
         2848                   180                      9.14
         2862                    75                      9.18
         2882                    35                      9.24
         2928                    90                      9.39
         2953                   285                      9.47
         2974                  1711                      9.54
         2975                    26                      9.54
         3000                  5620                      9.62
         3053                    75                      9.79
         3113                   540                      9.99
         3200                    66                     10.26
         3229                   358                     10.36
         3275                   362                     10.50
         3519                   155                     11.29
         3541                  1371                     11.36
         3543                    36                     11.36
         3560                   720                     11.42
         3561                    13                     11.42


                                 42
    Occupational income          Number of people in        Average annual income
   (in milreis per annum)           occupation                 relative to mean
            3600                         66                          11.55
            3906                         13                          12.53
            3967                         78                          12.72
            4000                       7703                          12.83
            4320                        394                          13.86
            4461                        180                          14.31
            4675                        161                          15.00
            4748                         78                          15.23
            4799                        448                          15.39
            4800                        464                          15.40
            5000                       1520                          16.04
            5312                        694                          17.04
            5339                         90                          17.13
            5459                        181                          17.51
            5856                         90                          18.78
            5859                         13                          18.79
            5936                         13                          19.04
            5948                        540                          19.08
            6000                       3774                          19.25
            7119                        540                          22.83
            7123                         39                          22.85
            8000                        934                          25.66
            8784                         90                          28.18
            8899                         90                          28.54
            9598                        138                          30.79
           10000                        244                          32.08
           10679                        270                          34.25
           12000                        403                          38.49
           14000                         75                          44.91
           14396                         64                          46.18
           19195                         34                          61.57
           20000                        132                          64.15
           23994                         22                          76.96
           28793                          3                          92.36
           30000                         66                          96.23
           33592                         35                         107.75
            Total                       312                            1


Income distribution data. The occupational data come from the Brazilian 1872 Census.
The annual incomes by occupation were estimated by the team of economic historians
Bértola, Castelnovo, Reis and Willebald (2006). The original data include 813
professional groups. For simplicity they are consolidated in the table shown above:
different professions with the same estimated income are summed up.

Population and area. Current land area of Brazil. Population from Maddison (2004).




                                         43
Urbanization rate. The 1872 urbanization rate (share of cities 50,000 or greater) is 5.1
precent, interpolated from Banks (1976).

Mean income in $PPP. From Maddison (2004).


REFERENCES

Banks, Arthur S. (1976), Cross-National Time Series,1815-1973, [Computer File] ICPSR
       ed. (Ann Arbor, Michigan: Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
       Research.

Bértola, Luis, C. Castelnovo, E. Reis and H. Willebald (2006), "Income distribution in
       Brazil, 1839-1939" Paper presented at Session 116 A Global History of Income
       Distribution in the Long 20th Century, XIV International Economic History
       Congress, Helsinki-Finland 21-25 August.

Maddison, Angus (2004), World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2001 AD,
      available at http://www.ggdc.net/Maddison/content.shtml.




                                            44
                                            Byzantium 1000

     Social group                             Percentage of           Per capita         Income in
                                               population            income (in         terms of per
                                                                    nomisma per         capita mean
                                                                       annum)
     Tenants                                        37                   3.5                0.56
     Farmers                                        52                   3.8                0.61
     Large landowners                                1                    25                 4.02
      Rural                                        90                   3.91                0.63
     Urban ‘marginals’                               2                   3.5                 0.56
     Workers                                         3                    6                 0.97
     Traders, skilled craftsmen                    3.5                    18                 2.90
     Army                                           1                    6.5                1.05
      Urban excluding nobility                     9.5                   9.9                1.60
     Nobility                                      0.5                   350                56.31
     Total                                         100                  6.22                  1
   Notes: Nobility includes civil and military nobility. The average household size estimated at 4.3 (see
   Lefort, 2002).

Income distribution data. Taken directly from Milanovic (2006: Table 5, p. 465). Rural
incomes are based mostly on Lefort (2002) who quantifies population shares and incomes
of several classes; rural population is divided into tenants (pariokoi); farmers that include
both landowning peasants and (not very numerous) hired farm workers and slaves working
on large estates; and large landowners. Urban population is, following Morrisson and
Cheney (2002), divided into four classes plus nobility (both civilian and military).
Additional explanations given in Milanovic (2006: pp. 461-8).

Other incomes and wages (for comparison and illustrative purposes):
                                      Amount in                Amounts in terms         Source
                                      nomisma                  of the estimated
                                                               average annual
                                                               income
Heads of themes (administative        360 to 720               58 to 115                Ostrogorsky (1969,
units) annual wage (around year                                                         p. 246)
900)
Heads of the three most               2880                     ~460                     Ostrogorsky (1969,
important themes (around year                                                           p. 246)
900)
Military commanders                   144                      23                       Morrisson and
                                                                                        Cheynet (2002, p.
                                                                                        861)

Population and area. For population, see Milanovic (2006, p. 461). It is a compromise
estimate (15 million) based on Treadgold (2001), Andreades (1924) and Harl (1996).
Area: Treadgold (2001, p. 5).



                                                   45
Urbanization rate. See Milanovic (2006, p. 461), based on Bairoch’s (1985) cut-off
point of 5,000 inhabitants.

Mean income in $PPP. Average income (6.22 nomisma) divided by the estimated
subsustence minimum (3.5 nomisma), and the latter priced at $PPP 400 at 1990
international prices. This gives (6.22/3.5*400) mean income of $710 in $PPPs. From
Milanovic (2006, pp. 456-7).

REFERENCES

Andreades (1924), “De la monnaie et de la puissance d’achat des metaux precieux dans
        l’Empire byzantin”, Ext. B.N., pp. 75-115.
Bairoch, Paul (1985), De Jėricho à Mexico: villes et economies dans l’histoire, Paris:
        Arcades, Gallimard.
Harl, Kenneth H. (1996), Coinage in the Roman Economy, 300 B.C. to A.D. 700,
        Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lefort, Jacques (2002), “The rural economy, seventh –twelfth Century” in Angeliki Laiou
        (ed.), The Economic History of Byzantium: from the Seventh through the Fifteenth
        Century, Washington DC: Dumbarton Oaks, pp. 231-310.
Lefort, Jacques (2002), “The rural economy, seventh –twelfth Century” in Angeliki Laiou
        (ed.), The Economic History of Byzantium: from the Seventh through the Fifteenth
        Century, Washington DC: Dumbarton Oaks, pp. 231-310.
Milanovic, Branko (2006), “An estimate of average income and inequality in Byzantium
        around year 1000,” Review of Income and Wealth 52 (3).
Morrisson, Cecile and Jean-Claude Cheynet (2002), “Prices and wages in the Byzantine
        world” in Angeliki Laiou (ed.), The Economic History of Byzantium: from the
        Seventh through the Fifteenth Century, Washington DC: Dumbarton Oaks, pp.
        807-870.
Ostrogorsky, Georgije (1969), Istorija Vizantije, Beograd: Prosveta. English translation
        History of the Byzantine State, New Brunswick, N.J.:Rutgers Byzantine Series,
        1999 [1969].
Treadgold, Warren T. (2001), A Concise History of Byzantium, Palgrave.




                                          46
                                       China 1880


Social group    Population   Percentage      Total       Income as a     Income per       Income in
                 (in 000)        of         income      share of total      capita       terms of per
                             population    (in taels)    income (%)      (in taels per   capita mean
                                                                           annum)
Commoners        370000         98.0       1821047          74.4              4.92          0.76
Upper gentry      1050           0.3        380120          15.5             362.0          55.7
Lower gentry      6450           1.7        247605          10.1              38.4          5.91
 Gentry           7500          2.0         627725          25.6              83.7          12.9
Total            377500         100        2448772          100                6.5            1

Income distribution data. The calculations are based on Supplement 2 (“The gentry's
share in the national product”) from The Income of the Chinese Gentry, by Chung-li
Chang, University of Washington Press, Seattle 1962, pp. 326-333.

        Gentry per capita incomes. The supplement provides a careful breakdown of
gentry incomes by different sources, division of these income sources between upper and
lower gentry, and the population shares of both types of gentry (see the table below
which is derived from Chang’s Supplement 2). The rest of the book gives the data on
Chinese GDP and taxes from which one can calculate total household disposable income,
and when combining this information with the estimates of gentry total income and its
share in the Chinese population, calculate gentry’s (upper’s and lower’s) per capita
incomes (see the last line in the table below).
        Main sources of gentry income, according to Chang, are:
        (i) Government office-holding (administration) which was confined to gentry
only. Income from government jobs provided resources for purchase of land and thus
income from landownership. Land was a much less important source of income than at a
similar stage in European history.
        (ii) Gentry service in local affairs (managerial income); basically local
administration.
        (iii) Assistants to officials (secretarial services).
        (iv) Teaching. Unlike the first three, they are private services. Only higher
education (teaching) was monopolized by the gentry.
        (v) Other services include medicine, writing etc. They are of much smaller
importance.
        In professions (i) to (iii) actual incomes (as calculated by Chang) were several
times larger than the official wages. It was a policy to keep official wages low and give
large premiums (the yang-lien allowance, see Chang p.13).

        Commoners’ per capita incomes. Once gentry per capita incomes are derived,
commoners’ incomes are obtained as the residual (using total household disposable
income, line d in Table below, minus gentry’s total income, and dividing by commoners’
total population). The estimated commoners’ per capita income of 4.92 taels should be


                                           47
contrasted with the estimated subsistence minimum (based on wage data) which was
between 5 and 6 taels (Chang). If we consider Maddison's (2004) estimated China GDI
per capita of $PPP 540 and Chang's average income of 6.5 taels to be the same (as they
should be), then the subsistence minimum of $400 works out to be 4.8 taels. This
indirectly obtained subsistence minimum is quite close to the directly calculated one
(from Chang) of 5 to 6 taels per annum. This further corroborates both the subsistence
minimum and the average figures.

                       Derivation of incomes of the upper and lower gentry
                                                      Income shares:        Estimated total income
Source of gentry income           Estimated       Upper      Lower gentry Upper gentry Lower gentry
                                  amonts (in      gentry
                                   000 taels)
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)       (1)x(2)         (1)x(3)
 Office-holding                        121000        1             0        121000              0
 Gentry service                        111000      0.18          0.82        20250           90750
 Secretarial services                     9050       0             1            0             9050
 Teaching                               61575        0             1           0             61575
 Other services 1/                        9000      0.2           0.8         1800            7200
 Landholding                           220000       0.7          0.3        154000           66000
 Mercantile activity                   113600       0.7          0.3        79520            34080
 Total gentry income                   645225                               376570          268655
  plus Imputed rent                     30000      0.34          0.66        10200           19800
  minus direct taxes                    47500      0.14          0.86         6650           40850
(a) Disposable gentry income           627725                               380120          247605

(b) China-wide GNP                      2781272
(c) Total taxes                          332500
(d) Household disposable                2448772
income: (b)-(c)

(e) Gentry population                       7500         0.14           0.86              1050               6450
 (in 000 people)
Disposable income (in tael                                                                362                 38
per capita p.a.) = (a)/(e)
Sources: Gentry incomes, Table 26, page 197. Imputed rent and GDP, p. 326. Number of gentry: p. 327
(average hopusehold size = 5). Direct taxes: p. 329. Upper and lower gentry shares in total gentry income:
p. 330. All references to Chung-li Chang (1962). 1/ Upper and lower gentry’s shares for other services
assumed.




                                                    48
Other incomes and wages (for comparison and illustrative purposes):
Position                             (1)                  (2)            (1)+(2) in        Source
                                Official wage        Yang lien(taels    terms of the
                                 (taels p.a.)            p.a.)           estimated
                                                                       overall income
                                                                           mean
District magistrate                  45                  1000              ~160          Chang, p.13
Governor                            150                 12000              ~1900         Chang, p.13
Highest level military              605                                      93          Chang, p.13
rank*
Seventh level military              36                                      5.5          Chang, p.13
rank*
Highest level court                 307                                     47
official*                                                                                Chang, p.35
Ninth level court official*        54.4                                     8.3          Chang, p.35
*/ Wages include income in kind. Note: Yang lien is an allowance paid on top of the official
    wage.

Population and area: Population from Maddison (2004). Area: Current area of the
People’s Republic of China plus Taiwan.

Urbanization rate: From Bairoch, De Jéricho à Mexico, NRF, Gallimard, 1985, p. 462.
Based on population living in towns that are greater than 5,000 inhabitants.

Mean income in $PPP. From Maddison (2004).

REFERENCES

Maddison, Angus (2004), World population, GDP and per capita GDP, 1-2001 AD,
available at http://www.ggdc.net/Maddison/content.shtml.

Bairoch, Paul (1985), De Jéricho à Mexico, NRF, Paris: Gallimard.

Chang, Chung-li, The Income of the Chinese Gentry, University of Washington Press,
Seattle 1962, pp. 326-333.




                                                49
                                England and Wales, 1688

Social group                    Number of    Percentage of    Income per      Income in terms
                                 people         people        capita (in £)     of per capita
                                                                                    mean
Temporal lords                     8000           0.14          151.5              15.83
Baronets                          12800           0.22          93.8                9.80
Merchants on land, greater        19584           0.34           66.7               6.97
Spiritual lords                     520           0.01          65.0                6.79
Knights                           7800           0.14           61.5                6.43
Esquires                          30000           0.53          56.3                5.88
Merchants by sea, greater         16000           0.28           50.0               5.23
Artisans and handicrafts          26980           0.47          50.0                5.23
Gentlemen                        120000           2.11          35.0                3.66
Merchants by sea, lesser          48000           0.84           33.3               3.48
Merchants on land, lesser         78342           1.38           33.3               3.48
Persons in offices, greater       40000           0.70           30.0               3.14
Law                               56434           0.99          22.0                2.30
Persons in offices, lesser        30000           0.53           20.0               2.09
Naval officers                    20000           0.35          20.0                2.09
Military officers                 16000           0.28           15.0               1.57
Clergymen, greater                10000           0.18           14.4               1.50
Freeholders, greater             192976           3.39           13.0               1.36
Science and Liberal Arts          64490           1.13           12.0               1.25
Freeholders, lesser              482450           8.48           11.0               1.15
Clergymen, lesser                 50000           0.88           10.0               1.05
Shopkeepers and tradesmen        457668           8.04          10.0                1.05
Farmers                          516910          9.09            8.5                0.89
Manufacturing trades            732883.5         12.88           8.4                0.88
Common soldiers                   70000           1.23           7.0                0.73
Common seamen                    150000           2.64           6.7                0.70
Building trades                  328581           5.78           5.6                0.58
Laboring people & outservants   997489.5         17.53           4.3                0.45
Miners                            64080           1.13           3.3                0.35
Cottagers and paupers           1017845          17.89           2.0                0.21
Vagrants                          23489           0.41           2.0                0.21
Total                           5689322           100           9.57                  1


Income distribution data. The source is the Lindert-Williamson revision of Gregory
King’s social table (available at
http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder/King1688revised.htm). The data which
were originally presented on per household basis are transformed on per capita basis
(each individual is assigned per capita income of his/her household).

Population and area. Current territory of England and Wales. Population: obtained
directly from King’s numbers.



                                            50
Urbanization rate. Bairoch (1985: Table 13/1, p. 279) gives the year 1700 range (based
on cities greater than 5,000) to be 13 to 16 percent. For 1688, we have used the lower
bound of the range (13 percent).

Mean income in $PPP. Obtained by interpolation from Maddison’s (2001, p. 247)
estimates of English and Welsh GDI per capita in 1600 and 1700. An alternative
calculation based directly on King’s estimates yield almost the same result. If we take
the ratio between the mean income from King’s social table (9.6 pounds per capita per
annum) and the subsistence minimum assumed to be one-third above the vagrants’
income (2.7 pounds), we get a mean income which is 3.5 times the subsistence which,
combined with the subsistence minimum of $PPP 400, yields an average income of
$PPP 1400. The interpolation based on Maddison’s data is $PPP 1418.

REFERENCES

Bairoch, Paul (1985), De Jéricho à Mexico, NRF, Paris: Gallimard.

Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspectives, Paris: OECD
      Development Centre.




                                            51
                                England and Wales, 1801-3
Social group                    Number of    Percentage of     Per capita    Income in terms
                                 people         people       income (in £)     of per capita
                                                                                   mean
Temporal peers                    7175           0.08           320.0             14.59
Spiritual peers                     390          0.004          266.7             12.16
Eminent merchants, bankers        20000           0.22          260.0             11.86
Baronets                           8100           0.09          200.0              9.12
Knights                           3500           0.04           150.0              6.84
Esquires                          60000          0.66           150.0              6.84
Educators in universities          2000           0.02          150.0              6.84
Warehousemen, wholesale           3000           0.03           133.3              6.08
Manufacturers                    150000           1.66          133.3              6.08
Building & repairing ships         1800           0.02          116.7              5.32
Higher civil offices              14000           0.15          114.3              5.21
Lesser merchants, by sea          91000           1.01          114.3              5.21
Shipowners, freight               25000           0.28          100.0              4.56
Gents                            160000          1.77            87.5              3.99
Eminent clergymen                 6000           0.07            83.3              3.80
Law, judges to clerks             55000           0.61           70.0              3.19
Liberal arts and sciences         81500           0.90           52.0              2.37
Keeping houses for lunatics         400          0.004           50.0              2.28
Theatrical pursuits                4000           0.04           50.0              2.28
Lesser offices                    52500           0.58           40.0              1.82
Engineers, surveyors, etc.        25000           0.28           40.0              1.82
Merchant service                  49393           0.55           40.0              1.82
Marines and seamen                52906           0.58           38.0              1.73
Freeholders, greater             220000           2.43           36.4              1.66
Shopkeepers and tradesmen        372500           4.11           30.0              1.37
Tailors, milliners, etc.         125000           1.38           30.0              1.37
Confined lunatics                  2500           0.03           30.0              1.37
Naval officers                    35000           0.39           29.8              1.36
Common soldiers                  121985          1.35            29.0              1.32
Military officers                 65320           0.72           27.8              1.27
Education of Youth               120000           1.33           25.0              1.14
Lesser clergymen                  50000           0.55           24.0              1.09
Dissenting clergy, itinerants     12500           0.14           24.0              1.09
Farmers                          960000          10.60           20.0              0.91
Innkeepers and publicans         250000           2.76           20.0              0.91
Freeholders, lesser              600000           6.63           18.0              0.82
Clerks and shopmen               300000           3.31           15.0              0.68
Artisans, mechanics, laborers   2005767          22.16           12.2              0.56
Vagrants                         175218           1.94           10.0              0.46
Laborers in mines, canals        180000           1.99            8.9              0.41
Hawkers, pedlars, duffers          4000           0.04            8.0              0.36
Laborers in husbandry           1530000          16.90            6.9              0.31
Persons imprisoned for debt      10000           0.11            6.0               0.27
Paupers                         1040716          11.50            2.5              0.11
Total                           9053170           100           21.93                1




                                            52
Income distribution data. Based on Colquhoun 1801-3 social table revised by Lindert
and Williamson. Available at
http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder/Colquhoun180103.htm. The data which
were originally presented on per household basis are transformed on per capita basis
(each individual is assigned per capita income of his/her household).

Population and area. Current territory of England and Wales. Population: As obtained
directly from Colquhoun (coincides within 1 percent with the population for year 1800
from Maddison, 2001).

Urbanization rate. Estimated from Allen (2003, Figure 9, p. 428).

Mean income in $PPP. Maddison (2001) for year 1800.

REFERENCES

Robert C. Allen, "Progress and Poverty in Early Modern Europe" Economic History
       Review 61, 3 (August 2003): 403-443.

Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspectives, Paris: OECD
      Development Centre.




                                          53
                                    Holland 1561 and 1732

Income distribution data: The rental values of all dwellings (including the poor) were
taxed. We know that dwelling rents were highly correlated with income (Williamson
1985; van den Berg and van Zanden, 1988: pp. 193-215), but we also know that the
elasticity of rents to income was less than one (between 0.72 and 0.75 in 1852-1910
Britain: Williamson 1985, p. 225). Thus, income inequality should be understated by
rental values. With that understood, the source of the Dutch data is van Zanden (1995).
We have not yet been able to secure the underlying distribution data from the author.

Population and area: Population is interpolated between 1500 and 1600 (983,176), and
between 1700 and 1820 (2,002.783), from Maddison (2001). We approximate the area of
21,680 km2 to be modern Holland.

Urbanization rate: For 1561, the urbanization estimate (45%) is from van Bavel and van
Zanden (2004). For 1732, the urbanization estimate (39%) is from de Vries (1985).

Mean income in $PPP: GDP per capita in 1990 international dollars interpolated
between 1500 and 1600, and between 1700 and 1820, from Maddison (2001: p. 264).

REFERENCES

de Vries, Jan (1985) “The Population and Economy of the Preindustrial Netherlands,”
       Journal of Interdisciplinary History XV, 4 (Spring): 661-85
Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspectives, Paris: OECD
       Development Centre.
van Bavel, B. and J. L. van Zanden (2004), “The jump-start of the Holland economy
       during the late-medieval crisis, c.1350-c.1500,” Economic History Review LVII 3:
       503-32
van den Berg, W. J. and J. L. van Zanden (1988), “Vier eeuwen welstandlijkheid in
       Alkmaar, ca 1530-1930,” Tijdschrift voor Sociale Gwschiedenis 19: 193-2
van Zanden, Jan Luiten (1995), “Tracing the beginning of the Kuznets curve: western
       Europe during the early modern period,” Economic History Review XLVIII, 4:
       643-64.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. (1985), Did British Capitalism Breed Inequality? Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.




                                           54
                       India (Moghul) around 1750, and India (British) 1947

                          India–at the end of the Moghul rule (around 1750)

Social group                                Percentage of         Percentage of        Income in terms
                                             population           total income           of per capita
                                                                                             mean
Nobility, zamindars                                 1                    15                  15.0
Merchants to sweepers                              17                    37                   2.2
Village economy                                    72                    45                   0.6
Tribal economy                                     10                     3                   0.3
Total                                             100                   100                    1

                                India–at the end of the British rule (1947)

Social group                                Percentage of         Percentage of       Income in terms of
                                             population           total income          per capita mean
British officials, traders                      0.06                     5                    83.3
Nobility, Indian capitalists                    0.94                     9                    9.6
Petty traders, govt & industrial
workers                                            17                    30                    1.8
Village rentiers                                    9                    20                    2.2
Working land proprietors                           20                    18                    0.9
Sharecroppers, tenants                             29                    12                    0.4
Landless peasants                                  17                     4                    0.2
Tribal economy                                      7                     2                    0.3
Total                                             100                   100                     1
Note: Zemandars are large landowners. The data refer to the entire Indian subcontinent (today’s India,
    Pakistan and Bangladesh).

Income distribution data. The source of both data is Maddison (2002) which is turn
based on Maddison (1971: pp. 33 and 69). Maddison (2002) gives only population and
income shares, but if we combine this information with Maddison’s own estimates of
GDI per capita for India (see below), we can calculate $PPP income estimates for each
social group. Indian Moghul data present a particular problem because there are only 4
social classes given. Since their incomes are vastly different, and the largest group (72
percent; village economy) is in the middle of income distribution, probably spanning
people with very different incomes, Gini2 is unusually some 27 percent higher than the
minimum Gini (G2 is 48.9 vs. Gini minimum 38.5). 23

Discussion: Note that a part (but only a part) of high Indian inequality around the time of
the independence from Great Britain is caused by very high incomes of the British in
India. According to Maddison, 0.06 percent of the population (British officials and
businessmen) received 5 percent of total income which made their average per capita
income more than $PPP 51,000 per year (and would place them in the top 5 percent of

23
     For the definitions of G1 and G2, see the main text.


                                                        55
today’s US income distribution). Yet, despite these incomes being extravagantly high,
this is only a part of the story since Gini without the British is still at a rather high level of
45 (as opposed to 48-49 with them). Consequently, the main cause of the very high
inequality is a very low income level of the poor classes (a point discussed in the main
text with regard to the appropriateness or not of using the subsistence minimum of $PPP
400).

One can also compare the without-the-British inequality in India in 1947 to the inequality
results derived from the first Indian National Sample Survey (NSS) conducted in 1951.
The expenditure-based NSS Gini is only 36. 24 So—(1) are expenditures significantly
more equally distributed, compared to income, than we would expect (a conventional
adjustment, suggested by Li, Squire and Zou (1998), is 5 to 6 Gini points while here the
difference is 9 Gini points), 25 or (2) is Maddison overestimating India’s 1947 inequality;
or (3) is he underestimating income of India’s poor, or (4) did inequality go down by
several Gini points between the end of the British raj and 1951?

Population and area. The Indian population in 1750 is estimated from Maddison (2003:
appendix HS-8, Table 8a, p. 256). Interpolation based on the data for 1700 and 1820. The
population for 1947 is taken directly from Maddison (2003). For both dates, the area
includes the entire Indian subcontinent (today’s India, Pakistan and Bangladesh).

Urbanization rate. For 1750, from Bergier and Matthieu (2002: Table 1, original
sources given there). Obtained by interpolation from the urbanization rates of the Indian
subcontinent of 11-13 % in 1700 and 9-12% in 1800. The paper available at
http://eh.net/XIIICongress/cd/papers/33BergierMathieu422.pdf#search=%22urbanization
%20rate%20british%20india%22. For 1947, obtained as interpolation between the
urbanization rate of 14.1% in 1941 and 17.6% in 1951; see Mohan (1985: Table 1, p.
621).

Mean income in $PPP. From Maddison (2004), “World population, GDP and per capita
GDP, 1-2000 AD”, available at http://www.ggdc.net/Maddison/content.shtml. For around
1750, we assume the same income as in 1820 (the first year in Maddison’s series). For
1947, the value is taken directly from Maddison (2004).

REFERENCES

Bergier, Jean Francois and Jon Matthieu (2002), “The mountains in urban development,”
        paper presented at the XIII World Congress, Buenos Aires, July 2002.
Li, H., L. Squire and H.-f. Zou (1998), “Explaining international and intertemporal
        variations in income inequality,” The Economic Journal, vol. 108, 26-43.

24
   See WIDER data set available at http://www.wider.unu.edu/wiid/wiid.htm, available also at
http://econ.worldbank.org/projects/inequality (all the Ginis dataset).
25
   And it could easily be argued that the difference ought to be less since data from social tables are very
rough in that they assign the same income for an entire class of people and do not allow for the fact that
some people from a mean-poorer class may have higher incomes than some people from a mean-richer
class.


                                                      56
Maddison, Angus (1971), Class structure and economc growth: India and Pakistan since
        the Moghuls, Allen and Unwin, London.
--- (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics.
Mohan, Rakesh (1985), “Urbanization in India's future,” Population and Development
        Review, vol. 11, No. 4 (December).




                                         57
                                      Kingdom of Naples 1811


     Income        Percentage of          Income per          Income per capita       Income in terms of
      Class         population              family              (in ducats pa)         per capita mean
                                          (in ducats)
       1                10                    200                     38                     0.58
       2                10                    230                     44                     0.67
       3                10                    260                     50                     0.75
       4                10                    260                     50                     0.75
       5                10                    260                     50                     0.75
       6                10                    260                     50                     0.75
       7                10                    260                     50                     0.75
       8                10                    260                     50                     0.75
       9                10                    260                     50                     0.75
      10                 6                    600                    114                     1.74
      11                3.3                  1500                    286                     4.34
      12                0.7                  5000                    952                     14.47
     Total              100                                          65.8                      1
Note: Average household size (5.25) assumed to be the same across all income groups

Income distribution data. The source is Malanima (2006: p. 31), who uses the tax census
data from 1811. This tax census is, for the purposes of establishing an estimate of income
distribution, better than others because it surveyed not only tax paying units but also the
poor (the indigent). Each of the 14 provinces of the Kingdom was supposed to place
people in predetermined nine categories, running from the poorest to the richest (by
family income). The percentage of people placed in each category was “free” (that is, left
to each village, city etc.) with the only stipulation that not more than one-sixth of the
population may be placed in the bottom category (the “indigent”) and hence be exempt
from taxation. The problem is that it imposes an equality of conditions across provinces
and leads to an underestimation of incomes in the rich areas like Naples-city. For
example, people with a same income may be placed in category III in Naples and in
higher category IV in a poorer province. Similarly, the number of poor in Naples (which
was probably high) might have been underestimated (because of the imposed threshold of
one-sixth). Yet, with the exception of the Naples-city (then the third largest European
city containing about 6 percent of the total Kingdom’s population), which also displayed
relatively high inequality, 26 income differences between the provinces were too small to
lead to significant and systematic misplacing of households. The ratio of mean rural
incomes between the richest and poorest province was less than 1.5 to 1 (and rural
population accounted for 85% of the total population). 27

Another problem is that the authorities in each province might have been tempted to
underestimate people’s incomes and to push more people into lower classes so that taxes

26
 The Gini given by Malanima (2006) is 53.
27
 Excluding Naples-city, the same ratio for the urban areas is even narrower: 1.4 to 1 (calculated from
Malanima).


                                                    58
would be minimized. This is reflected in the fact that some 75 percent of families were
grouped in the second class (just above the indigent; see Malanima 2006, Table 3, p. 9). 28
Malanima, however, revises these original data, uses information about salaries and other
sources of income, and constructs a new distribution (which we use here) composed of
nine groups, each consisting of 10 percent of the population, and the top decile divided
into three groups (see Malanima 2006: Appendix). We thus obtain an income distribution
composed of twelve groups ranked by their estimated per capita income.

Population and area. Malanima (2006: p.3).

Urbanization rate. Malanima (2006: Table 7, p. 15)

Mean income in $PPP. Obtained as the ratio between the mean income of the Kingdom
of Naples as calculated from Malanima data (65.8 ducats per capita per annum) and the
subsistence minimum (31 ducats per capita for a five-member family in rural areas, and
up to 50 ducats per capita in urban areas). Taking relative shares of urban and rural
populations (85 and 15 percent), we estimate the subsistence minimum at 35 ducats per
person annually. Mean income is thus 1.9 times the subsistence. Taking $PPP 400 for the
subsistence, results in mean income of $PPP 752. This can be contrasted with
Maddison’s (2004) estimate of Italy’s 1820 GDI per capita of $PPP 1117. Since
Kingdom of Naples was poorer than most of Italy (north of Naples), the difference seems
plausible.

REFERENCES

Malanima, Paolo (2006), “Pre-modern equality: income distribution in the Kingdom of
      Naples (1811),” paper presented at XIV International Congress of Economic
      History, August 2006, Helsinki. Available at
      http://www.helsinki.fi/iehc2006/papers3/Malanima.pdf.




28
  It is notable however that the quota for the indigent which was 16.6 percent was not fulfilled: in total,
only 14.4 percent of families were placed in this group and thus tax-exempt.


                                                      59
                                    Nueva España 1790

                        Percentage of      Annual income    Annual income     Average income
                         population         per family        per capita         per capita
                                             (pesos)           (pesos)        relative to mean
Spanish upper class         10                1,543              309                 6.12
Mestizo middle class        18                 300                60                 1.19
Indigenous peasant          72                  61              12.2                 0.24
class
Total                      100                   252             50.4                1
Note: Assumed household size = 5 for all social groups.

Income distribution data. In 1813, Manuel Abad y Queipo, Bishop of Michoacán,
published his Colección. His social tables offer information on: family size; total
population; three income classes with population shares and income per capita for the
bottom two (the Spanish upper class 10% ; mestizo middle class 18% at 60 pesos; and
indigenous peasant class 72% at 12.2 pesos). What is missing to complete the crude size
distribution is either an estimate of average income per capita for the richest class or an
estimate of total income for Nueva España as a whole. Our estimates use an average of
the latter from three sources: Coatsworth’s 240 million pesos in 1800 (Coatsworth 1978
and 1989); Rosenzweig’s 190 million pesos in 1810 (Rosenzweig Hernández 1989); and
TePaske’s 251 million pesos in 1806 (TePaske 1985).

Population and area. Population estimate of 4,500,000 from Colección (1813). Modern
Mexican borders are used to define the area of 1,224,433 km2 since it appears that
Manuel Abad y Queipo ignored New Mexico and California.

Urbanization rate. Calculated from cities with 10,000 or more inhabitants from von
Humboldt (1822).

Mean income in $PPP: 1800 GDP per capita in 1990 international dollars (Coatsworth
2003 and 2005).

REFERENCES

Abad y Queipo, Manuel (1813/1994) Colección de los escritos más importantes que en
        diferentes épocas dirigió al gobierno (1813, reprinted in 1994 with an
        introduction and notes by Guadalupe Jiménez Codinach, México, D. F.: Consejo
        Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes).
Coatsworth, John H. (1978), "Obstacles to Economic Development in Nineteenth-
        Century Mexico," American Historical Review 83 (1): 80-100.
--- (1989), "The Decline of the Mexican Economy, 1800-1860," in R. Liehr (ed.),
        América Latina en la época de Simón Bolívar. La formación de las economías
        nacionales y los intereses económicos europeos, 1800-1850, Berlin: Colloquim
        Verlag.
--- (2003), “Mexico,” in Joel Mokyr (ed.), The Oxford Encyclopaedia of Economic
        History, vol. 3, New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 501-7.


                                              60
--- (2005), “Structures, Endowments, and Institutions in the Economic History of Latin
        America,” Latin America Research Review 40 (3): 126-44.
Rosenzweig Hernández, F. (1989), "La economía novohispana al comenzar el siglo
        XIX," in El desarrollo económico de México, 1800-1910, Toluca.
TePaske, J. (1985), "Economic Cycles in New Spain in the Eighteenth Century: The
        View from the Public Sector," in R. L. Garner and W. B. Taylor (eds.), Iberian
        Colonies, New World Societies: Essays in Memory of Charles Gibson, University
        Park, PA: private printing.
von Humboldt, Alexandre (1822/1984), Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain,
        trans. by J. Black, London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orne and Brown, 1822,
        republished in 1984.




                                          61
                          Old Castille (Spain) 1752

Province       Families   Population          Annual      Annual income    Average annual
               surveyed                     income per    per capita (in   income per
                                             family (in   pesos)           capita relative
                                               pesos)                      to the mean
Villarramiel         94         376              250            62.5             0.26
Villarramiel        146        584               750           187.5             0.77
Villarramiel        58         232              1250           312.5             1.28
Villarramiel        38         152              1750           437.5             1.79
Villarramiel        19          76              2250           562.5             2.31
Villarramiel         8          32              2750           687.5             2.82
Villarramiel         6          24              3250           812.5             3.33
Villarramiel         1           4              3750           937.5             3.84
Villarramiel         8          32              5677         1419.25             5.82
Paredes             364        1456              250            62.5             0.26
Paredes             395        1580              750            187.5            0.77
Paredes              68         272             1250            312.5            1.28
Paredes              21         84              1750            437.5            1.79
Paredes              17         68              2250            562.5            2.31
Paredes               6         24              2750            687.5            2.82
Paredes               8         32              3250            812.5            3.33
Paredes               5         20              3750            937.5            3.84
Paredes              39         156             5677          1419.25            5.82
Palencia            943        3772              250             62.5            0.26
Palencia            483        1932              750            187.5            0.77
Palencia            219         876             1250            312.5            1.28
Palencia            101         404             1750            437.5            1.79
Palencia             56         224             2250            562.5            2.31
Palencia             28         112             2750            687.5            2.82
Palencia             36         144             3250            812.5            3.33
Palencia             19         76              3750            937.5            3.84
Palencia             89         356             5677          1419.25            5.82
Frechilla            56        224               68           16.9325            0.07
Frechilla           67         268               437         109.1875            0.45
Frechilla           89         356               594          148.615            0.61
Frechilla           34         136               866         216.4775            0.89
Frechilla           26         104              1223         305.8175            1.25
Frechilla           18          72              1810         452.4175            1.85
Frechilla           25         100              2460           614.97            2.52
Frechilla            8          32              3513           878.25            3.60
Frechilla            5          20              4351          1087.7             4.46
Frechilla            6          24              5546         1386.543            5.68
Frechilla            1           4              6918          1729.5             7.09
Frechilla            5          20              7325          1831.15            7.51
Frechilla            3          12              9975          2493.75           10.22
Villalpando         87         348               213         53.20402            0.22
Villalpando         106        424               341          85.1309            0.35
Villalpando         46         184               610         152.3859            0.62
Villalpando         21          84               832         208.0357            0.85
Villalpando         27         108              1247         311.7407            1.28
Villalpando          5          20              1683           420.8             1.73
Villalpando         17          68              2568         641.9559            2.63
Villalpando          8          32              3559         889.8438            3.65
Villalpando          2           8              4757         1189.125            4.87



                                       62
Province           Families           Population             Annual       Annual income Average annual
                   surveyed                               income per per capita (in          income per
                                                           family (in     pesos)             capita relative
                                                             pesos)                          to the mean
Villalpando                 5                 20              5509            1377.15              5.65
Villalpando                 3                 12              6569           1642.333              6.73
Total                    3945               15780            975.72            243.94                1
Note: People (and families) ranked by per capita income within each province. Total gives the overall (Old
Castille) mean. Old Castille is composed of five provinces: Villarramiel, Paredes, Palencia, Frechilla,
Villalpando. Family size assumed to be 4 throughout.

Income distribution data. Family annual income estimates (in pesos) from five
locations in the Palencia region, part of what is now Castilla y León: Frechilla (13 income
classes) and Villalpando (11 income classes); Palencia city, Paredes de Nava, and
Villarramiel (9 income classes each). These data were kindly provided by Leandro
Prados, who used them recently in Álvarez-Nogal and Prados de la Escosura (2006),
which in turn were taken from Yun Casalilla (1987: p. 465) and Ramos Palencia (2001:
p. 70).

Population and area. Population of 1,980,000 and area of 89,061 km2 are from Lees and
Hohenberg 1989: pp. 443 and 445).

Urbanization rate. The 1750 estimate from Lees and Hohenberg (1989: p. 443).

Mean income in $PPP. GDP per capita for Spain, in 1990 international dollars
interpolated between 1700 and 1820, from Maddison (2001: p. 264).

REFERENCES

Álvarez-Nogal, Carlos and Leandro Prados de la Escosura (2006), "Searching for the
       Roots of Spain's Retardation (1500-1850)," Universidad Carlos III Working
       Papers in Economic History, Madrid.
Lees, L. H. and P. M. Hohenberg (1989), “Urban Decline and Regional Economies:
       Brabant, Castile, and Lombardy,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 31
       (July).
Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspectives, Paris: OECD
       Development Centre.
Ramos Palencia, Fernando (2001), Pautas de consume familiar en la Castilla
       Preindustrial: El consume de bienes duraderos y semiduraderos en Palencia
       1750-1850, University of Valladolid doctoral thesis.
Yun Casalilla, Bartolomé (1987), Sobre la transición al capitalismo en Castilla:
       Economía y sociedad en Tierra de Campos 1500-1830, doctoral thesis
       (Salamanca).




                                                    63
    Roman Empire 14

                                                                                                     Average          Average
                                                                                                                                    Income in
                                                   Number of                     Percentage of        family         per capita
Social group                                                        People                                                         terms of per
                                                   members                        population         income         income (in
                                                                                                                                   capita mean
                                                                                                     (in HS)            HS)
Senators 1/                                            600           2470            0.004           150000            37975           100
Knights (equestrian order) 1/                        40000          158000           0.285            30000            7595             20
Municipal senators 1/                               360000         1422000           2.562             8000            2025            5.3
Other rich people                                   200000          790000           1.423                             4810            12.7
Legion commanders 8/                                    50            198            0.000            67670            17132           45.1
Centurions                                            2500           9875            0.018            16160            4091            10.8
Praetorians 3/                                        9000          35550            0.064            3000              759            2.0
Ordinary soldiers 2/                                250000          987500            1.8              1010             256             0.7
Workers at average wage 7/                         1066667         4213333            7.6              800              304             0.8
Tradesmen and service workers 5/                    133333          526667            0.9                               468             1.2
Farmers and farm workers (free or slave) 6/        12000000        47400000           85.4                              234             0.6
Subsistence minimum 4/                                                                                                  180             0.5
Total                                                             55,500,000         100.0                              380             1.0
    Note: The average household size of 3.95 (derived from Goldsmith, 1984) used throughout except for senators where the average household size (on account of
    many dependents) was increased to 4.1. HS = sestertius.
    For explanation of the notes, see text below.




                                                                                64
Income distribution data. The basis for calculations is provided by Goldsmith’s (1984)
estimates. Goldsmith provides minimum wealth (census qualification) for the three top
classes (senators, knights and municipal senators) and an estimate of their mean incomes.
The problem was that –taking these estimates as given, and assuming that the bulk of the
working population lived at slightly above the subsistence minimum ($PPP 400)—one
finds an overall lower mean income than given by Goldsmith and used here (HS 380).
This is why we introduced, following Goldsmith who spoke of that class but did not put
any numbers on it, a fourth rich class of “other rich people” who were neither Roman
knights nor municipal senators (both of which needed to fulfill the census requirements).
There is no doubt that that “fourth” rich class existed but putting a number on its size and
average income is obviously difficult. We decided to take as their mean income the
average of the two other higher classes’ incomes (leaving out as decidedly the richest the
class of Roman senators).

Notes to the table above

1/ From Goldsmith (1985). Total amount for senators includes HS15 million of
Augustus’ and Imperial households’ (100 people) private fortune. The censuses,
according to Goldsmith, were 1 milion for senators and 250,000 for the knights.
According to Finlay (p. 46), the census for the knights was 400,000 HS. The average
annual income of senators’ class is calculated to be 15 percent of the census (note: census
is the threshold) and for knights, 12 percent of the census amount.

2/ Calculated from Clark (p. 676): 225 denarii (1 denarius = 4 HS) plus 50 modii of
wheat valued at 110 HS (Milanovic, 2006, Table 3). This makes the average wheat price
2.2 HS per modius. Harl (p. 276) gives modius price range from 8 asses (2 HS) in Egypt
to 32 (8 HS) in Rome. Temin (2006, p. 138) gives free market price in Rome at 4-6 HS.
After the huge Rome’s fire in 64, Tacitus (Book XV, Chapter 39) mentions that the price
of wheat in Rome, due to the sudden impoverishment of the population, dropped to 3HS
per modius. We select a relatively low price to avoid inflating incomes by using Roman
prices for the goods that were essentially consumed outside the capital.
        Tacitus (Book I, Chapter 17) quotes soldiers (in year 14) complaining that a
soldier is worth only 10 asses per day. That would be 2.5 HS per day or 912 HS per
annum, some 10 percent below our estimate of HS 1010. Tacitus’ number may refer to
the monetary pay only, i.e., it likely excludes payments in kind.
        Size of the army (250,000) from Temin (2006, p. 147) quoting Goodman (1997).
Similarly, Walbank (p.19) gives 250-300,000.

3/ Clark (p. 676). The size of the Praetorian guard was 9 cohorts each with 1,000 men.

4/ From Milanovic (2006, Table 4), based on Goldsmith (1984, p. 268) and the amount of
alimenta paid from the public treasury to boys under 15 years of age.

5/ From Temin (2006, p. 136). We assume that their income was twice the subsistence.
They are assumed to account for 10 percent of the urban population.



                                             65
6/ Lowest class according to Temin (2006). We assume their average income to be 30%
above the subsistence minimum. They account for more than 90 percent of the rural
population (which in turn accounts for 90 percent of the total population).

7/ Based on Goldsmith (3.5 HS per day times 225 working days). Temin (2006, p. 138)
gives also the average wage in Rome as 3-4 HS per day (see also Milanovic, 2006, Table
4 and the sources given there). Wages expressed at Rome-city prices (see discussion of
mean income below). Workers are estimated to account for 80 percent of urban
population.

8/ The legion's commander wage ratio (67 times ordinary soldier’s wage) is given in
Duncan-Jones (p. 116) who quotes Brunt (1950). The number of legion commanders
calculated by dividing 250,000 soldiers by the average size of a legion (5,000 men; for
the average size of the legion, see Duncan-Jones p. 215).

Discussion.
(1) Slaves and landowners. Slaves are not shown as a separate social category. This is
because their economic conditions covered practically the entire spectrum of incomes
(with a possible exception of the very top). Their consumption levels varied widely: they
ranged from being very rich (owning slaves themselves) to being very poor (mostly
slaves engaged in mining). Even rural slaves, who were on average worse-off than urban
slaves, were not just “all undifferentiated gang laborers; [on the contrary] there are lists
of rural slave jobs that are as varied as the known range of urban or household slave
jobs" (Temin, no date, p. 8). For the urban slaves, who were more numerous than rural
slaves, 29 the prevalence of manumission made Roman slavery (unlike that in the
Americas) an “open slavery”. Schiavone (2000) and Temin (no date) discuss the position
of slaves and the role of manumission at great length. Similarly, landowners are not
shown separately as a class since most landowners belonged to the four top classes and
their incomes from land are included in our totals.

(2) Top of the income distribution. The estimated Gini of between 37 and 40 might seem
low in the light of the excesses of wealth in Rome (see Table below with data gathered
from Tacitus’s Annals) But this extraordinary wealth was limited to a very few people at
the very top. It is very unlikely that they would be even selected (so few they were) to
participate in a modern random household survey. Moreover, their extraordinary wealth
was not out of step with what we observe today. For example, the fabulously rich
triumvir Marcus Crassus (-115 to -53) whose wealth was estimated at 200 million HS
(Schiavone, 2000, p.71) and hence his income at HS 12 million per year, 30 has more than
a counterpart in today’s Bill Gates and other super rich. Crassus’s income was equal to
about 32,000 mean Roman incomes. Using today’s US GDI per capita, the equivalent
would be an income of about $1 billion per year. But this is an income that is easily made
by many of today’s hyper-billionaires and yet the overall inequality is not much affected
by it. Bill Gates’s fortune is estimated at $50 billion which with 5% interest yields $2.5

29
   According to Schiavone (2000, p.112), slaves represented 35 percent or more of Italy’s population. And
Italy was the most urbanized part of the Empire.
30
   Using the conventional interest rate of 6 percent (see Finley, 1985, p.104).


                                                   66
billion per year, i.e., more than twice as much as Crassus—expressed in mean incomes of
one’s own time and place. According to The Forbes’ Magazine 2007 list of richest
people in the world, 31 four individuals in the United States have wealth above $20
billion which would place them around Crassus’s level.

Tacitus (Book XII, Chapter 53) gives the wealth of Pallas, a freedman, at 300 million HS.
This would have been 50 percent more than Crassus’s wealth. Augustius’ household’s
private income was estimated (as mentioned above) by Goldsmith at HS 15 million.
Using the conventional interest rate of 6 percent, it translates into a wealth of HS 250
million.

Other incomes and wages compiled from Tacitus’ Annals (for comparison and illustrative
   purposes):
                                         Amounts in HS       Amounts in           Source
                                                             terms of the
                                                             estimated
                                                             average annual
                                                             income (or GDP)
Augustus’ donative to each               1000                2.6                  Book I, Chapter 8
pretorian guardsman (year 14)
Augustus’ donative to each               300                 0.8                  Book I, Chapter 8
legionnaire and soldier of cohorts
(year 14)
Augustus’ donative to people (year       43.5 million        0.2% of GDP          Book I, Chapter 8
14)
Tiberius dowry to Agrippa’s              1 million           ~2600                Book II, Chapter
daughter (year 19)                                                                86
Left by the Senate to Senator            5 million           ~13,000 (or 5        Book III, Chapter
Marcus Piso after his punishment                             times the            17
(year 20)                                                    senatorial
                                                             census)
Tiberius’ personal loan to the banks     100 million         0.5% of GDP          Book VI, Chapter
(who were suffering from shortage                                                 25
of funds; year 33)
Tiberius’ donative after a large fire    100 million         0.5% of GDP          Book VI, Chapter
in Rome (year 36)                                                                 51
Maximal lawyer’s fee (year 47)           10,000              26                   Book XI, Chapter
                                                                                  7
Consular reward for raising a            5 million                                Book XII, Chapter
pertinent issue in the senate (paid to                                            53
a senator; year 52)
Nero’s guaranteed annual income          500,000             ~1300                Book XIII, Chapter
for Messala (year 58)                                                             34
Seneca’s average annual earnings         75,000              ~200                 Book XIII, Chapter
(years 55-58)                                                                     42
Nero’s average annual gift to the        60 million          ~0.3% of GDP         Book XV, Chapter


31
 Available at http://www.forbes.com/lists/2007/10/07billionaires_The-Worlds-Billionaires-North-
America_6Rank.html.


                                                   67
state treasury (year 61)                                                                18
Nero’s subsidy to soldiers after they      2,000                 5.2                    Book XV, Chapter
crushed Piso’s conspiracy (year 65)                                                     72
Nero’s gift to Lyon (Lugdunum)             4 million             ~0.02% of GDP          Book XVI,
after a big fire (year 65)                                                              Chapter 13
Note: Augustus’s donatives refer to the amounts given out at his death.
Inflation rate was estimated by Temin (2003, p. 149) to have been less than 1 percent p.a,, up to the end of
the Julio-Claudian era in 69. Thus, later (post-Augustan) incomes ought to be deflated accordingly.

Population and area. Population is taken from Goldsmith (1984: p. 263). Goldsmith
also gives the area as 3.3 million km2, while Taagepera (1979: Table 2, p. 125) gives 3.4
million km2 (for year 1, wrongly labeled as year 0).

Urbanization rate. Goldsmith’s (1984: pp. 272-3) range is 9 to 13 percent with the
former number “nearer the lower boundary at the beginning of the principate.” (The
urbanization rate seems to be calculated based on the cut-off point of 2-3,000 people). In
addition to Rome, the population of which is conventionally estimated at 1 million
(Bairoch 1985: p. 115), there were six cities (Carthage, Alexandria, Antioch, Ephesus,
Pergamum and Apamea) with populations in excess of 100,000 (Schiavone 2000: p. 61).
Taking their average size to be 150,000, it follows that about 2 million (or almost 4
percent of the population) lived in the cities that were larger than 100,000. For the
urbanization rate, we use a median estimate of 10 percent.

Mean income in $PPP. Obtained by expressing mean income from Goldsmith (HS 380)
in terms of the subsistence minimum (estimated at HS 180), and then pricing the latter at
$PPP 400. This yields mean income of $PPP 844 in 1990 prices. In his most recent
(2007) update (available at http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/) Maddison gives Italian National
Disposable Income in year 14 as $PPP 806.

Discussion.
Temin (2003) argues that Goldsmith’s calculation of the mean Roman income is too high.
However, there are at least three counterarguments to Temin: (1) his critique of
Goldsmith’s calculations is not based on Goldsmith’s methodology (which Temin
praises) but on Goldsmith’s apparent use of Rome-based wage rates for the rest of the
Empire including Egypt where both wheat prices and wages were much lower in nominal
terms. Temin then uses an average of the two nominal wage-rates, and obtains a
significantly lower overall Imperial mean income. But that issue can be sidestepped by
arguing that the Imperial numbers are expressed in Rome-city prices. This is acceptable
since Temin (2003, p. 19) himself believes that real (wheat) wages in Egypt and Rome-
city were about the same. Thus, Temin’s metrhodology of averaging two nominal wage-
rates seems faulty. (2) The level of infrastructural development, urbanization, size of a
large standing army (almost ½ of a percent of total population), and the point made by
Schiavone (2000) that regional differences in mean incomes might have been as high as 5
or even 6 to 1, 32 imply that an overall Imperial mean income was unlikely to have been
32
  If there are large inter-regional differences, and even the poorest region is at the subsistence, then the
overall Imperial mean must be relatively high. Large regional differences are mentioned by Goldsmith too
(1984: p. 265).


                                                     68
less than HS 380 (as calculated by Goldsmith) which, using the assumptions regarding
the subsistence minimum, translates into about $PPP 850 (in 1990 prices). (3) There is
the consistency argument against changing Goldsmith’s mean income while retaining his
other calculations.




                                          69
                                      References

Allen, Robert C. (2001), “The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from the
        Middle Ages to the First World War,” Explorations in Economic History, vol. 38,
        pp. 411-447. An earlier version ”Wages, Prices & Living Standards: The World-
        Historical Perspective” available at
        www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Members/robert.allen/WagesPrices.htm
--- (2003), “Progress and poverty in early modern Europe”, Economic History Review,
        vol. LVI, pp. 403-443.
Bairoch, Paul (1985), De Jéricho à Mexico, NRF, Paris: Gallimard.
Brunt, P.A., (1950), “Pay and superannuation in the Roman army”, PBSR, vol. 18, pp.
50-71
Clark, Colin (1957), The Conditions of Economic Progress, London: McMillan.
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 2004. “Greed and Grievance in Civil War.” Oxford
Economic Papers 56, no. 4 (2004): 563-595.
Duncan-Jones, Richard (2000), Structure and Scale in the Roman Economy, Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Finley, Moses (1985), The Ancient Economy (second edition), Penguin.
Goldsmith, Raymond W. (1984), “An Estimate of the Size and Structure of the National
        Product of the Early Roman Empire”, Review of Income and Wealth vol. 30, no. 3
        (September), pp. 263-88.
Harl, Kenneth H. (1996), Coinage in the Roman Economy, 300 B.C. to A.D. 700,
        Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Maddison, Angus (2007), “World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2003 AD”,
        Updated March 2007. Available at http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/.
Milanovic, Branko (2006), “An estimate of average income and inequality in Byzantium
        around year 1000,” Review of Income and Wealth 52 (3).
Schiavone, Aldo (2000), The end of the past: Ancient Rome and the modern West,
        Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Taagepera, Rein (1979), “Size and duration of empires: growth-decline curves, 600BC –
        600AD,” Social Science History, vol. 3, No. 3/4
Temin, Peter (2006), "The economy of the early Roman Empire," Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, vol. 20, No. 1 (Winter 2006), pp. 133-51.
--- (2003), “Estimating GDP in the Early Roman Empire,” paper presented at the
conference on “Innovazione tecnica e progresso economico nel mondo romano”
organized by Elio Lo Casio (April 13-16 2003).
--- (no date), “The labor supply of the early Roman empire”, mimeo.
Walbank, F. W. (1946), The decline of the Roman Empire in the West, London: Cobbett
        Press.




                                          70
                                                      Appendix 2: The w/y Calculations

Observation                                             Gini mid-range    Average Economy      Landless Peasant    Urban Worker   Wr/y   Wu/y
                                                        Average Gini1     Income (y)           Income (Wr)         Income (Wu)
                                                        and Gini2

Rome 14: "workers @ ave. wage" = Wu                                37.9                 380                 234             304   0.62    0.8
"farmers & workers (free & slave)" = Wr
Byzantium 1000: "urban marginals" = Wu                             41.1                6.22                  3.5            3.5   0.56   0.56
"tenants" = Wr
England 1688: "laboring people & servants" = Wu                    45.0                  9.6                  2             4.3   0.21   0.45
"cottagers & paupers" = Wr
England 1801-3: "laborers in mines &                               51.5               21.93                  6.9            8.9   0.31   0.41
canals" = Wu, "laborers in husbandry" = Wr
Naples 1811: "income classes 3-9" = Wu                             28.3                65.8                  44              50   0.67   0.75
"income class 2" = Wr
India 1750: "village economy" = Wr                                 43.7                                                            0.6
India 1947: "landless peasants" = Wr                               48.9                                                            0.2
Brazil 1872: male day laborers in agriculture = Wr                 38.7                312                 212                    0.67
China 1880: "commoners" = Wr                                       24.2                 6.5                4.92                   0.76
Old Castille 1752: "Palencia city, three lowest                    52.4              975.72                491              530    0.5   0.54
classes" = Wu, "four rural districts, two lowest
classes" = Wr
Nueva Espana 1790: "indigenous peasant" = Wr                       63.5                 252                  61                   0.24

Sources: Ginis are the average of Actual Gini1 and Actual Gini2 from Table 2. Average economy incomes are from Appendix 1. Wr and Wu are from
Appendix 1, as defined.




                                                                  71
                          Appendix 3: Derivation of top 1 percent income share

       Define H(y)=cumulative percentage of people with incomes higher than y (the
reverse of the normal distribution that cumulates people from the bottom income
upwards).

        Also H(y) follows a Pareto distribution:

(1) H ( y ) = Ay − a

where a=Pareto exponent. If we do not have individual-level data but income distribution
tables with grouped data (fractiles of income distribution), then y should ideally be the
lower bound of the income interval. There are two differences between these
requirements and the data we have. First, we have only social classes arranged by their
mean incomes and population shares. In other words, we have percentages of people
with an average income and do not know lower or upper bounds of their income ranges.
Notice that the same problem exists when the data are arranged in deciles and only mean
income by decile is available. Second, there are very likely "leakages"--namely people
from lower (mean-poorer) social groups whose actual incomes are higher and should be
part of the top (and the reverse). This problem is specific to the type of data we have here.
These two departures of our data from the usual way income distribution statistics are
displayed (even in grouped form) should be kept in mind.

        Now, let us define G(y) = total income of those with incomes above y divided by
total population; if it follows a Pareto distribution, then

                  a
(2) G ( y ) =        Ay −( a −1)
                a −1

        Also, by definition, yh = mean income of people with income greater than y, and

            yhH ( y ) N
 G( y) =
               N

This means

            G( y) N G( y)     a     A ya     a
(3) y h =           =      =        a −1
                                          =     y
            H ( y) N H ( y) a − 1 y      A a −1

For example, if the Pareto constant is 2, then mean income of those with income greater
than y, will be 2y.

Using (1) and (2), we can link G(y) and H(y):



                                               72
                  a                  a               a
(4) G ( y ) =        Ay −( a −1) =      Ay − a y =      H ( y) y
                a −1               a −1            a −1

Write the expression (4) to the exponent a:

                       a
              ⎛ a ⎞           a     A
(G ( y )) a = ⎜     ⎟ H y =
                       a a
                                 Ha   = KoH a −1
              ⎝ a −1⎠       a −1    H

where Ko = constant, and we use expression (1).

Now this means that

a ln G = ln K 0 + (a − 1) ln H = K + (a − 1) ln H

where the constant K=ln Ko

Then,

            a
ln H =         ln G + C
          a −1

The ratio between the change in H and change in G is:

      ln H 1 − ln H 2 (a / a − 1) ln G1 − (a / a − 1) ln G 2     a
(5)                   =                                      =
       ln G1 − ln G 2             ln G1 − ln G 2               a −1

Expression (5) is the key relationship that we fit in order to get the Pareto constant and to
interpolate for the values that we do not have in the original data. For example, in the
case of Rome we have H1=1.71 and H2=0.29. Now, the H1 people receive 24.4 percent
of total income. And H2 people receive 6.2 percent of total income. The top 1 percent
receive the share that is between the two.

Using (2) we find that the share of total income received by people whose income is
greater than y, s(y), is equal to:

                G( y) N G( y)
(6) s ( y ) =          =
                 μN      μ

where μ=overall mean income.

         We can then transform (5)

      ln H 1 − ln H 2       ln H 1 − ln H 2          ln H 1 − ln H 2     a
(7)                   =                            =                 =
       ln G1 − ln G 2 ln s1 + ln μ − ln s 2 − ln μ    ln s1 − ln s 2   a −1


                                                    73
(7) will be the key relationship when we do the estimation:

          Thus,

ln 1.71 − ln 0.29 0.536 − (−1.238) 1.774
                  =               =      = 1.295
 ln 24.4 − ln 6.2   3.195 − 1.825   1.37

From which we find α=4.38.

Now, to find the income share of the top 1 percent, we use (7) again.

 ln 1.71 − ln 1
                = 1.295
ln 24.4 − ln x


   0.536
             = 1.295
3.195 − ln x

And thus x=16.13.

We obtain the same result if we do:

ln 1 − ln 0.29
               = 1.295.
 ln x − ln 6.2

        Note that the data we have here are: (i) the bottom cut-off point (y), the share of
people above that income level, H(y), and (iii) the share of total income they receive,
s(y). The cut-off point is crucial. If we have only the means (for each fractile) and the
percentage of people, we are effectively treating the fractile means as the bottom cut off
points.

      We can also get the important relationship between the income share and the
number of people above the income level y. Using (4) and (6), we get

             a
s( y)μ =        H ( y) y
           a −1

and
            a         y
s( y) =        H ( y)
          a −1        μ

        If H(y)=1 percent, then s(y)=(a/a-1)(y/μ), where y is the cut-off point above which
the top 1 percent of the population begins, and μ=overall mean. The ratio y/μ expresses,
in terms of the overall mean, income level where the top 1 percent of population begins


                                             74
(the 1 percent cut-off point). Going back to the Roman example where we found α=4.38
and s(y)=16.13, we can readily see that this implies a cut-off point of 12.4.




                                         75
                                                                         Table 1
                                  Data Sources, Estimated Demographic Indicators and GDI Per Capita
Country/territory        Source of data            Year       Number of       Estimated   Population   Area (in km2) Population    Estimated
                                                            social classes urbanization   (in 000)                   density       GDI per
                                                                           rate (in %)                               (person/km2) capita
Roman Empire             Social tables                14                11             10        55000    3,300,000             13           844
Byzantium                Social tables              1000                 8             10        15000    1,250,000              8           710
Holland                  Tax census                 1561                10             45          983        21,680          45.3         1129
                         dwelling rents
England and Wales        Social tables              1688                31                13            5700          130,000                 44             1418
Holland                  Tax census                 1732                10                39            2023           21,680               93.3             2035
                         dwelling rents
Moghul India             Social tables              1750                 4                11          182000        3,870,000                                 530
Old Castiille            Income census              1752                33                10            1980           89,061               22.2              745
Nueva España             Social tables             1790*                 3               9.1            4500        1,224,433                3.7              755
England and Wales        Social tables            1801-3                44                30            9277          130.000               71.4             2006
Bihar (India)            Monthly census             1807                10              10.5            3362          108,155               31.1              533
                         of expenditures
Kingdom of Naples        Tax census                 1811                12                 15           5000           82,000                 61              752
Brazil                   Professional               1872               813                5.1          10167        8,456,510                1.2              721
                         census
China                    Social tables              1880                 3                 7          377500        9,327,420               40.5              540
British India            Social tables              1947                 8              16.5          346000        3,870,000                89               617
Notes: GDI per capita is expressed in 1990 Geary-Khamis PPP dollars (equivalent to those used by Maddison 2003 and 2004). Population density is people per
square kilometer. For the data sources and detailed explanations, see Appendix 1.
* 1790 = 1784-1799.




                                                                             76
                                               Table 2
                                       Inequality Measures
Country/territory, year   Gini1      Gini2    Top            Mean        Maximum      Actual       Actual
                                              income         income      feasible     Gini as %    Gini as %
                                              class (in %    in terms    Gini (IPF)   of the       of the
                                              of total       of s                     maximum      maximum
                                              population)    (s=$PPP                  (with        (with
                                                             400)                     s=400)*      s=300)*
Roman Empire 14              36.4     39.4          0.004          2.1         52.8           75             61
Byzantium 1000               41.0     41.1           0.50          1.8         43.6           94             71
Holland 1561                 56.0                       1          2.8         64.5           87             76
England/Wales 1688           44.9     45.0           0.14          3.5         71.7           62             57
Holland 1732                 63.0                       1          5.1         80.3           78             74
Old Castille 1752            52.3     52.5           0.08          1.9         46.3          113             88
Moghul India 1750            38.5     48.9              1          1.3         24.5          200            113
Nueva España 1790            63.5                      10          1.9         47.0          135            105
Bihar (India) 1807           31.1     32.8             10          1.3         35.5          135             77
England/Wales 1801-3         51.2     51.5           0.08          5.0         80.0           64             61
Naples 1811                  28.1     28.4            0.7          1.9         46.8           61             47
Brazil 1872                  38.7     43.3            1.0          1.8         44.5           97             74
China 1880                   23.9     24.5            0.3          1.4         25.9           95             55
British India 1947           48.2     49.7           0.06          1.5         35.5          141             97

Modern comparators
Brazil 2002                            58.8                      10.4          90.3           65             63
South Africa 2000                      57.3                      11.0          90.8           63             62
China 2001                             41.6                       8.6          88.3           47             46
United States 2000                     39.9                      57.8          98.2           41             40
Sweden 2000                            27.3                      39.2          97.3           28             28
Nigeria 2003                           41.8                       2.3          55.7           75             63
Congo, D.R., 2004                      40.4                       1.1          11.0          366            122
Tanzania 2000                          34.4                       1.4          26.0          133             77
Malaysia 2001                          47.9                      17.7          94.2           51             50

* Calculated using Gini2 measures unless it is unavailable, in which case Gini1 is used. Modern Ginis,
calculated from individual-level data from national household surveys, are from World Income Distribution
database, benchmark year 2002 (see http://econ.worldbank.org/projects/inequality).
 Source: For ancient societies, see Appendix.




                                                   77
                          Table 3. Estimated top of income distribution

                          Top 1% share in          The cut-off point         Gini coefficient
                          total income (in %)      (in terms of mean
                                                   income)
Byzantium 1000                     30.6                     3.7                      41.1
China 1880                         21.3                     5.6                      24.5
Nueva España 1790                  21.1                     9.8                      63.5
Rome 14                            16.1                    12.4                      39.4
India-Moghul 1750                  15.0                    15.0                      48.9
K. of Naples 18                    14.3                     5.5                      28.4
India British 1947                 14.0                    16.9                      49.7
Bihar 1807                         11.5                     3.8                      33.5
Brazil 1872                        11.2                     5.7                      38.7
England 1801                        8.9                     6.2                      51.5
England 1688                        8.7                     6.1                      45.0
Old Castille 1752                   7.0                     6.2                      52.5

Mexico 2000                        11.5                      8.0                     53.8
UK 1999                            7.0                       4.3                     37.4
US 2000                            6.6                       4.7                     40.2
Italy 2000                          6.0                      4.2                     35.9
Germany 2000                        4.9                      3.6                     30.3
France 2000                         4.5                      3.5                     31.2
Note: Income distributions for Holland not available. All modern countries as calculated from LIS database
(using disposable per capita income). The cut-off point indicates the income level (expressed in terms of
overall country mean) where the top percentile begins. For the modern societies, it is estimated by taking
the mean income of the 99th percentile and adding 3 standard deviations (of income within that percentile).
Where available, the Gini is Gini2, otherwise Gini1 (Table 2).




                                                    78
                                                                                                   Figure 1
                                                                  Derivation of the Inequality Possibility Frontier

                                   100




                                   80
Maximum feasible inequality (G*)




                                   60




                                   40




                                   20




                                    0
                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                         1

                                                2

                                                       4

                                                              6

                                                                      8

                                                                          2

                                                                                 2

                                                                                        4

                                                                                               6

                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                    4.
                                             1.

                                                    1.

                                                           1.

                                                                   1.




                                                                              2.

                                                                                     2.

                                                                                            2.

                                                                                                   2.




                                                                                                               3.

                                                                                                                      3.

                                                                                                                             3.

                                                                                                                                    3.




                                                                                                                                               4.

                                                                                                                                                      4.

                                                                                                                                                             4.
                                                                              Average income as multiple of subsistence minimum (alpha)



                                         Note: Vertical axis shows maximum possible Gini attainable with a given α.




                                                                                                          79
                                                      Figure 2
                                 Ancient Inequalities: Estimated Gini Coefficients,
                                     and Two Inequality Possibility Frontiers
             90.0



             80.0



             70.0
                                             Nueva España 1734
                                                                                                                     Holland 1732
             60.0

                                                  Old Castille 1752       Holland 1561
                                     India 1947
             50.0
Gini index




                               India 1750                                                                England 1801

                                                                                          England 1688
             40.0                                      Byzantine E 1000
                                                            Roman E 14
                                Bihar 1807     Brazil 1872
                                                     K. Naples 1811
             30.0


                              China 1880
             20.0



             10.0



              0.0
                    0                  500                       1000                    1500                 2000                  2500
                                                                 GDI per capita (in 1990 $PPP)



                    Note: The solid line IPF is constructed on the assumption that s=$PPP400; the broken-line IPF is
                    constructed on the assumption that s=$PPP 300. Estimated Ginis are Ginis2 unless only Gini1 is
                    available.




                                                                          80
                                                   Figure 3
                         Ginis and the Inequality Possibility Frontier for the Ancient
                                Society Sample and Selected Modern Societies
                   100
                   80




                                                              BRA
                   60




                                                                ZAF
            Gini




                                                                         MYS
                                                                                                USA
                   40




                         CON         NIG                   CHN
                            TZA
                                                                                           SWE
                   20
                   0




                                     1000       2000            5000           10000         20000
                                                   GDI per capita


Note: Modern societies are drawn with hollow circles. IPF drawn on the assumption of s=$PPP 400 per
capita per year. Horizontal axis in logs.




                                                  81
                                                             Figure 4
                                            Inequality Extraction Ratio for the Ancient
                                           Society Sample and Selected Modern Societies
                    200
      inequality extraction ratio




                            CON
                 100




                                    TZA   NIG
                                                                   BRA
                                                                     ZAF

                                                                             MYS              USA
                                                               CHN
                                                                                           SWE
                    0




                                          1000       2000              5000        10000   20000
                                                     gdp per capita in 1990 ppp


Note: Modern societies are drawn with hollow circles. Horizontal axis in logs. Inequality extraction ratio
                                       shown in percentages.




                                                             82
  Figure 5. The top percentile’s income share and the cut-off income level separating it
                                from the lower 99 percent

             30              Byzantium




                                      China              Nueva Espana
    top 1% share share
                   20




                                                                    Roman Empire
                                                                             India-Moghul
                                     Kingdom of Naples                               India-British

                             Bihar   Brazil
    10




                                         England 1688-PC
                                         England 1801-PC
                                         Old Castille
             0




                         0      5                      10                   15                   20
                                              cutoff income level


         Note: The cut-off point is income level, expressed in terms of country mean income, where the top
percentile begins. The two data points for England and Wales (1688 and 1801-3) almost fully overlap.




                                                        83
                           Figure 6. Top five percentiles of income distribution in
                              Byzantium 1000, Rome 14, and England 1801-3

              40




                                  Byzantium
                      30
    cumul. income share




                           Roman E
                                           England 1801-3
            2010
              0




                            1          2          3          4             5            6
                                                top percentile

Note: All data points except for the top 1 percent are empirical. The top 1 percent share is derived using
Pareto interpolation.




                                                     84
                                 Figure 7. Gini vs the y/w Ratio in an Ancient Sample of Eleven
                        70


                                                                                                         Nueva Espana 1790
                        60
                                                                                      England 1801
                                                                                                                    England 1688
                                                                 Castille 1752
                        50
                                                                                                                           India 1947

                                                       India 1750
     Gini Coefficient




                                                          Byzantium 1000
                        40
                                      Brazil 1872
                                                      Rome 14


                        30
                                                    Naples 1811

                                                China 1880

                        20




                        10




                        0
                             0         1                     2                        3              4                 5                6
                                           Average Economy-wide Income versus Income of Rural Labor (y/w)

``




                                                                                 85
86
