NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A FISCAL FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS OF
INTEREST RATE BEHAVIOR IN
OPEN ECONOMIES

John H. Makin

Working Paper No. 1355

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 198L

Support from the Suntory Foundation and the National Science
Foundation Grant No. SES—8112681 is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and Taxation and projects
in Government Budget and Productivity (World Economy). Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1355
May 1984

A Fiscal Framework For Analysis of Interest
Rate Behavior in Open Economies
ABSTRACT

This paper derives a reduced—form expression for an interest
rate in an open economy by incorporating after tax covered interest

parity conditions into a simple neo—classical macro model. The result
clearly demonstrates that the relationship between an interest rate
and variables used to explain it is conditional on income tax rates
at home and abroad and presence or absence of capital gains tax

treatment of foreign exchange gains or losses. Effects of non—indexation
of tax treatment of depreciation and inventories may also play a role.
Any change in effective tax rates over a sample period employed to
estimate interest rate (or exchange rate) equations may cause deteriora-

tion in the fit of a fixed coefficient model. Efforts are underway to
employ a random coefficients approach to address this problem.

Until August 30, 1984

After September 1, 1984

John H. Nakin
Department of Economics,
DK—30
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

John H. Makin, Director
Fiscal Policy Studies Program
American Enterprise Institute
1150 Seventeenth St. N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036

(206) 543—5945

(202) 862—6414

I.

Introduction

This paper develops a model for analysis of interest rate behavior

in open economies. Feldstein's (1983) warning that "the failure to deal
explicitly with the fiscal framework of monetary policy is a serious

shortcoming of modern monetary theory" is taken seriously. The model

developed incorporates domestic and foreign tax treatment of: Interest
income and expense, depreciation, and inventory valuation, and foreign

exchange gains and losses. Applicable tax rates appear explicitly in a
derived, reduced—form equation expressing an interest rate in terms of
expected inflation at home and abroad, unanticipated changes in the money
supply, unanticipated changes in the fiscal deficit, the stage of the

business cycle, and uncertainty about the level of inflation. Changes
in tax rates are shown to alter the relationship between interest rates
and variables, like those listed above, employed to explain their
behavior.

Most of the elements of the model presented here have appeared sep-

arately elsewhere. Darby (1975), Feldstein (1976) and Tanzi (1976)
showed the necessity to incorporate tax treatment of interest income
and expense into analysis of the responsiveness of interest rates to

changes in anticipated inflation. Levi and Makin (1978) (1979) showed
that the Fisher equation alone was not an adequate formulation to represent interest rate behavior and that interest rate equations are better
represented as reduced forms deriveable from the macromodel whose struc—

—2--

ture determines the relationship between interest rates and exogenous

shocks to the macromodel. Makin (1978) followed the same procedure to
show that the impact on interest rates of changes in expected Inflation

would be reduced in an open economy. Peek (1982) and Peek and Wilcox
(1983) incorporate changes over time in tax rates into their analysis

of Interest rate behavior. Blejer (1983) introduces taxes into the
interest parity condition and the Fisher equation and examines implications for international capital flows thereby extending work by Tanzl
and Blejer (1982) on capital movements between developed and developing

countries. Hartman (1979) examines how the presence of taxation leads
to reallocation of the real capital stock across countries.

Despite these many developments, there remains a need for a comprehensive model which both incorporates a full range of tax rates and
recognizes integration of capital markets and the resultant after—tax

interest parity condition. Such a tax—oriented, open economy model of
interest rate behavior should prove particularly useful in highlighting implications for behavior of interest rates in more open economies

arising from differences in domestic versus foreign tax policies. The
effect arising from sharp changes abroad in expected inflation which
result from enhancement or relaxation of policies of inflation control,
can also be carefully considered.

As such, the model developed here is highly suggestive of non—
neutralities resulting from both unanticipated and anticipated monetary
disburbances where tax rates are applied to unindexed nominal, rather

than real, magnitudes. The distortions which result from taxation of
nominal interest rates and profits become particularly pronounced in a

—3—
highly inflationary environment. Where such distortions are present
in a large economy which plays a central role in international capital
markets, they tend to be transmitted to other economies in a manner
that is determined by the relationship between tax policies of other

economies and those of the large economy. It is this behavior which
the model developed here is particularly designed to analyze.
Section II briefly outlines a structural framework from which a

reduced form expression for a representative rate of interest is derived.
Section III discusses the effect of tax policy on the relationship
between both nominal and expected after—tax real rates and a set of
explanatory variables derived from the structural equations of the

model. Section IV presents some concluding remarks.

II. Modeling Behavior of the Expected After—
Tax Real Interest Rate in an Open Economy
The basic aim of this section is to demonstrate how expected and
unexpected monetary policy actions will, along with other variables
affect the expected after—tax real interest rate hereafter referred to

as the after—tax real rate. The impact of monetary policy both domestically and abroad reflects two fundamental considerations. First, the
behavior of savers, Investors, exporters, importers, money holders, and
foreign exchange market participants is determined along with other

variables by expected after—tax returns. Second, tax policies differ
across countries as well as with regard to interest income and expense

versus foreign exchange gains and losses. Within the framework to be
employed here it

Is

useful to view expected monetary policy actions as

—4—
being largely reflected by expected inflation. Unexpected monetary
policy actions are measured as residuals from an ARMA

(0,8)

model of

money (Ml) growth. 1/

A shortcoming of many models of interest rate determination which
do consider tax policy regarding interest Income and expense is a fail—
ure to impose an after—tax interest parity condition. 2/

That condition

may be written as: 3/

= i(l—r)

i

+ (l_Tk)(1Tt_1T) +

(lTk) i (l—T)(nt—1r)

(1)

where (an "F" superscript denotes "foreign")
nominal interest rate.

anticipated inflation over life of instrument on which i
is to be paid.
T

Tk

=

marginal

tax rate applied to interest income and expense.

marginal

tax rate on foreign exchange gains.

1/ For a full discussion of this measure of money surprises and of
alternative measures, see Makin (1983).
2/ After—tax interest parity is absent from Makin and Tanzi (1982.b),
Makin (1983), Peek (1982), and Peek and Wilcox (1982). This omission
is not particularly serious in these papers which investigate interest
rate behavior in the United States. But for smaller more open economies
this omission could be significant.
3/ This parity condition represents equilibrium for domestic investors
but not necessarily for foreign investors. Simultaneous equilibrium
for both requires that tax rates be equal in both countries. Otherwise,
as is typically the case, two—way capital flows can result ESee Levi
(1977) and Blejer (l983).J

—5—
Equation (1) also satisfies purchasing power parity (PPP) since
expected depreciation of domestic against foreign currency is measured
by the difference between the expected rates of inflation at home and

abroad. 1/
The last term in equation (1), the "interaction term," will be

very small and is ignored. 2/ Dividing both sides of (1) by (1—i) and
omitting the small interaction term gives:

=

(1 k)

+

(c')

(2)

(1 T)

Equation (2) highlights the fact that after—tax interest parity
will differ from pre—tax interest parity only in countries where interest
income is taxed at a rate which differs from the rate applied to foreign

exchange gains and losses. This condition is satisfied in the United
States, Canada, and the United Kingdom where realized foreign exchange
gains and losses are treated as capital gains and losses and the returns
on assets held longer than a statutory minimum period are taxed at

lower rates than interest earnings which aretaxed as ordinary income.
Most other industrial countries tax both interest Income and exchange
gains and losses as ordinary income.

1/ "Real" exchange rate changes, those in excess of changes implied
by PPP could also be included here and their impact on after—tax real
rates would be conditional on tax rates In equation (1). It has, however, proved very difficult to Identify variables with a systematic impact on real echange rates and so no attempt to model real exchange
rates explicitly is included here with the result that movements in
real exchange rates are pushed into the residual of the interest rate
equation (9) below.

2/ Given i 0.10, Tk 0.25, T 0.35, and (1Tt—1T') =
action term in (1) is 0.0024.

0.05,

the inter--

Substituting into equation (2) an expression for i written as
an after—tax Fisher equation gives: 1/
1
j

r
I.

l_TF

(l—rk)
*
rF + rt
iTt
(1—i)

(1—T) —
+ rL

(l-Tk)(l—TF)

ixF

(lTF)(lT)

Equation (3) captures, purchasing power parity, after tax interest

par ity, and the foreign after—tax Fisher equation. What remains is to
derive an expression for the domestic after—tax real interest rate from
a macroeconomic model, equate it to a foreign after—tax real rate and

substitute the result into a domestic, after—tax Fisher equation. The
result is an expression for the domestic nominal interest rate which
simultaneously satisfies all of the equilibrium conditions of a typical
macromodel, purchasing power parity, after—tax interest parity, and
after—tax Fisher equations at home and abroad. 2/

1/ The after—tax Fisher equation abroad is written as
=

(

1
l—T F

)

[r

+ IT]

(3.a)

where rF is the expected, after—tax real interest rate abroad and
TF
is the foreign marginal tax rate applied to interest income and expense.
Strictly speaking, equation (3.a) ought to be written as a full expression for nominal interest like that to be derived below for a domestic
economy. In effect, we take the foreign expected after tax real Interest
rate to be exogenously fixed and equate the domestic after—tax real
interest rate to it.
2/ Commodity arbitrage equilibrium (PPP) is assumed to be unaffected
by taxation. This is because commodity arbitrage involves no exchange
gains or losses since the commodity arbitrageur is assumed to purchase
only the amount of foreign exchange required to purchase commodities
abroad while they are less expensive than those available at home.

—7—
The macroeconomic framework consists of four structural equations
typical of models in the familiar IS—FM format with a supply side in—

eluded. The model is an extension of a framework employed in Makin
(1982)(l983) and Makin and Tanzi (1982b) to include after—tax interest

parity and purchasing power parity conditions. The log of total real
expenditure not related to domestic Income Et (investment, exports plus
domestic government expenditure) is written as:

— a1r

Et =

—

"2t + a3X — a4iI + aSCAP + ei

(4)

(cj, 1... 5 > 0)

log of real investment plus real exports plus real domestic

Where Et

government expenditure.

r

expected after—tax real interest rate
= a measure of inflation uncertainty.

X =
=

log

of a shift in the total real expenditure schedule.

anticipated

Inflation.

GAPt = a measure of Intensity of capacity utilization.
elt

an error term normally distributed with zero mean. (All

error terms, ei (i1... 4) take this form.)
Total expenditure not related to domestic Income, Et is depressed

by a rise In the after—tax real rate, r and by a rise in Inflation

uncertainty. The former effect is well known. The latter effect arises
due to the positive association between Inflation uncertainty and
relative price uncertainty documented by Cukierrnan and Wachtel (1982).

Since most capital is not adaptable to many uses, more like clay than

—8—

putty,

investment really represents an increased commitment to a given

set of relative prices and is therefore made more risky by increased
uncertainty about relative prices. 1/
The remaining variables In the expenditure equation are a shift

variable, X, anticipated inflation and a measure of capacity utilization to capture an accelerator effect on investment. Expected inflation carries a negative sign to reflect negative pressure on investment
owing to the depressing effect of inflation on corporate profits that
arises from historic cost depreciation rules as noted by Feldstein and
Summers (1978). 2/

The log of the sum of real saving, taxes, and imports, Z, is
written:

+

1l't

—

12(mt—pt)

+ 3t — y4a + e2

(11, 12, 1 3 > 0)

(5)

where

log of real income (output).

(m—p) = log

of real money balances.

Equilibrium in the money sector is written as:

(mt—pt) o +

— 2(T)1t

+ e3t

(6)

It will be seen below, once the model is solved for the nominal
1/
Interest rate, that the inflation uncertainty term in equation (4)
implies a negative relationship between inflation uncertainty and the
nominal Interest rate. Hartman and Makin (1982) employ a utility—
maximizing framework which provides an alternative rationale for this
negative relationship.
2/ The depressing impact of actual inflation on corporate profits
may be offset by a reduction in the real value of corporate debt, but
only Insofar as the actual inflation is unanticipated. See Makin and
Tanzi (1982b).

—9—
The supply side of the model represents real income (output) as:

+ +i(m—t_im) + +2Yt_l + e4

(7)

surprise money growth measured as the difference

(mt—tim)

between the log of the current money supply and the log of the anticipated (as of t—l for t) money supply 1/

Finally, the Fisher equation for the domestic country is written
as:
1

= (_—_-)
1— t

Equations

[r + i]

(8)

(4) through (7) and equation (3) can now be used to

solve for r. Substituting the result into (8) yields a reduced—form
equation for the nominal interest rate in terms of a constant term,

expected inflation, money surprises, inflation uncertainty, expenditure
disturbances, pressure on capacity, time and an error term.
1

=

(____) [X

—

+ (l—X1)1T

1— T

+ Vt]

—X4o + X5X —

A3(mt

—

(9)

where, given
(l—T)

22 +13]

[11+
(l—TF)

A0 = [a0 —

A1 =

[aj +

lo + Y (o

+

l )]/

122 (l—Tk)]/'
(l—T) — (l—Tk)(l—Tp)

A2

(

(l—TF)

A3 =

4lE1l12l]/

(0 < A1 < 1)

]' 2

> 0)

(A3 > 0) 2/

1/ In principle, based on inventory—stock considerations described by
Binder and Fischer (1981) lagged money surprises could be included In
equation (7).
2/ A3 is positive since y, the elasticity of real saving plus
imports and taxes with respect to real income, is unity given a constant

— 10 —

A4
A5

=

Vt

(a2 —

(A14 >< 0)

a5/

(A5 > 0)

[e1t + 11e4
+ y2(1e4t + e3 )—e 1/
t
t

t

III. Effect of Fiscal Policy on the Behavior of
Nominal and After—Tax Real Interest Rates
The most significant feature of equation (9) regarding a fiscal
framework for analysis of interest rate behavior is the implied effect
of ordinary income tax rates both at home and abroad, T and Tp, Ofl

the relationship between the nominal interest rate and all explanatory

variables. The tax rate on foreign exchange gains appears in the terms
describing the impact on the nominal interest rate of domestic and

foreign—expected inflation. In view of equation (9), it is little
wonder that estimated Fisher equations employing data for different
time periods or for different countries have produced largely unstable
estimates of the relationship between nominal interest rates and

inflation. Results have been further disturbed by omission of one or
more of the relevant explanatory variables which ought to appear
along with expected inflation in a propertly specified interest rate
equation.

Also significant in equation (9) is the implied value of the term
describing the impact of expected inflation on the nominal interest

rate. A one per cent rise in domestic—expected inflation raises the

2/ (continued from p. 9) ratio of saving plus taxes and imports
to income, while 8, the elasticity of demand for real balances
with respect to real income and Y2, the (elasticity) real balance
effect on saving plus imports, are both fractions.

11 —

interest

rate by [(l—A1)/(l—T) per cent with (0 < A1 < 1). The full

magnification effect of anticipated inflation on interest, [l/(l—T)]

suggested by Darby (1975), Feldstein (1976), and Tanzi (1976) Is

dampened by the Mundell effect, proportional to Y22 and the

Feldsteln—Surnmers effect proportional to a. Both produce negative
pressure on the after—tax real rate when expected inflation rises.

The Mundell effect results from the lower stock of real money demanded

when expected inflation rises. A lower stock of real cash balances
depresses consumption (elevates saving) and ceteris paribus a drop in
the after—tax real rate is required to raise real expenditure up to
the higher level of saving flows.

The Feldsteiri—Summers effect lowers

the after—tax real rate given a rise in expected inflation by shifting
down the expenditure function in the face of a reduction of expected
after—tax profits caused by historical cost depreciation methods in

U.S. tax law. 1/ These considerations suggest that the failure of
most empirical studies to find a full magnification effect of [l/(l—T)]
running from changes In expected inflation results from operation of
Mundell and Feldstein—Summers effects along with the configuration of

tax rates represented In A1. Given a tax rate applicable to interest
income and expense of T =

0.30,

the full magnification 'effect would

suggest that a 1.43 per cent rise in the interest rate would result

1/ Tax treatment in this area and with regard to inventories varies
considerably across countries and needs to be incorporated on a case—
by—case basis. These policies are surveyed in Modi (1983). For the
United States. It has been calculated by Feldstein and Summers (1979)
that excess taxes resulting from the use of historical cost depreciation and first—in—first—out (FIFO) inventory valuation have accounted
for as much as 45 per cent of the taxes paid by nonfinancial corpora—
tion.

— 12 —

from a 1.0 per cent rise in expected inflation. However, allowing for
the dampening effect of the A1 term in equation (9), and given some
reasonable values of relevant parameters, the full equilibrium impact
of a one per cent rise in expected inflation would be a 0.75 per cent
rise in interest, or slightly over half of the full magnification
effect. 1/

The expression for the A1 term in equation (9) suggests some
specific hypotheses about implications of tax rates for sensitivity

of Interest rates to changes in expected inflation. A reduction in
either foreign tax rates on interest income and/or a reduction in
domestic tax rates applied to capital gains or losses will each unambiguously raise A1, thereby further dampening the magnification

effect of expected inflation on Interest rates, and resulting in
less sensitivity of nominal interest rates to changes in expected
inflation.

The dampening will be due to the effect of such tax rates

in enhancing the negative impact of changes in expected inflation
on after—tax real rates.
The negative impact on domestic interest of a rise in expected
inflation outside of a country is ceteris paribus due to the fact
that higher expected inflation abroad coincides with a reduction in

expected depreciation (increase in expected depreciation) of domestic

currency. This in turn lowers the equilibrium level of domestic

0.25, TK = 0.20,
0.25, and 2 = 0.5. Obviously the

a1 = 0.25,
result
Is sensitive to parameter values. The basis points being made here
are that It is crucially tied to tax rates and less than that indicated
by the full magnification effect.

1/ This result assumes: T

Q4

0.2, 2 = 0.2,

13 =

0.30,

1F =

—13—

interest rates relative to foreign. This effect would be more pro—
nounced in countries where tax rates applied to capital gains and
losses are higher relative to domestic tax rates on interest income.
The corollary proposition is that countries such as the United States,

Canada, and the United Kingdom, which apply lower tax rates to foreign
exchange gains and losses would, ceteris paribus, tend to observe less
sensitivity of domestic interest rates to changes abroad in expected

inflation. Given parameter values like those in the footnote above,
a rise in tax rates on foreign interest income would also tend to raise
the responsiveness of domestic interest rates to changes in inflationary

expectations abroad. Therefore, countries linked by security and commodity arbitrage to "foreign" countries where inflation and attendant
bracket creep raise tax rates on interest income may find their own
interest rates becoming more sensitive to changes in expected inflation
in these "foreign" countries.

Turning to other variables in the Interest rate equation (9), it
is first worth noting that since all of the reduced—form coefficients
(the Xi) contain

as a denominator, the value of each will ceteris

paribus rise given a rise in the ratio of domestic to foreign income

tax rates (T/TF). Countries with relatively high tax rates on
interest income will tend to experience enhanced sensitivity of both

nominal and real Interest rates to unanticipated movements in money
growth, expenditure schedule disturbances, inflation uncertainty,

changes in the degree of capacity utilization and lagged changes in
Output.

— 14 —

Some general theoretical conclusions about implications of tax

policy for behavior of interest rates in open economies emerge from

this discussion. First, a rise in the ratio of domestic to foreign
income tax rates (r/TF) enhances the sensitivity of after—tax

real rates to all variables save changes in foreign expected inflation

where the impact is ambiguous. Second, a rise in (T/TF) reduces
the responsiveness of nominal interest rates to changes in domestic

expected inflation since the enhanced sensitivity of the after—tax real

rate provides more dampening of the simple magnification effect. Third,
the sensitivity of nominal and after tax real rates to all real disturbances (surprise money growth, inflation uncertainty, expenditure
schedule shifts, and intensity of capacity utilization, and lagged real
output) is increased by a rise in (T/TF) and is unaffected by

tax rates applicable to foreign exchange gains and losses. Fourth, a
rise in tax rates applicable to foreign exchange gains and losses will
ceteris paribus increase sensitivity of domestic nominal Interest rates
to changes In expected inflation at home and abroad while reducing
sensitivity of domestic nominal Interest rates to changes in expected
Inflation at home and increasing sensitivity of after—tax real rates to
changes In expected inflation abroad.

With tax rates taken as given, the impact on interest rates of the
real variables mentioned above is extensively discussed in Makin and

Tanzi (1982b). That discussion Is repeated here, largely unaltered,
for the convenience of the reader.

— 15 —

The hypothesized negative impact of money surprises on the real

rate arises from their positive impact on real income which, in turn,
elevates real saving and requires a drop in the real rate to produce an

equilibrating rise in real investment. This effect outweighs the simultaneous upward pressure on the real rate that results from excess demand

for real balances associated with elevated real income. Lagged real
income (output) depresses the real rate, given its positive impact on
current real income, by the same causal chain described for money surprises.

It is important to distinguish between the real income impact of
a money surprise described here and an expectations effect like that

reported by Mishkin (1982). Mishkin reports a positive relationship
between quarterly money surprises and end—of—period short—term interest

rates. The result arises, in Mishkin's view, from a positive Impact of
a money surprise on expected Inflation. In contrast, this study employs
period—average short—term rates as a dependent variable In order to
capture the real income Impact under way during the quarter, before
comparison of an actual with an anticipated money supply gives rise to

an expectations effect. A fuller discussion of Mlshkin's results and
their relationship with results obtained here is contained In Makin

(1982c). An alternative liquidity rationale for a negative relationship
between money surprises and short—term rates is discussed in Makln
(1982b) and Khan (1980).

The impact of uncertainty about Inflation on the equilibrium,

after—tax real rate is ambiguous as discussed earlier. The negative
impact of uncertainty about inflation on real Investment Is measured

— 16 —

by a2 in equation (4). The negative impact on real saving of uncertainty about inflation is measured by 14 in equation (5). The ambiguous
impact on the interest rate is given by A4 in equation (9).
The impact of exogenous upward shifts in the expenditure schedule

on the after—tax real rate is unambiguously positive. If there is an
exogenous upward shift in aggregate demand, the after—tax real rate
must rise to "crowd out" private investment in order to restore commodity

market equilibrium. The model represented by equations (4) through
(9) makes it clear that tests of the possible impact of fiscal deficits
on interest rates cannot be conducted by inserting a measure of the

actual fiscal deficit directly into an interest rate equation. Since
tax proceeds rise with income, the built—in portion of deficits is

endogenous and typically countercyclical. Interest rates are typically
procyclical; therefore, the coefficient on the actual deficit (measured
as a positive number) term in the interest rate equation will be downwardly biased and possibly negative. 1/

One way to avoid these difficulties is to test the impact on
Interest rates of unanticipated movements in the fiscal deficit. 2/
This approach purges the deficit of its systematic component which, as
noted above, tends to bias downward its measured impact on interest

rates. Further, given period—average short—term rates as the dependent

1/ This is confirmed by results reported in Makin and Tanzi (l982b).
For a thorough discussion of government deficits and aggregate demand,
see FeldsteIn (1982).
2/ Another way could be to use the full employment budget surplus.

— 17 —

variable,

as with money surprises, it is possible to capture the impact

on interest rates of higher—than—expected sales of government securities

during the quarter. This impact should occur before the end of the
quarter, when comparison of an actual with an anticipated fiscal deficit

may give rise to an expectations effect. More specifically, a surprise
increase in the deficit may cause market participants to expect higher

money growth and therefore higher inflation. But if this expectations
effect is already captured in the expected inflation term, the surprise

deficit will appear to have no additional explanatory power. The use of
a period—average interest rate as a dependent variable, as noted, avoids
this problem of apparent redundancy of fiscal deficits in an interest

rate equation. We expect that a surprise deficit will raise the period—
average interest rate.

Intensity of capacity utilization, an accelerator argument In the
expenditure equation, will be positively related to the after—tax real

and nominal Interest rates. As capacity limits are approached, capital
formation is required and investment expenditure shifts upward. Ceteris
paribus, a higher after—tax real rate is required to maintain equilibrium.

After consideration of all these factors, it Is clear from equation (9) that regression of nominal interest on a constant, a surprise
deficit, a money surprise, GAP, a measure of uncertainty about inflation, and expected inflation ought to (a) test the hypothesized positive
impact on the after—tax real interest rate of an exogenous shock to
aggregate demand (measured by an unanticipated deficit); (b) test the
hypothesized negative impact of a money surprise on the after—tax real

— 18 —

rate

by checking to see if the coefficient on the surprise is signifi—

cantly less than zero; 1/ (c) test the hypothesized negative impact of
expected inflation on after—tax real Interest by checking to see if the
coefficient on expected inflation is significantly below [l/(1—T)J;

(d) measure the net Impact of uncertainty about Inflation on the after—
tax real rate; (e) test the impact of intensity of capacity utilization
on the after—tax real rate; and (f) test the Impact of expected inflation
abroad on the after—tax real rate.

IV. Concluding Remarks
To date, much of the analysis of interest rate behavior, and
particularly its relationship to changes in expected inflation, has

focussed on the United States. 2/ Tax policy regarding interest Income
and expense has been introduced Into most models since its relevance
was pointed out by Darby (1975), Feldsteln (1976), and Tanzi (1976).
Less attention has been paid to formulation of open economy models
which permit analysis of transmission of monetary disturbances from
abroad and which consequently must incorporate tax policies relevant to
determination of equilibrium after—tax Interest arbitrage conditions.
In addition, little has been done to Include tax policies regarding
depreciation and Inventory allowances in models of interest rate
behavior.

This paper has developed a model that, it is hoped, will include
all of these relevant aspects of tax policy in a framework useful for

1/ See Makin (l982a) for a full discussion of effects of money surprises.

2/ A notable exception is the paper on Canada by Carr, Pesando and
SmIth (1976).

— 19 —

analysis

of interest rate behavior in medium—sized or smaller economies

where "foreign" variables refer to events in larger economies. This
framework may prove useful as a means to analyze along with relevant

domestic variables the impact on interest rates in smaller and medium
sized economies of monetary and fiscal policy policies in large economies.

Perhaps with this framework in hand, empirical investigation of
interest rate behavior outside of the United States will be expanded.

There remain some difficulties regarding availability of time series

data on relevant tax rates and measures of anticipated inflation. The
latter problem may be mitigated by employment of time series modeling
to obtain measures of expected inflation where survey data, such as the
widely used Livfngstone data for the United States, is not available.
Current studies underway within the Fiscal Affairs Department and elsewhere, particularly at the National Bureau of Economic Research, may
eventually provide time series on relevant tax rates.

— 20 —

References
Biejer, Mario I. (1983) "Financial Market Taxation and International
Capital Flows," working paper, International Monetary Fund,
January 1983.

Blinder, Alan S., and Stanley Fischer (1981). "Inventories, Rational
Expectations and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics
(November 1981), pp. 277—304.
Carr, J., James E. Pesanclo, and Lawrence B. Smith (1976), "Tax Effects,
Price Expectations, and the Nominal Rate of Interest," Economic
InquIry (June 1976) pp. 259—69.

Cukierman, Alex, and Paul Wachtel (1982). "Relative Price Variability
and Nonuniform Inflationary Expectations," Journal of Political
Economy (February 1982), pp. 146—57.
Darby, Michael R. (1975). "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary
Policy on Interest Rates," Economic Inquiry (June 1975), pp. 266—76.
Feldstein, Martin (1976). "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of
Interest: A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review (December
1976), pp. 809—20.

(1982). "Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand," Journal
of Monetary Economics (January 1982), pp. 1—20.

__________

(1982) "The Fiscal Framework of Monetary Policy" (Distinguished Lecture, Western Economic Society, July 16, 1982) National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working paper No. 966, August 1982.

___________

and Lawrence Summers (1978). "Inflation, Tax Rules and
the Long—Term Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
pp. 61—99.

and L. Summers (1979) "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital
Income in the Corporate Sector" National Tax Journal: XXXII, 4,
pp. 445—470.

___________

Hartman, David G. (1979) "Taxation and the Effects of Inflation on the
Real Capital Stock in an open Economy" International Economic Review
(June 1979) pp. 417—25.
}iartman, Richard, and John H. Makin (1982). "Inflation Uncertainty and
Interest Rates," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
No. 906, June 1982.
Levi, Maurice D. (1977) "Taxation and 'Abnormal' International Capital
Flows" Journal of Political Economy (June 1977) pp. 635—646.

— 21 —

__________ and John H. Makin (1978). "Anticipated Inflation and
Interest Rates: Further Interpretation of Findings on the Fisher
Equation," American Economic Review (December 1978), pp. 801—12.

__________ (1979). "Fisher, Phillips, Friedman and the Measured Impact
of Inflation on Interest," Journal of Finance (March 1979), pp. 35—52.
Makin, John H. (1978) "Anticipated Inflation and Interest Rates in an
Open Economy," Journal of Money Credit and Banking (August 1978)
pp. 275—89.

__________ (1982). "Effects of Inflation Control Programs on Expected
Real Interest Rates," International Monetary Fund, Staff Papers (June
1982), pp. 204—232.

_________ (l982a). "Money Surprises and Short—Term Interest Rates:
Reconciling Contradictory Findings," National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 993, SeptemBer 1982.
__________, and Tanzi, Vito (l982b) "The Level and Volatility of Interest
the United States: The Role of Expected Inflation, Real Rates
Rates
and Taxes "International Monetary Fund, Departmental Memorandum, 82/81,
November 30, 1982).

in

_________ (1983).

"Real Interest, Money Surprises, Anticipated Inflation and Fiscal Deficits," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
forthcoming (1983).

Modi, Jitendra R. "Survey of Tax Treatment of Investment Income and
Payments in Selected Industrial Countries", Fiscal Affairs Department,
International Monetary Fund, mimeo, December 1982.

Peek, Joe (1981). "Interest Rates, Income Taxes, and Anticipated
Inflation" (mimeographed), Department of Economics, Boston College,
July 1981
Peek, Jand Wilcox, J.A. (1982) "The Postwar Stability of the Fisher
Effect", Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley, 1982.

Tanzi, Vito (1976). "Inflation, Indexation and Interest Income
Taxation," Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, Quarterly Review (March 1976),
29, pp. 54—76.

—________ , and Mario I. Blejer, (1982) "Inflation, Interest Rate Policy
and Currency Substitution in Developing Economies: A Discussion of
Some Major Issues," World Development, Vol. 10, No. 9 1982, pp. 781—89.

