                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ON OPTIMAL LEGAL CHANGE, PAST BEHAVIOR, AND GRANDFATHERING

                                            Steven Shavell

                                         Working Paper 13563
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13563


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




I thank Louis Kaplow, Saul Levmore, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Chris Snyder,
Kathryn Spier, Robert Stavins, Roberton Williams, and an anonymous referee for comments, John
Howell, Christopher Taggart, Jane van Lare, and Paul Vronsky for research assistance, and the John
M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
On Optimal Legal Change, Past Behavior, and Grandfathering
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 13563
October 2007
JEL No. K1,K2,K32,L5

                                                ABSTRACT

When is it socially advantageous for legal rules to be changed in the light of altered circumstances?
In answering this basic question here, a simple point is developed -- that past compliance with legal
rules tends to reduce the social advantages of legal change. The reasons are twofold: adjusting to a
new legal rule often involves costs; and the social benefits of change are frequently only incremental,
only in addition to those of past compliance. The general implications are that legal rules should be
more stable than would be appropriate were the relevance of past behavior not recognized, and that
a policy of grandfathering, namely, of permitting noncompliance, should sometimes be employed.
The analysis of these points has broad relevance, applying across legal fields, often explaining what
we observe but also indicating possibilities for reform, such as in the regulation of air pollution. The
analysis is related to the conventional reliance-based justification for the stability of the law, the literature
on legal transitions, and economic writing on optimal legal standards.


Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu
forthcoming in the Journal of Legal Studies


             On Optimal Legal Change, Past Behavior, and Grandfathering

                                           Steven Shavell*


         Abstract: When is it socially advantageous for legal rules to be changed in the
light of altered circumstances? In answering this basic question here, a simple point is
developed – that past compliance with legal rules tends to reduce the social advantages of
legal change. The reasons are twofold: adjusting to a new legal rule often involves costs;
and the social benefits of change are frequently only incremental, only in addition to
those of past compliance. The general implications are that legal rules should be more
stable than would be appropriate were the relevance of past behavior not recognized, and
that a policy of grandfathering, namely, of permitting noncompliance, should sometimes
be employed. The analysis of these points has broad relevance, applying across legal
fields, often explaining what we observe but also indicating possibilities for reform, such
as in the regulation of air pollution. The analysis is related to the conventional reliance-
based justification for the stability of the law, the literature on legal transitions, and
economic writing on optimal legal standards.

JEL Classifications: K1, K2, K32, L5


1. Introduction
        The object of this article is to examine a primary question about legal rules,
namely, when is it desirable for legal rules to be modified in the light of new
circumstances? The major contribution of the article is its identification and elaboration
of the point that parties’ past compliance with legal rules may reduce the net social
advantages of legal change. The general implications are that legal rules should be more
stable than would apparently be appropriate, that is, appropriate were past behavior not
taken into account, and also that a policy of grandfathering – of allowing noncompliance
for parties already participating in an activity and complying with rules in the past1 –
should often be employed.

        *
          Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School. I thank Louis
Kaplow, Saul Levmore, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Chris Snyder, Kathryn Spier,
Robert Stavins, Roberton Williams, and an anonymous referee for comments, John Howell, Christopher
Taggart, Jane van Lare, and Paul Vronsky for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law,
Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support.
        1
          This general meaning of “grandfathering” will be employed below. For standard definitions of
“grandfather clause,” see BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY 718 (8th ed. 2004) (“A provision that creates an
exemption from the law’s effect for something that existed before the law’s effective date.”); MERRIAM
WEBSTER’S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 507 (10th ed. 1993) (“[A] clause creating an exemption based on
circumstances previously existing.”). The word “grandfathering” and its cognates are widely used,
although they do not usually appear in the language of statutes.


                                                                                                         1
         The kernel of the argument to be developed is easily appreciated. Consider a firm
that installed a type of smoke scrubber which satisfied pollution control rules five years
ago when the firm built a factory. Suppose that advances in technology have resulted in
the availability of a new type of smoke scrubber that is superior to the old: the new
scrubber reduces pollution even more and it is cheaper to purchase and operate.
         Should there be a change in the legal rule requiring the firm to use the new type of
smoke scrubber in its factory? Quite possibly not, and for two reasons. First, the social
costs of a change would be distinctly positive – the firm would have to purchase the new
scrubber, and the firm would often bear various adjustment costs as well (it would have
to remove the old scrubber and it might have to engage in retrofitting to accommodate the
new scrubber). Second, the social benefits of a change would be only incremental, for if
the old scrubber were kept, it would reduce pollution to a certain degree. If the costs
associated with a change to the new scrubber would outweigh the incremental social
benefits, it would be socially best to permit the firm to continue to use the old scrubber.
         In contrast, if a firm were building a factory afresh, the firm should obviously be
required to install the new smoke scrubber. The new scrubber costs less than the old type
and the social benefits that the new scrubber would yield would be total, not incremental,
because by hypothesis there would be no existing factory that would already have
installed a scrubber of some type.
         This simple example illustrates the conclusion that it may be socially
advantageous to grandfather a party that complied with a legal rule in the past, even
though the rule should be altered for new participants in the activity.2
         A closely related conclusion applies when it is impractical for the legal system to
treat new participants and past participants differently, in other words, when
grandfathering is infeasible. In that case, if a legal rule is altered, those for whom a
change would be socially wasteful cannot be grandfathered, resulting in inefficiency.
Hence, it will often be desirable for the law to remain stable, until the inefficiency of
forced change for many parties who complied with the law in the past is outweighed by
the benefits of change in regard to others.
         These conclusions about the importance of prior behavior to the calculus
governing the desirability of legal change, of grandfathering, and of legal stability have
very broad applicability, as they do not depend on the area of law.
         However, two qualifications to the analysis will be noted. The first is that past
behavior matters only when it is of a durable nature (a smoke scrubber may last for
years). When instead past behavior concerns nondurable, modifiable effort (such as the
frequency of inspection of toxic waste-containing tanks for leaks), legal rules should not
depend on past behavior and thus should be adjusted in response to all manner of changes
in conditions.
         The second qualification is that legal rules should reflect past behavior only when
the rules are based on legal standards (notably, regulatory standards or due care standards
used in applying the negligence rule). When instead legal rules are premised on strict
liability, parties will automatically be induced to take past behavior into account in a
socially appropriate manner. Hence, under strict liability, there is no basis for

         2
           A similar argument to that of the example demonstrates that it may be desirable to grandfather a
party who participated in an activity in the past when there was no legal rule (rather than a less rigorous
rule) applying to the activity at the time. See infra section 3.4.


                                                                                                          2
grandfathering, such as for cabining damages to reflect an earlier anticipated level of
harm.
         The organization of the article is as follows. In section 2, I develop theoretically
the main argument that I have just described. To this end, I examine informally a stylized
model of precautions that reduce the risk of harm. There are two periods in the model.
In the first, uncertainty exists about the harmfulness of the activity or about the cost or
technology of risk-reduction. In the second period, the uncertainty has been resolved –
information about the magnitude of harm that the activity might cause and/or about new
opportunities for risk-reduction has become available. This information may or may not
make it socially desirable for the level of precaution to change. The implications of the
desirability or undesirability of change in the level of precautions for the stability of legal
rules and for grandfathering are considered.
         In section 3 I study the role in the model of a number of logically secondary, but
sometimes empirically important, factors, including maintenance costs, the scrap value of
equipment, transition costs, and modification of property. I also address informational
problems that confront legal authorities and I discuss legal policy when grandfathering is
too administratively difficult to accomplish.
         In section 4, I present a formal version of the model.
         In section 5, I comment on the law in the light of the analysis. I first ask whether
legal rules do, as an approximate matter, exhibit a measure of stability where the analysis
suggests that they ought, which is to say, where parties’ actions have durable aspects and
they are subject to legal standards. I then consider grandfathering. I note that
grandfathering can be seen as a general, though implicit, feature of the negligence
determination in tort law. I also survey two contexts in which explicit grandfathering is a
prominent feature – regulation of air pollution from power plants and real estate zoning –
and I consider how well their characteristics conform to the theory of optimal
grandfathering. I suggest that although the observed grandfathering rules appear to be
rational in a rough qualitative sense, the rules sometimes appear to suffer from substantial
defects. Notably, the grandfathering of out-of-date power plants is problematic, mainly
because it is of long duration and permits old, highly-polluting plants to be maintained
and modified significantly yet still to remain grandfathered.
         In section 6, I discuss several views found in commentary and scholarly writing
about legal change and relate them to the analysis of this article. One view concerns the
notion that legal rules ought to be relatively stable because individuals rely on the rules.3
I find this view consistent with the argument given here for legal stability, but incorrect if
premised on the idea that participation in activities would be undesirably chilled by
called-for legal change. Another view is found in the economically-oriented literature on
“legal transitions,” the major claim of which is that grandfathering is often socially

         3
           See, e.g., Landgraf v. USI Film Prod., 511 U.S. 244, 265–66, 114 S. Ct. 1483, 1497 (1994)
(“Elementary considerations of fairness dictate that individuals should have an opportunity to know what
the law is and to conform their conduct accordingly; settled expectations should not be lightly disrupted. . .
. In a free, dynamic society, creativity in both commercial and artistic endeavors is fostered by a rule of
law that gives people confidence about the legal consequences of their actions.”); Developments in the Law
– Zoning, 91 HARV. L. REV. 1427, 1494–96 (1978) (discussing property holders’ reliance interests in the
context of zoning); Hochman (1960) at 727 (emphasizing reliance as the major factor in statutory
retroactivity cases).



                                                                                                             3
disadvantageous.4 This claim holds only if liability is strict. If, as is usually true,
however, liability is based on fault or a regulatory standard, the claim of the transitions
literature appears to be misleading, because it is patent that grandfathering may have a
desirable role to play.5 I then comment on prior, economic literature on legal rules and
incentives. This literature does not address the question of the relevance of past behavior
to later optimal behavior and to optimal change in rules.
         In section 7, I briefly conclude.

2. A Model of Optimal Legal Change
        2.1 Assumptions. In the standard model of potentially harm-creating activity, a
party chooses a level of precaution in order to reduce the likelihood of harm.6 As
indicated above, I will consider a two period version of the model, and I will suppose that
some parties engage in the activity in both periods whereas others enter the activity only
in the second period.
        Two alternative assumptions will be made about precautions. Precautions may be
durable, notably, involve the acquisition of a safety device, such as the smoke scrubber
mentioned above, or relate to fixed physical aspects of property, such as the number and
location of exits from a building (but see the next section on the interpretation of durable
precautions) or its setback from a boundary line. It will be assumed that if a party invests
in a durable precaution in period 1, the party can benefit from it in period 2 without
additional cost.7 If, however, a durable precaution is changed in period 2 from what it
was in period 1, a cost, that of the new precaution, will be incurred. For example, if a
smoke scrubber of type A is purchased in period 1 and it is replaced by a smoke scrubber
of type B in period 2, the cost of the type B smoke scrubber will be borne in period 2. If
scrubber A is replaced by scrubber B, the total cost of precautions over the two periods
will thus be the cost of scrubber A plus the cost of scrubber B, but if scrubber A is used
over both periods, the total cost of precautions will be just that of scrubber A.
        Precautions may instead be nondurable. Typically, nondurable precautions take
the form of effort to reduce risk, such as the example from the Introduction of the
frequency of inspection of a holding tank for leaks, or the care taken in driving. It is
natural to assume that an effort to reduce risk requires the bearing of a cost each period
the effort is made, and further that the cost of effort in period 2 is independent of the

         4
             See especially Graetz (1977), Kaplow (1986), and Shaviro (2000).
         5
           But to be clear, the conclusions of the transitions literature are not misleading, and have
relevance, in the area of taxation, to which the literature was originally addressed. The reason is that tax
rules can often be viewed as a species of, or analogous to, strict liability rules, rather than rules requiring
compliance with legal standards. See infra section 6.
         6
           See, e.g., Brown (1973), and more generally, Landes and Posner (1987) and Shavell (1987). In
some versions of the standard model, the exercise of precautions affects not only the likelihood of harm but
also its magnitude. This difference is inessential for my purposes, and for simplicity I examine here a
model in which only the likelihood of harm is affected by the level of precautions.
         7
          The assumption that a durable precaution can be enjoyed in period 2 without any additional cost
is made for simplicity. I relax the assumption in section 3 infra, and allow for the possibility that a
maintenance cost must be incurred in period 2 to continue to benefit from the precaution.



                                                                                                                  4
effort made in period 1. The presumption, for instance, is that the cost of inspecting
holding tanks with a frequency of three times a week in year 2 is independent of the
frequency of inspection of the tanks in year 1. Hence, the cost of nondurable precautions
taken in the two periods is assumed to be simply the cost of the precaution taken in
period 1 plus the cost of the precaution taken in period 2.
        Another assumption that I make is that there is uncertainty at the outset about how
harmful the activity is or about the cost or the technology of risk reduction. By the
beginning of period 2, however, the uncertainty is resolved – the nature of the harmful
activity or about opportunities for risk reduction is learned. For concreteness, one might
imagine that at the beginning of period 1, it is thought that the harm from the activity
could turn out to be anywhere in the range between $100,000 and $1,000,000; and by the
beginning of period 2, the true magnitude of the harm will become known (perhaps
because an accident will occur and reveal the harm).8 Or one might have in mind a
situation such that at the beginning of period 1, it is thought that a technological advance
could occur, and if so, would result in a risk-reducing device that would be twice as
effective as present devices and cost the same; and by the beginning of period 2, whether
the new device will be available will be known. The importance of the assumption that
uncertainty is resolved by the beginning of period 2 is that it may then become desirable
for precautions and the law to change in the light of the new information and
circumstances.
        2.2 The interpretation of durable and nondurable precautions. Although in
the model the assumption is that the effect of a durable precaution on risk in period 2 is
identical to its effect in period 1, it will be apparent that the qualitative character of the
conclusions to be reached would be similar as long as the precautions taken in period 1
have some effect on risk or harm in period 2. Hence, a durable precaution should be
viewed broadly, as essentially any action that influences the probability or magnitude of
harm beyond the period 1.9
        The taking of durable precautions may sometimes be an implicit aspect of
compliance with a legal rule. For example, suppose that a factory is required to use
natural gas as a fuel for its power plant (say because the alternative of coal would
generate substantial pollution). The burning of gas does not itself constitute a durable
precaution, but it may well be associated with such: the factory might have purchased a
kind of furnace best suited to burn natural gas, it might have installed a pipe connecting
the main gas line to its power plant, and it might have chosen its location in order to be
assured of a steady supply of gas. These decisions have durable aspects because they
allow the factory to continue to use natural gas more cheaply in the future.
        Another comment about the generality of the notion of durable precautions
concerns training and intellectual capital, and also investments in the use of particular
financial arrangements and reporting practices. If an organization trains its employees to
undertake a specific risk-lowering task, say an airline teaches its mechanics to overhaul a

         8
          To amplify, the activity is assumed always to cause just one level of harm if an accident occurs.
What that level is not known in the beginning of period 1, but it is known by the beginning of period 2.
         9
          See infra section 3 and also section 4.5 on variations of the simple assumption that a durable
precaution has the same effect in period 2 as it did in period 1.



                                                                                                              5
kind of aircraft engine according to a set procedure, then the training investment is a form
of intellectual capital that has a durable aspect in that it yields benefits every time a
trained employee undertakes the task. Likewise, organizations and individuals often
make particular financial and contractual arrangements and collect and organize data to
satisfy regulatory demands (consider, for instance, how retirement plans must be
established, maintained, and reported on to satisfy ERISA regulations). These legal
compliance efforts are substantial, in that they involve learning, the establishment of
procedures, legal services, and the like, and they have a durable dimension in that they
can continue to be employed after they are made.
        In respect to nondurable precautions, the main interpretive observation worth
making is that not only effort, but also a physical resource that is consumed within a
period should be viewed as an example. The use of a windshield wiper blade might be
considered a nondurable precaution, assuming that the length of the relevant period
exceeds the life of the wiper blade, for then a different kind of blade could be employed
in the next period, and its cost would not depend on that of the prior blade.
        2.3 Socially optimal behavior. In order to ascertain how well legal rules
function and how they ought to be designed, socially optimal behavior must be
delineated. I will usually employ as a social welfare criterion the analytically convenient
objective of minimizing social costs, namely, the costs of precautions over the two
periods plus the expected harm done. This social goal reflects the notion that precautions
as well as harms are socially expensive, so that precautions should be taken only if they
accomplish sufficient good in reducing harm.10
        Given this social objective, what is socially ideal behavior? Let us begin by
reviewing the standard one period model of harm and precaution. In this model, the best
level of precaution, which I well refer to as the conventionally optimal level of
precaution, minimizes the cost of precaution plus the expected harm in the single period
at issue. Thus, if the question is which is better, no precaution or a particular, named
precaution, the answer is simple: If the cost of the precaution is less than the reduction in
the expected harm it brings about, the precaution should be taken. If the cost of the
precaution is $1,000 and it lowers the risk of a $500,000 harm from 10% to 8%, it lowers
the expected harm by 2%x$500,000 = $10,000, so it is worth taking.11 More generally,
the question may be which precaution to take among an array of different precautions,
and the possible precautions might constitute a continuum. To determine the optimal
level of precautions in this context, one can conceive of deciding how much to spend on
precautions by asking whether, by spending another dollar, the expected harm would be

         10
            Were I to consider other social goals, such as compensation of victims of harm, the qualitative
conclusions would not be altered, for they depend mainly on there being a cost-saving advantage to
maintaining durable precautions. Inclusion of social goals in addition to those I study would only cloud the
analysis, even though in reality of course the social objective is more broad than minimization of social
costs as defined here.
         11
            As in this illustration, the expected harm means probability-discounted harm. That the expected
harm is included in social costs means that society displays “risk-neutrality” with respect to harm rather
than “risk-aversion.” I make the assumption that society and, below, that decision makers, are risk-neutral
mainly for analytical convenience. On the concepts of risk-neutrality and risk-aversion, see, e.g., Pindyck
and Rubinfeld (2001) at 155-160 and Shavell (1987) at ch. 8.



                                                                                                          6
reduced by more than a dollar; as long as the answer to this question is yes, the extra
dollar should be spent. At a certain point, though, spending another dollar will not be
worthwhile, since the effectiveness of precautions will have fallen to just less than a
dollar; at this point, the optimal expenditure on precautions will have been reached. In
general, the more harmful an activity is, the higher will be the optimal level of
precautions, and the optimal level of precautions will rise in a more or less continuous
fashion with the expected harmfulness of an activity.
         Now let us consider the two period model with uncertainty surrounding the level
         12
of harm and let us first study the case of nondurable precautions, because it is the easier
case to understand. Here the cost of precautions is independent in each period, so we can
view the periods separately. Because in the beginning of period 2 the level of harm that
would occur in an accident is assumed to be known, the optimal level of precaution will
be whatever is conventionally optimal for that level of harm. If the level of harm were an
accident to occur turns out to be $200,000, then the precaution taken in period 2 ought to
be appropriate for a $200,000 potential harm, if the level of harm turns out to be
$600,000, then the precaution taken in period 2 ought to be suitably higher, and so
forth.13 In the beginning of period 1, however, the level of harm that would result from
an accident is not known, so that the level of precaution should reflect this uncertainty.
In the model, it is readily shown that the optimal level of precaution in period 1 equals
the level that would be appropriate for the expected harm given that harm occurs. For
instance, if the harm is equally likely to be anywhere in the range between $100,000 and
$1,000,000, then the expected harm conditional on its occurrence is the midpoint of this
range namely, $550,000, so the precaution taken in period 1 should be that which is
optimal for a potential harm of $550,000.14
        We can summarize as follows. In the case of nondurable precautions, the optimal
period 1 level of precaution is the conventionally optimal level for the expected harm.
The optimal period 2 level of precautions is the conventionally optimal level for the then
known harm, whatever that may be. Thus, the optimal period 2 level of precaution is
generally different from the optimal period 1 level. Note as well that the optimal level of
precaution for a party who first enters the activity in period 2 is the same as the optimal
level of precaution in period 2 for a party who had engaged in the activity in period 1.
        Next let us turn to the case of durable precautions and let us again begin by
considering what is best for a party in period 2. I want to show that the party should not
change its precaution from what the precaution was in period 1 unless the harm turns out
to be sufficiently high.15 To illustrate, suppose in period 1 that a party took the
         12
           The case in which uncertainty concerns the cost (or technology) of risk-reduction is similar, as I
will occasionally remark in notes below.
         13
          Likewise, in the case where uncertainty attaches to the cost of risk reduction and it turns out to
be inexpensive to reduce risk, then the level of precaution ought to be suitably higher.
         14
           For simplicity, I will often refer below to the expected harm conditional on harm occurring
(here $550,000) simply as the expected harm, even though the unconditional expected harm equals the
probability of harm occurring multiplied by the expected harm conditional on its occurrence.
         15
            In the case where uncertainty attaches to the cost of risk reduction, the analogue is that it is best
for the party not to change its precaution from the period 1 level unless the cost of risk reduction turns out
to be sufficiently low.


                                                                                                                7
precaution of buying a safety device that lowered the risk of harm to 7%. Assume that
the harm in period 2 turns out to be $700,000, that the conventionally optimal precaution
for harm of $700,000 involves a cost of $20,000, and that that precaution would lower
risk to 5%. Should this new precaution be taken? If it is not taken and the period 1
safety device continues to be employed, the risk will remain at 7%, so the expected harm
will be 7%x$700,000 = $49,000, but no added cost of precaution will be incurred. If
instead the new, conventionally optimal precaution is taken, an added cost of $20,000
will be borne, implying that social costs in period 2 will be $20,000 + 5%x$700,000 =
$55,000, which is higher than $49,000. Hence, the new conventionally optimal
precaution should not be taken – the party should stand pat with the original period 1
precaution. One way of understanding this conclusion is to observe that the cost of a
change in precaution is $20,000, whereas the benefit is only due to the marginal effect of
the 2% drop in risk (that is, 7% – 5%) on expected losses, 2%x$700,000 = $14,000,
which is less. If, though, the harm were sufficiently high, then it would be worthwhile
changing to the conventionally optimal precaution. For example, suppose that the harm
is discovered to be $900,000 and that the conventionally optimal precaution for this harm
costs $22,000 and lowers the risk to 4%. Then if the period 1 precaution is maintained,
social costs will be 7%x$900,000 = $63,000, whereas if the precaution is changed to the
new conventionally optimal level, social costs will be $22,000 + 4%x$900,000 =
$58,000, so that it will be best for the party to change to the conventionally optimal level
of precaution. Here the $22,000 is worth spending because the marginal reduction in risk
of 3% (that is, 7% – 4%) is justified by the high potential harm, for 3%x$900,000 =
$27,000.
        We can summarize and generalize as follows. In the case of durable precautions,
a party ought to continue with its period 1 precaution in period 2 if the cost of the new
conventionally optimal precaution for period 2 harm would exceed the marginal
reduction in expected harm that would be accomplished by a change to this precaution.16
Hence, it is socially desirable for a party to maintain its period 1 precaution in period 2
as long as the known harm turns out to fall below a threshold; otherwise, the party
should change its precaution to the conventionally optimal level for the known harm.
        Consider now the best level of precaution in the beginning of period 1. At that
time, the harmfulness of the activity is not known, and one might think that the optimal
level of precautions is the conventionally optimal level for the expected harm, namely,
the conventionally optimal level of harm for harm of $550,000 in our example. (This


         16
            This conclusion can be expressed algebraically (see section 4 infra for details). Let p(x1) be the
probability of harm resulting from the expenditure on precaution x1 made in period 1 and let x*(h) be the
conventionally optimal precaution expenditure when harm is known to be h (that is, x*(h) is the x that
minimizes x + p(x)h). Then if there is no change in precaution in period 2, social costs are p(x1)h, whereas
if precaution is changed to the conventionally optimal level, social costs in period 2 are x*(h) + p(x*(h))h.
Hence, it is best not to change precaution as long as p(x1)h < x*(h) + p(x*(h))h, or equivalently, x*(h) >
[p(x1) – p(x*(h))]h.
          Similarly, in the case where there is uncertainty about the cost of risk-reduction rather than h, let c
be the cost of a unit of precaution, assume that c = 1 in period 1, let the uncertain c in period 2 become
known at the beginning of period 2, and let x*(c) be the number of units of precaution x that minimize cx +
p(x)h. Then it is best not to change precaution as long as p(x1)h < cx*(c) + p(x*(c))h, or equivalently,
cx*(c) > [p(x1) – p(x*(c))]h.



                                                                                                                8
level was optimal, recall, in the case of nondurable precautions.) However, in the case of
durable precautions, the optimal level of period 1 precaution is higher than the
conventionally optimal level for the expected harm. The essential reason is that because
precautions are durable, when precautions are taken in period 1, it will often be best not
to alter them in period 2, as described in the previous paragraph. This in turn means that
the social payoff from risk reduction flowing from period 1 precaution may extend to
period 2 and thus raises the optimal investment in period 1 precaution (above what it
would be in the case of nondurable precaution).
         Last, consider what is socially optimal for a party entering into the activity only in
period 2, so that it will be participating in the activity just that period. The party should
take the conventionally optimal level of precautions that is appropriate for the level of
harm, which is known, as the model that applies to the party is in effect just the standard
one period model. In particular, what is optimal for the party is different from what is
optimal for a party who engaged in the activity the first period, because for that party, as
has been emphasized, it is optimal to maintain first period precaution unless the harm is
sufficiently high. For example, what might be optimal for those parties who engage in
the activity both periods is to choose period 1 precautions equal to the conventionally
optimal level for harm of $600,000 and to maintain period 1 precaution in period 2 unless
the harm turns out to exceed $800,000, in which case it is optimal for them to take the
conventionally optimal precaution for the level of harm that is observed. But those
parties only entering the activity in period 2 should always take the conventionally
optimal precaution for the level of harm that eventuates. Hence, if the harm is between
$600,000 and $800,000, it is optimal for those entering the activity in period 2 to take
greater precautions than those who had engaged in the activity the previous period.17
         2.4 Strict liability. Having described socially optimal behavior in the two
periods, I now consider how it can be achieved. Under strict liability parties pay for the
harm that they cause, whatever the harm turns out to be.18 It is evident that, because a
party bears the full social costs of its decisions under strict liability, the party will make
all of its decisions in a socially optimal way. In particular, the party will choose optimal
precautions each period that it engages in the activity, whether the precautions are
durable or nondurable.19 For instance, if precautions are durable, the party will only
change precaution in period 2 if the harm is sufficiently large; for if the harm is not very
large, it will be cheaper for the party to bear higher expected liability payments than to
reduce them by spending on the new conventionally optimal precaution.
         As a corollary to what was just observed, we can say that there should be no
grandfathering under strict liability. In the context of strict liability, the interpretation of

         17
            Observe also that if harm turns out to be less than $600,000, those entering the activity should in
principle take precautions that are lower than those that engaged in the activity the first period. This makes
sense because, not having invested in a higher level of precautions, those entering the activity should take a
level of precautions that reflects only the known harm in period 2.
         18
            In the model I abstract from contributory behavior of victims for simplicity, and hence I do not
consider strict liability with a defense of contributory negligence.
         19
          This conclusion also holds under a corrective tax, such as a pollution tax, that is set equal to the
expected harm that a party generates.



                                                                                                               9
grandfathering is some kind of insulation from liability in period 2 for parties who
participated in the activity in period 1, notably, limiting the magnitude of damages to the
harm that was foreseen in period 1, even if the harm turned out to be higher in period 2.
Such grandfathering under strict liability is not only unnecessary to induce optimal
precautions, but it also could be socially undesirable because it could dilute incentives to
take these precautions.
        2.5 Negligence or regulatory standards. Under the negligence rule or a
regulatory standard, parties are required to adhere to a level of precaution that the state
chooses. I will assume here that parties comply with the required level of precaution
owing to the threat of liability for negligence or of penalties for violation of regulatory
standards. Hence, the question to be addressed is how legal standards ought to be set,
and the answer is simply that the standards ought to equal the optimal levels of
precaution described above.
        Accordingly, from what we concluded in section 2.3, we have the following. If
precautions are nondurable, the best standard in period 1 is the conventionally optimal
level of precaution for the expected harm, and the best standard in period 2 generally is
different and equals the optimal level of precaution for the then known harm.
Grandfathering is not optimal.
        However, if precautions are durable, the best standard in period 1 exceeds the
level of precaution that would be appropriate for the expected harm, and grandfathering
may be desirable. If in period 2 the known harm is below a threshold, grandfathering is
optimal – parties who engaged in the activity in period 1 can maintain their period 1
precaution – but parties who enter the activity in period 2 should take the conventionally
optimal precaution for the known harm. If in period 2 the known harm exceeds the
threshold, then parties who engaged in the activity in period 1 should change their
precaution to the conventionally optimal precaution for the harm, which is the precaution
that new parties should take.

3. Extensions of the Model
        I now want to consider briefly a number of factors to add greater realism to the
model. I will focus on the case of central interest, that of durable precautions where legal
rules set out negligence or regulatory standards.
        3.1 Maintenance cost. It was assumed above that if a party employed its period
1 precaution in period 2, the party would bear no additional cost. But there is often a
maintenance cost that must be incurred to continue to use a durable precaution, such as
the cost of keeping a safety device in good repair or the cost of operating it. Because the
bearing of a maintenance cost makes retaining the period 1 precaution less attractive, the
social desirability of continuing to use the period 1 precaution in period 2, and of
grandfathering, is reduced. In the illustration where the period 2 level of harm turns out
to be $700,000 and grandfathering is optimal, suppose that a maintenance cost of $9,000
must be incurred to continue use of the period 1 precaution. Then if that is done, the
precaution-associated cost in period 2 will be $9,000, whereas if the new precaution is
taken, the cost will be $20,000. Hence, the net cost of a change to the new precaution
would be only $11,000, whereas the marginal reduction in expected harm would be
$14,000, which is greater, so that grandfathering would not be desirable. This illustrates
the point that, given maintenance costs, grandfathering is optimal only when the cost of a



                                                                                         10
new precaution minus maintenance costs associated with the period 1 precaution exceeds
the marginal reduction in expected harm that would be accomplished by the change in the
precaution.
         3.2 Scrap value. Another assumption that was made above was that, if a party
invested in a durable precaution in period 1 but then changed to a different precaution in
period 2, its cost of precautions over the two periods was the sum of the costs of both.
This assumption would be appropriate where a durable precaution is a safety device for
which the party would obtain no value if the party were to change to a new device in
period 2. However, in some circumstances, the party would obtain value for the period 1
device by selling it on a second-hand market or by using it elsewhere for some purpose.
To the degree that the party can obtain such a scrap value for the period 1 device, the
social cost of changing the precaution falls. Hence, the social desirability of continuing
to use the period 1 precaution in period 2, and of grandfathering, diminishes. To
illustrate in the example, I had said that if the new level of harm in period 2 turns out to
be $700,000, grandfathering is desirable, for the cost of the new precaution is $20,000
whereas the reduction in expected harm if there is a change to a new precaution is less,
$14,000. However, suppose that the old precaution has a scrap value of $10,000. Then
the cost of a switch to the new precaution net of scrap value is $20,000 – $10,000 =
$10,000, which is less than $14,000, so that a change in precaution would be desirable
and grandfathering would not be optimal. In general, when there is scrap value,
grandfathering is optimal only when the cost of the new precaution minus scrap value
exceeds the marginal reduction in expected harm that would be accomplished by a
change to the new precaution.
          3.3 Transition cost. An additional assumption that was made in section 2 was
that changing to a new precaution would not involve any cost apart from that of the new
precaution itself. Yet in many instances there will be some kind of transition cost
because, for instance, a safety device used in period 1 will have to be removed, repairs
will have to be made where that device had been installed, or redesign may be needed to
make use of a new safety device. Such transition costs obviously enhance the social
desirability of continuing to use period 1 durable precautions and thus of grandfathering.
In the second illustration, where the harm learned in period 2 turns out to be $900,000, I
had said that grandfathering was not desirable, as the cost of the new precaution was
$22,000, whereas the marginal reduction in expected harm was higher, $27,000. But if
there is a transition cost of, say, $8,000, grandfathering would become socially
advantageous, since the cost of the switch to the new precaution would effectively be
$22,000 + $8,000 = $30,000, exceeding $27,000. If there are transition costs,
grandfathering is desirable whenever the cost of the new precaution plus transition costs
exceeds the marginal reduction in expected harm that would be accomplished by the
change in precaution.
         3.4 Grandfathering in the absence of earlier legal standards. In the analysis
of section 2 and in the examples that were discussed, it was socially desirable for parties
to take positive precaution in period 1. Furthermore, the argument for maintaining period
1 precaution and for grandfathering depended upon the period 1 precaution being
positive. For if that were not so, if no precaution were taken in period 1, then the
advantage of adopting a new period 2 precaution would be total, not marginal. If a
factory did not install any smoke scrubber in period 1, then the pollution reduction



                                                                                         11
accomplished by installing a new kind of smoke would be total, not incremental, only in
addition to what another smoke scrubber already accomplished. Hence, the factory
would be in the same situation as a new factory; its optimal level of precaution would be
the period 2 level and there ought not to be grandfathering.
        However, once we take into account the factor of transition cost just discussed,
we can see that the basis for grandfathering is restored. In particular, even if no
precaution was taken in period 1, a party’s having participated in an activity in period 1
may well imply that the party would have to incur a transition cost to undertake a period
2 precaution. For example, if a factory that was built in period 1 did not install any type
of smoke scrubber, the factory might find it expensive to install a smoke scrubber in
period 2 because that might require renovations. In contrast, a factory that is to be built
in period 2 and knows it must install a smoke scrubber can plan for that. Hence, it might
be optimal to grandfather, that is, to allow the factory built in period 1 to continue
without any scrubber, but to require the new factory to install the scrubber. This point is
of some relevance because, in reality, we often observe grandfathering when, previously,
no legal standard applied, rather than when a positive but weaker legal standard applied.
        3.5 Modification of property. Now consider the possibility that parties might
wish to modify their property for some privately beneficial reason. A factory might want
to engage in alterations in order to produce a new good, to make use of a new production
technology that would lower its costs, to build a new employee cafeteria – the reasons for
modifications are manifold. A modification may affect, and often would lower, the
transition costs accompanying a change in durable precautions. Suppose, for example,
that a factory must halt production in order to undertake renovations. During that time, a
safety device could conveniently be replaced with a new one – whereas if the factory
were not shut down on account of renovations, replacing the safety device would itself
require cessation of operations. Hence, in this example, the modification would eliminate
the transition cost of a halt of factory operations, for the halt would occur anyway.
Another example is where factory modifications require the hiring of architects and
engineers. They might charge less to do the work needed for installing a new safety
device than if that were their only task. Against the background of such examples, let us
assume that modification lowers transition costs.20
        To the degree that modifications lower transition costs, modifications will lower
the social desirability of continued use of the period 1 precaution and of grandfathering.
To illustrate, we discussed in the example of the last subsection that, when transition
costs are $8,000, grandfathering is desirable, for the cost of the new precaution plus the
transition cost is then $30,000, exceeding the reduction in expected harm of $27,000 that
the new precaution would bring about. But suppose that a modification would lower
transition costs to $1,000. Then grandfathering would no longer be socially
advantageous, for the cost of the new precaution plus transition costs would be only
$23,000. In general, when there is a modification, there should be no grandfathering

         20
            It is possible that modifications would affect factors apart from transition cost that are relevant
to the desirability of changing durable precautions. For example, scrap value could be affected by a
modification (it might be easier to remove an old smoke scrubber, in order to sell it, if a factory is being
renovated). But transition cost seems to be the main affected factor, and in any case it would be
straightforward to modify what I will say about modifications to take into account their different effects.



                                                                                                              12
when the new, lower transition cost plus the cost of the new precaution is less than the
marginal reduction in expected harm.
        3.6 Imperfect information of the state. Another factor that I have not yet
considered concerns the information that the state (courts or a regulator) requires in order
to determine optimal precautions and thus when grandfathering is desirable. In the basic
model of durable precaution, the state needs to know the cost of precautions and the
reduction in expected harm that precautions bring about over both periods. Further, when
the extensions to the model are taken into account, the burden on the state becomes
greater, as it needs to reckon maintenance cost, scrap value, transition cost, and the effect
of modifications on transition cost.
        The state will inevitably suffer from at least some lack of information necessary
to the calculation of optimal precautions. As a consequence, it will often have to make
decisions on the basis of estimates, perhaps of average characteristics of parties, leading
to the possibility of error relative to ideal outcomes. Suppose, for instance, that the state
is not able to ascertain actual transition cost, so the state bases its grandfathering on
average transition cost. In particular, suppose that the state decides to grandfather
because average transition cost is $15,000, which exceeds the threshold of $10,000 above
which it is optimal to grandfather. Then, if a particular firm happens to face low
transition costs relative to the average, say its transition cost is $5,000, the firm would
mistakenly be grandfathered by the state. The social cost of such an error is that society
forgoes the opportunity to lower expected harm by more than the cost of so doing. Under
a different scenario, a converse error could occur: a firm could be mistakenly required to
change precautions rather than be grandfathered. Suppose that average transition costs
are $5,000 and the state decides to require all firms to change precautions but a particular
firm faces unusually high transition costs, such as $20,000. This firm ought to be
grandfathered but would not be. The social cost of this type of error is that society
requires the expenditure of greater resources than it derives benefits through a reduction
in expected harm.
         3.7 Imperfect information of the state and modification. I return here to the
subject of modification and grandfathering because of its connection to imperfect
information of the state. To explain, suppose that the state cannot easily determine a
party’s transition cost, meaning that the state cannot base grandfathering policy directly
on transition cost. The state might then take the level of modification expenditures to be
an indirect indicator of transition cost for the reasons given in section 3.4. In particular,
the state might assume that the higher are modification expenditures, the lower are
transition costs and thus the less likely grandfathering is to be optimal. Under this view,
the state might rationally decide that when a party’s modification expenditures surpass a
threshold, grandfathering should no longer be permitted.
        Although a policy under which grandfathering status is lost if modification
expenditures exceed a threshold may thus be good on the whole, it might sometimes
result in errors relative to the ideal. Suppose, for instance, that a factory loses its
grandfathering privilege under the modification expenditure policy because it spends
heavily on a new employee cafeteria, yet suppose that the expenditure on the cafeteria
does not really lower the true transition cost associated with a change to a new, less
polluting furnace and thus should not have resulted in a loss of grandfathering. Or
suppose that a factory does not lose its grandfathering status because it spends only



                                                                                          13
modestly on upgrading its power plant, yet suppose that even this upgrading would have
significantly lowered the true transition cost of a change to a new furnace and thus should
have resulted in a loss of grandfathering. These examples illustrate the possibility that
because modification expenditures may be an imperfect proxy for transition cost
reduction, which is what grandfathering status ought to reflect, it is possible for socially
undesirable outcomes to occur when grandfathered status depends on modification
expenditures.
         Another unwanted effect of a policy under which modification expenditures may
result in loss of grandfathering is the socially undesirable curtailment of modifications.
The reason is that under the policy, parties have an incentive to keep modification
expenditures below the threshold at which they would lose grandfathering status, even
though it might be efficient for them to spend more on modifications. Consider the
example just mentioned of a factory that could build an employee cafeteria. The cafeteria
might be very beneficial for the employees and thus be desirable to add, yet the factory
might well not build the cafeteria if that would mean it would sacrifice its grandfathered
status.
         The detrimental curtailment of modification expenditures together with the
problem of erroneous grandfathering decisions constitute implicit costs of the policy
under which the degree of modification expenditures determines grandfathering status.
Of course, these costs do not mean that the policy is inadvisable, but they do suggest that
there might be significant value in obtaining direct information about transition costs
rather than relying upon the proxy of modification expenditures.
         3.8 Second-best legal change in the absence of grandfathering.
Grandfathering involves administrative costs, for it requires the state to determine
whether, or for how long, parties have participated in an activity and have complied with
legal rules. Moreover, the problems described in the last two sections diminish the social
value of grandfathering. In view of these administrative costs and problems, it may be
best for the state not to engage in grandfathering and thus simply to change the law or not
to do so for all parties, without inquiry into their past participation in activities and their
compliance with legal rules.
         Under the assumption that the state does not grandfather, its best decision will
reflect a comparison of two types of error cost. If the law is kept stable, the error cost is
that from failing to obtain risk reduction from those parties who ought to change their
precautions, including from new entrants to the activity. If the law is altered, the error
cost is that from forcing those parties to bear the costs of change who ought not to have to
adopt new precautions. Whether it is best on net to keep the law stable or to alter it may
be viewed as reflecting a comparison of these two types of error cost. As a general
matter, the greater the fraction of individuals who engaged in an activity in the past, the
more durable and expensive their investments in precautions, the greater the transition
costs associated with change, and the less the advantage in adopting new precautions, the
more likely it will be that the law should remain stable.
         3.9 Participation in activities and grandfathering. In the analysis so far, I have
taken parties’ participation in activities as given – I have presumed that some parties
participate in the potentially harmful activity both periods and that others enter the
activity in period 2. How would the analysis of grandfathering be altered if I were to
allow parties to decide whether and when to enter into the activity?



                                                                                            14
         In this expanded model, grandfathering would increase participation in activities
because it would reduce the costs of participation. For example, a firm that I had
supposed would only have entered the harmful activity in period 2 might now choose to
enter in period 1 in order to be able to obtain grandfathered status and operate later in
period 2 at lower cost.
         The increased participation in activities due to grandfathering would generally be
socially undesirable. As is well known, under a regime of legal standards, parties engage
in potentially harmful activities to a socially excessive extent – because they do not have
to pay for any harm that they cause provided that they comply with the standards.21 A
firm that installs smoke scrubbers as mandated by pollution regulations does not have to
pay for the pollution it still generates and thus might be led to operate even though it
should not. This problem of socially excessive participation in activities under legal
standards would seem to be exacerbated by grandfathering. Similarly, under strict
liability, participation in activities would be optimal in the absence of grandfathering,
whereas grandfathering would lead to a problem of socially excessive participation.
         The conclusion from the above is that the optimal amount of grandfathering
would probably be lower on account of consideration of participation in potentially
harmful activities. That is, because grandfathering would increase participation in
harmful activities, and because such enhanced participation would tend to be socially
undesirable, grandfathering would be socially desirable less often than I found it to be.

4. Formal Analysis
        I here present a formal analysis of most of the content of sections 2 and 3 of the
text. Because the interpretation of the model has been addressed there, I will aim for
brevity below.
        4.1 Basic model. Risk-neutral parties engage in a potentially harmful activity.
The probability of harm each period depends on the level of precautions in that period.
The magnitude of the possible harm is not known in the first period, but it is learned
before the second period decision about precautions is made.22 Let
        xi = level of precautions in period i, i = 1, 2; xi $0;
      p(xi) = probability of an accident in period i; pN(xi) < 0; pN(xi) → !4 as xi → 0;
                pO(xi) > 0;
        h = harm if an accident occurs;
      f(h) = probability density of h in the first period; h is known in the second period;
                h $ 0.23


         21
           On the basic problem that the negligence rule (and regulatory standards) fail to moderate
adequately parties’ participation in potentially harmful activities, see originally Shavell (1980). As
emphasized there, the problem does not exist under strict liability, for parties must pay for harm due to their
activity under that rule regardless of their degree of precaution.
         22
            That harm is uncertain rather than that the cost of precautions or their productivity is uncertain
is inessential to the main qualitative conclusions. See section 4.5 infra.
         23
           It could be assumed that uncertainty about the level of harm is not completely resolved after
period 1, but this would not alter the nature of the conclusions.



                                                                                                             15
Some parties engage in the harmful activity both periods; others engage in the activity
only in period 2.
         One assumption that will be considered is that precautions are nondurable
(naturally interpreted as modifiable effort to prevent an accident). Under this assumption,
the cost of precautions in each period is xi, so that the total cost of precautions for a party
who engages in the activity both periods is x1 + x2; costs of precautions each period are
independent. If a party engages in the activity only in the second period, its cost is x2.
         The alternative assumption is that precautions are durable (naturally interpreted as
acquisition of a device to reduce accident risk). In this case, it is assumed that if x1 is the
level of precautions that a party takes in period 1 and this is not changed in period 2 (that
is, x1 = x2), then there is no additional cost incurred by the party in period 2, so that the
cost of precautions over the two periods is just x1; but if precautions are altered in period
2, the cost of precautions over the two periods is x1 + x2. (The interpretation of this
assumption is that a different level of precautions corresponds to purchase of a device in
period 2 that replaces the period 1 device.24) If a party engages in the activity only in the
second period, its cost is x2.25
         4.2 Socially optimal precautions in the basic model. The social goal is to
minimize expected social costs, where social costs are the costs associated with the
precautions xi and of harm caused. For convenience, denote the x that minimizes x +
p(x)h by x*(h); that is, x*(h) is the optimal level of precautions if h is the harm resulting
from an accident in a single-period model where the cost of precautions x is x. Note that
x*(h) is uniquely defined and positive for all positive h and that x*(h) is increasing in h.26
We will call x*(h) the conventionally optimal level of precautions for harm h.
         In the case of nondurable precautions, social costs for a party engaging in the
activity both periods are x1 + p(x1)h + x2 + p(x2)h. In period 2, when x2 is chosen, h is
known, so that it will be optimal for x2 to minimize x2 + p(x2)h. Hence, the optimal x2 is
x*(h). In period 1, when x1 is chosen, h is not known, so the optimal x1 minimizes x1 +
p(x1)E(h), where E(h) is the expectation of h. Thus, the optimal x1, is x*(E(h)). For a
party engaging in the activity only in period 2, social costs are x2 + p(x2)h, so optimal


         24
           A different formulation would correspond to an interpretation of a change in durable precautions
in which the period 1 device is not replaced but enhanced or supplemented in period 2. As discussed in
section 4.5(a), the main conclusions about grandfathering would not be different under this assumption.
         25
             The model of durable precautions and of uncertain harm bears some similarity to models of
irreversible investments (because a change in a durable precaution results in its loss) and uncertainty,
notably with regard to resource and environmental economics; see, e.g., Arrow and Fisher (1974), Dixit
and Pindyck (1994) at 412-418, and Weitzman (2003) at 60-65 and 139-145. But the emphasis in the latter
literature is different: it is on the point that irreversible steps are better not to take until uncertainty is
resolved (it is better to refrain from cutting down a forest until it is known how much value it will have to
the environment). Here, the emphasis is on what should be done after uncertainty is resolved (whether
durable precautions should be changed after the magnitude of harm becomes known).
         26
            The first-order condition for minimization of x + p(x)h is 1 + pN(x)h = 0. Because pO(x) > 0, the
first-order condition determines a minimum and this must be unique. Implicit differentiation of the first-
order condition shows that x*(h) is increasing in h. For any positive h, the first-order condition must hold
for some x, given the assumption that pN(x) → !4 as x → 0.



                                                                                                            16
precautions for him in period 2 are x*(h), the same as for a party who had engaged in the
activity both periods. To summarize, we have
         Proposition 1. In the case of nondurable precautions, if a party engages in the
activity both periods,
         (a) optimal precaution in period 1 is x*(E(h)), that is, the conventionally optimal
precaution when expected harm given the occurrence of an accident is E(h);
         (b) optimal precaution in period 2 is x*(h), the conventionally optimal precaution
when harm is h.
         (c) It follows that optimal precaution in period 2 is different from that in period 1
with probability one.
         If a party engages in the activity only in period 2,
         (d) optimal precaution in period 2 is x*(h), the same as optimal precaution in
period 2 for a party who had engaged in the activity in period 1.
Part (c) is true because h will be different from E(h) with probability 1 (only by
coincidence would the continuously distributed h turn out to equal E(h)).
         In the case of durable precautions, consider the optimal x2 conditional on x1. If x2
= x1, expected social cost in period 2 is p(x1)h. If x2 is different from x1, expected social
cost in period 2 is x2 + p(x2)h, so that it will be best that x2 = x*(h). It follows that if h is
such that
(1) p(x1)h # x*(h) + p(x*(h))h,
then it is optimal for x2 to remain at x1; otherwise, x2 should be changed to x*(h).27
Condition (1) holds for h in an interval I(x1) = [0, b(x1)], where 0 < h*(x1) < b(x1), and
where h*(x) is defined as the h satisfying x*(h) = x.28 The explanation is as follows: if h
< h*(x1), so that x*(h) < x1, it would make no sense to change and lower precaution, since
x1 can be maintained as the level of precaution at no additional cost; and as long as h is
not too much higher than h*(x1), it is not desirable to raise precaution to x*(h) for that
would entail bearing the entire cost of x*(h) whereas x1 can be maintained for free.
         We next describe the optimal choice of x1, denoted by x1*. Social costs as a
function of x1 are
(2) S(x1) = [x1 + p(x1)E(h)] +
                                                       4
               + [Pr(I(x1)][p(x1)E(h|I(x1))] + I[x*(h) + p(x*(h))h]f(h)dh,
                                                      b(x1)
where Pr means probability. The first term on the right is expected social costs in period
1, the second term is expected social costs if h is in the interval I(x1), when it is optimal to
leave precaution unchanged at x1, and the third term is expected social costs if h is above
the interval I(x1), when it is optimal to change precaution to x*(h). Differentiating (2)
yields the first-order condition determining the optimal x1,
(3) [1 + pN(x1)E(h)] + [Pr(I(x1)][pN(x1)E(h|I(x1))] = 0.
         27
          For simplicity, I assume that where (1) holds with equality, x2 remains at x1, and I adopt similar
conventions below without comment.

         28
             For h # h*(x1), we know that x*(h) # x1. Hence, p(x1) # p(x*(h)), implying that (1) holds. For
h > h*(x1) the left side of (1) grows faster with h than the right, since the derivative of the left with respect
to h is p(x1) and the derivative of the right is p(x*(h)), and the latter is smaller since x*(h) > x1. Hence (1)
does not hold for h sufficiently large, and b(x1) is as claimed and is unique.



                                                                                                               17
Note that (3) reflects two effects of an increase in x1: the direct effect in the first period;
and the indirect influence in the second period, that because it will be optimal to maintain
x1 for h in I(x1), there will be a second period effect as well, which is to lower the
expected costs of harm then. (Changing x1 also alters the endpoint b(x1) of I(x1), but this
has no first-order influence on social welfare.29) It follows from (3) that 1 + pN(x1)E(h) >
0, implying that x1* > x*(E(h)). In other words, the optimal first period level of
precaution x1* is higher than it would be were the first period the only concern, for there
is a second-period expected payoff as well.
        If a party engages in the activity only in period 2, since social costs are x2 +
p(x2)h, it will be best that x2 = x*(h). Thus, his precaution may be different from that of a
party who engages in the activity both periods.
        We therefore have established the next result.
        Proposition 2. In the case of durable precautions, if a party engages in the
activity both periods,
        (a) optimal precaution in period 1 is determined by condition (3) and exceeds
x*(E(h)), the conventionally optimal precaution for expected harm of E(h);
        (b) optimal precaution in period 2 remains equal to period 1 precaution x1* if
harm h is in I(x1*) = [0, b(x1*)] (that is, if h satisfies p(x1*)h # x*(h) + p(x*(h))h ), but
optimal precaution is the conventionally optimal level x*(h) if h is higher.
        (c) It follows that optimal precaution in period 2 is different from precaution in
period 1 with a probability less than one (equal to that of h exceeding b(x1*)).
        If a party engages in the activity only in period 2,
        (d) optimal precaution in period 2 is the conventionally optimal level x*(h).
Hence, optimal precaution for a new entrant is less than for a prior participant if h <
h(x1*), exceeds that for a prior participant if h is in [h(x1*), b(x1*)], and is equal to that
for a prior participant if h > b(x1*).
        4.3 Optimal legal rules in the basic model. Having determined optimal
behavior, let us discuss how it can be achieved under legal rules. We consider two types
of legal rule. Under the first, strict liability for harm, parties are assumed to pay for any
harm h that they cause.30 Under the second, parties’ precautions are regulated; we
assume that they are required to obey a standard of precaution (and that this is effectively
enforced). When a legal rule in period 2 depends on a party’s precaution in period 1, we
will say that grandfathering applies.
        Under strict liability, since a party pays for all harm, a party’s private problem is
the same as the social problem, so that it is clear that a party will choose precautions in a
socially optimal manner.
        Remark 1. Under strict liability, parties will choose socially optimal precautions.
In particular, they will do so in both periods, regardless of whether precautions are
durable or nondurable, and grandfathering will not be desirable.


         29
           That is, the terms obtained by differentiation of (2) due to changes b(x1) reduce to zero, since (1)
holds with equality at this point.
         30
              A fine paid to the state equal to harm, or a corrective tax equal to expected harm, is equivalent
to strict liability.



                                                                                                             18
         Under regulation, presuming that the state has sufficient information to calculate
optimal precautions, it can achieve them, so, in view of Propositions 1 and 2, we can state
         Remark 2. Under optimal regulation of precautions, parties are required to choose
optimal levels of precaution. In the case of nondurable precautions, grandfathering is not
optimal; precaution in period 2 is x*(h) whether or not parties engaged in the activity in
period 1. In the case of durable precautions, grandfathering may be optimal; parties who
engaged in the activity in period 1 are permitted to maintain their precautions at x1*
unless h turns out to exceed b(x1*), whereas parties who enter the activity in period 2
must set precautions equal to x*(h).
         4.4 Extensions. I here sketch several extensions of the model of durable
precautions (interpreted as devices).
         (a) Maintenance cost, scrap value, and transition cost. Suppose that if the
precaution x1 is kept in period 2, a maintenance cost m will be incurred; that if precaution
changes in period 2, the period 1 precaution can be sold for scrap value s(x1); and that if
the precaution changes in period 2, a transition cost t will be incurred (associated, say,
with the removal of the period 1 device).
         Now reconsider the optimal x2 conditional on x1. If x2 is different from x1,
expected social cost in period 2 will be x2 + p(x2)h – s(x1) + t, so that it will again be
optimal that x2 = x*(h). Hence, if h is such that
(4) p(x1)h + m # x*(h) + p(x*(h))h – s(x1) + t
it will be optimal for x2 to remain at x1; otherwise, x2 should change to x*(h). Note that if
s(x1) + m > t, condition (4) holds less often than (1). This makes sense, since scrap value
and maintenance costs are factors that make keeping x1 less attractive, whereas transition
cost makes keeping x1 more attractive. With condition (4) replacing (1), one can
determine a revised condition for x1* analogous to (3), but I will omit the details here
(and likewise I will omit discussion of x1* below with regard to modifications).
         Under strict liability, behavior will be optimal, appropriately reflecting scrap
value, maintenance cost, and transition cost, but under regulation the regulator must take
them explicitly into account.
         (b) Modification of property. Suppose that modification of property may be
undertaken in period 2 and will yield a private gain for parties (such as a renovation
allowing a factory to produce goods at lower cost), where the gain depends on the
magnitude of the modification investment. Let g(k) be the gain from modification given
the investment k, where g is increasing and concave in k. Modification is assumed also to
result in the lowering of the transition cost of a change in precaution (such as when a
renovation at a factory would allow an opportunity for easier replacement of pollution
control equipment). Thus, let transition cost t = t(k), where t is decreasing and convex
in k.
         Accordingly, social welfare in period 2 is g(k) – k – p(x1)h if there is
grandfathering and g(k) – k – [x*(h) + p(x*(h))h + t(k)] = g(k) – k – t(k) – [x*(h) +
p(x*(h))h] if there is not grandfathering.
         Given k and thus t(k), grandfathering is socially desirable when
(5) p(x1)h # x*(h) + p(x*(h))h + t(k)
(abstracting for simplicity from maintenance cost and scrap value).
         Consider the optimal k and the optimal choice about grandfathering in period 2.
Let k* maximize the net return from investment g(k) – k, so that k* is determined by gN(k)



                                                                                          19
= 1. Also, let k** maximize g(k) – k – t(k), the net return from investment minus
transition cost; thus k** is determined by gN(k) – tN(k) = 1. It is clear that k** > k*;31 the
reason is that there is a payoff from k in addition to increasing g, which is decreasing t.
         If there is grandfathering, the optimal k is k*, for social welfare given
grandfathering is g(k) – k – p(x1)h and k* maximizes the first two terms. Likewise, if
there is no grandfathering, the optimal k is k**, for social welfare when there is no
grandfathering is g(k) – k – t(k) – [x*(h) + p(x*(h))h].
         Hence, to determine whether grandfathering is optimal, we can compare social
welfare under grandfathering and k* to that without grandfathering under k**. If
(6) g(k*) – k* – p(x1)h > g(k**) – k** – t(k**) – [x*(h) + p(x*(h))h],
then grandfathering is optimal, whereas if (6) does not hold, then grandfathering is not
optimal and optimal precaution is x*(h).
         Note that the optimal solution as just described reflects the following factors.
First, the value of modification, due to the gains it yields, may, as a byproduct, lower
transition cost enough to make a change in precaution optimal, when otherwise
grandfathering would be optimal. If a change in precaution is optimal, then modification
investment should be higher than were its direct gains the only benefit from it, because it
also results in reduced transition cost.
         Again, under strict liability, behavior, and thus modifications as well as
precautions, will automatically be optimal. Under regulation, the regulator must
determine the optimal solution, but note that as long as the regulator determines whether
or not grandfathering is permitted, the parties will be induced to choose the right
modification investment: If grandfathering is permitted, parties will of course not spend
on a new precaution, and thus will choose k to maximize g(k) – k, so will choose k*; if
grandfathering is not permitted, parties will bear t(k), will choose k to maximize g(k) – k
– t(k), so will choose k**.
         (c) Imperfect information of the state. For the state to achieve optimal behavior, it
must have certain information. Under strict liability, all it need do is observe harm h.
Under regulation, however, it must be able to observe precaution and to calculate optimal
precaution, implying that it must know all functional relationships. This gives rise to a
host of problems that were described in section 3.5. Hence, for example, suppose that the
state cannot observe maintenance cost m, and knows only its distribution. Then the state
must make a decision about grandfathering on the basis of its knowledge of the
distribution of m. If the state disallows grandfathering, because m is on average large, it
will sometimes make errors, since parties for whom m is small, who should be
grandfathered, will have to change precaution, and so forth.
         (d) Imperfect information of the state and modification. It is worth taking
particular note of the implication of imperfect information with regard to modification of
property because of the policy importance of modification and grandfathering. As will be
discussed in section 5, grandfathered status is often removed if the degree of modification
is sufficiently large. A rationale for this type of rule is that the magnitude of modification
k may serve as an implicit indicator of unobservable transition cost – with a major
modification signaling a low transition cost t and thus a lesser need for grandfathering.


         31
            We know that gN(k*) – tN(k*) = 1 – tN(k*) > 1. Thus, to satisfy gN(k) + tN(k) = 1, k must be
raised from k* (since gO(k) – tO(k) < 0). .


                                                                                                           20
However, because high modification investment k results in loss of grandfathering, such
investment may be inefficiently discouraged under the rule.
         To demonstrate these points we must modify the model so that there is variation
in the levels of modification investment k that parties wish to choose.32 A natural way to
do this is to assume that the productivity of modification investment varies across the
population of parties: let the gain from modification investment k be 2g(k), where 2 is a
productivity parameter (a party’s type), drawn according to some probability distribution
over the positive numbers. Let k*(2) maximize 2g(k) – k and k**(2) maximize 2g(k) – k
– t(k), and note that k*(2) < k**(2) and that both are increasing in 2.33
         The determination of the socially optimal outcome in period 2 is essentially as
described in (b). It can be verified that if grandfathering is optimal for parties of type 2N,
then grandfathering must be optimal for parties with 2 < 2N.34 Hence, unless
grandfathering is optimal for all 2 or for no 2, there must exist a critical value, say 2c,
such that for 2 # 2c, grandfathering is optimal, and for higher 2 it is not. This is the
interesting case35 and is what we will consider. Accordingly, at the optimum parties with
2 # 2c choose k*(2) and parties with higher 2 choose k**(2), so that the graph of
investment k is increasing in 2, with a discontinuity at2c, where it rises from k*(2c) to
k**(2c).
         Now assume that the state cannot observe transition cost t so cannot base
grandfathering on t (or on 2, which is unobservable) but can observe modification
investment k and base grandfathering on it. The state can select a critical value kc and
allow grandfathering only if k # kc and in this way implicitly attempt to mimic the
optimum. Given kc, it is clear that parties for whom k*(2) < kc will choose k*(2) and thus
will be grandfathered.36 Also parties for whom k*(2) exceeds but is sufficiently close to
kc will choose kc in order to be grandfathered – in other words, there will be a mass point
of parties at kc.37 Parties with larger 2 will not find it worthwhile to choose kc in order to

         32
            Otherwise the state can, as I noted above in (b), calculate what is optimal for the (identical)
individuals and just allow or disallow grandfathering, whichever is optimal.
         33
           Optimal modification investment k*(2) is determined by 2gN(k) = 1. Implicitly differentiating
with respect to 2 gives gN(k) + 2gO(k)k*N(2) = 0, so that k*N(2) = – gN(k)/2gO(k) > 0. That k**N(2) > 0 is
shown similarly.
         34
            Grandfathering is optimal at a 2 when the analogue to (6) holds, namely, when 2g(k*(2) – k*(2)
– p(x1)h > 2g(k**(2)) – k**(2) – t(k**(2)) – [x*(h) + p(x*(h))h]. We want to show that if this inequality
holds at 2N, it must hold for lower 2. To establish that, it is clearly sufficient to demonstrate that 2g(k*(2) –
k*(2) – [2g(k**(2)) – k**(2) – t(k**(2))] is decreasing in 2. But the derivative of this expression with
respect to 2 is (by the envelope theorem) just g(k*(2)) – g(k**(2)), which is negative since k*(2) < k**(2).
         35
             Otherwise the state can achieve optimality simply by allowing grandfathering or disallowing it
for all parties.
         36
           They are clearly better off at any k grandfathered than not, and because they can choose the
optimal k and be grandfathered they must prefer this.
         37
           If a party for whom k*(2) > kc chooses k # kc, he will be best off at kc, given concavity of the
objective function and that k*(2) > kc, and his utility will be 2g(kc) – kc. If he chooses k > kc, since he will
not be grandfathered, his best choice of k will be k**(2), and his utility will be 2g(k**(2)) – k**(2) –


                                                                                                              21
be grandfathered and will thus choose k**(2) > kc. By choosing kc in a second-best
optimal way (close to k*(2c)), the state can approximate optimal behavior, but optimal
behavior cannot be achieved, at least because of the massing of parties at kc who do not
invest more (not k*(2)) in modification in order to preserve their grandfathered status.
        (e) Second-best legal change in the absence of grandfathering; incentives to
participate in activities. What was said in sections 3.8 and 3.9 is clear and nothing need
be added here.
        4.5 Robustness of the model. I here discuss why relaxing either of two
assumptions that were made in the model would not change the qualitative nature of the
conclusions.
        (a) The assumption that a durable device must be replaced rather than
supplemented: I assumed for simplicity that a durable precaution was a device, such as a
smoke arrestor, and that if the precaution were to change in period 2, a new device would
be needed and would replace the old device. Thus, I assumed that if the period 2
precaution x2 is different from x1, then x2 needs to be spent in period 2 and the probability
of harm is p(x2). However, another assumption that fits certain situations is that the
period 1 device would not be replaced but instead would be enhanced or supplemented
with another device. For instance, perhaps a new component can be installed in the
period 1 smoke arrestor or perhaps another smoke arrestor can be added so that two
smoke arrestors function to control pollution instead of one. In such situations it is
natural to assume, though, that it is less efficient to spend x1 on a period 1 device and then
an additional amount x2 to supplement it than to spend the same amount x1 + x2 at once on
a different device. Under this assumption, grandfathering may well be desirable, since
the relative lack of efficacy of spending to supplement x1 may make staying put best,
even though new entrants spend x*(h) > x1.38
        (b) The assumption that uncertainty in the second period concerns the magnitude
of harm rather than the technology or cost of risk reduction: If the uncertainty in period 2
concerns the risk reduction function instead of the harm, it is evident that the main
qualitative conclusions reached would not be altered. For example, suppose that in
period 2, the probability of harm is given by p(tx), where x is expenditure in that period
and t is an uncertain technological or cost parameter. If t > 1, then by spending x, the
effective expenditure would be greater than x, so such t correspond to technological
advances or reductions in cost. The choice facing a party in the second period is between
not changing precaution, in which case the risk of harm would be p(x), and changing
precaution and spending x*(t), the x that minimizes x + p(tx)h. Grandfathering is best if
p(x)h < x*(t) + p(tx*(t))h, and the analysis would proceed along the lines that were
developed above.

t(k**(2)) – x*(h). He will do whichever is better. Now at the 2 such that k*(2) = kc, we have 2g(kc) – kc =
2g(k*(2)) – k*(2) > 2g(k**(2)) – k**(2) – t(k**(2)) – x*(h). Hence, it must be true in a positive
neighborhood above this 2 that 2g(kc) – kc > 2g(k**(2)) – k**(2) – t(k**(2)) – x*(h), in other words, that
choosing kc is better than not being grandfathered and choosing k**(2) in this neighborhood.
         38
            To amplify, the second period probability of harm might be written as p(x1, x2), where p2(x1, x2)
< 0. In such situations, suppose that p2(x1, x2) > pN(x1 + x2), that is, spending an additional dollar in period 2
after the period 1 device is installed reduces risk less than spending that dollar on a better period 1 device.
Then it is possible that –p2(x1, 0)h < 1, so that it is not worth supplementing the period 1 device even
though x*(h) > x1.


                                                                                                               22
5. The Law in the Light of the Theory
         I now discuss briefly certain aspects of the law against the background of the
analysis of legal change and past behavior in the preceding sections. I first observe that
the law seems to exhibit a general constancy that I see in part as a reflection of the
importance of past behavior. I then examine when and how the law employs
grandfathering.
         General stability of the law. Legal rules appear to me to display a significantly
greater degree of stability than would be expected were the only argument against change
in law the avoidance of additional administrative costs (that is, the burden on legislators
and on courts of considering and of promulgating new rules). If the avoidance of
administrative costs were the sole factor favoring legal stability, then legal rules would
probably be modified much more often than they are in reality, because added
administrative costs are likely to be small in relation to the benefits that even quite
modestly altered behavior would bring about for large populations of actors. Were
administrative costs the only consideration disfavoring legal change, I believe that all
manner of our regulations and legal duties would be amended in a more or less
continuous fashion, as advances occur in the technology of risk reduction and as new
information about hazards develops.
         That legal rules do not change with this frequency I suggest is explained
importantly by the fact that individuals and firms make many decisions to take what I
have described as durable precautions. In particular, many of their decisions have lasting
aspects, such that real risk reduction continues without any, or with only modest, added
cost, whereas compliance with new rules would be expensive and effectively squander
their prior investments in risk reduction. The reason that parties’ decisions tend to have
lasting aspects is that the decisions often involve investment in physical capital that is
directly or implicitly required by legal rules, or investment in training and intellectual
capital, or investment in financial, contractual, or reporting practices (recall section 2.2).
         Further, in many contexts, it would be costly or impractical for the legal system to
take parties’ earlier investments in compliance into direct account, determining who
made what investments in the past and their present effectiveness, in order to grandfather
some of them. Hence, in reality the law must often apply to all parties uniformly, and
thus either remain the same for the entire population engaged in an activity or change for
the whole population (see section 3.8). For this reason, and in recognition of the parties
who have made durable investments in past compliance, it is frequently best for the law
to remain fixed even though improvements in technology or new information may seem
to call for its modification. Only when a sufficient fraction of the parties who complied
in the past ought to change their behavior and satisfy new duties – only when the
pressures for change have built to a certain point – will it be socially advantageous for the
law to be modified.
         Grandfathering as a feature of the law. Although as just stated the law tends to
exhibit stability, and practical difficulties may prevent the legal system from taking past
behavior into explicit account, grandfathering is still a widely-encountered aspect of our
legal system.39 Areas in which grandfathering is observed include pollution regulation;40

        39
            I am informed by individuals familiar with Continental legal systems that they also employ
grandfathering, although they do not use that descriptive term.


                                                                                                         23
land use and real estate zoning ordinances;41 building and safety codes;42 licensing of
professionals;43 the enforcement of wills and trusts;44 ownership of firearms;45 and
immigration status.46 Also, as I will suggest below, grandfathering is an implicit feature
of the negligence determination under standard tort principles. That grandfathering
should be a common feature of the law is, of course, what one would expect in the light
of the theoretical analysis presented here and, as has been emphasized, the view that
compliance with legal rules involves many decisions with durable aspects. Additionally,
it is worth noting that the type of grandfathering that we see is what one would predict, in
the sense that it focuses on durable forms of compliance, as will be evident, for example,
when I discuss some of the specifics of grandfathering in regard to electric utility plants
and zoning. To my knowledge, grandfathering is not applied to readily modifiable
behavior of parties, such as their driving speed. In other words, at least the gross
characteristics of grandfathering are what one would expect in principle.
         Tort law and implicit grandfathering. Grandfathering seems to be a latent feature
of tort law, due to the manner in which the negligence rule is likely to be applied. As a
general matter, a party will be found negligent for failing to take a precaution that
resulted in harm if the cost of the precaution was less than the risk-reduction benefit that



        40
            For a general description and survey of grandfathering and its effects in regard to pollution
regulation, see Stavins (2006). He relates grandfathering to, among other legislation, the Clean Air Act
(CAA) 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq. (2000); the Clean Water Act (CWA) 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. (2000);
the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et seq.; the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA) 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. (2000); and various state and local mandates. On the effects of
grandfathering, see, e.g., Becker and Henderson (2000), Bushnell and Wolfram (2006), Crandall (1983),
Gollop and Roberts (1983), Gruenspecht (1982), and Nelson, Tietenberg, and Donihue (1993).
        41
          See, e.g., 1 ROBERT M. ANDERSON, AMERICAN LAW OF ZONING ch. 6 (3d ed. 1986); 3 ROBERT
M. ANDERSON, AMERICAN LAW OF ZONING ch. 20 (3d ed. 1986); 101A C.J.S. Zoning and Land Planning §
101 (2005); 2 JAMES METZENBAUM, LAW OF ZONING ch. X-g (2d ed. 1955).
        42
         See, e.g., 13 AM. JUR. 2D Buildings § 5 (2000); 7A EUGENE MCQUILLIN, THE LAW OF
MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS § 24.512 (3d ed. 2005); 39A C.J.S. Health & Environment § 52 (2003).
        43
             Many statutes allow grandfathering of old licensees when new requirements are established.
See, e.g., IDAHO CODE § 54-213 (2006) (concerning accountants); ARK. CODE ANN. § 17-28-310 (2006)
(concerning electricians); MINN. STAT. ANN. § 487.08 (2005) (concerning judicial officers); MISS. CODE
ANN. § 73-53-7 (2005) (concerning veterinarians).

        44
           See, e.g., UNIF. PROBATE CODE § 8-101 (2001) (concerning provisions for transition); UNIF.
PROBATE CODE § 2-506 (2001) (concerning execution of wills); UNIF. TRUST CODE § 1106 (2001)
(concerning trust relationships).
        45
            See, e.g., D.C. CT. R. ANN. § 7-2501.01 (concerning possession of unregistered handguns); Fox
Butterfield, As Expiration Looms, Gun Ban’s Effect is Debated, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 10, 2004, at A14.
        46
            See, e.g., Adjustment of Status To That Person Admitted for Permanent Residence; Temporary
Removal of Certain Restrictions of Eligibility, 66 Fed. Reg. 16,383 (March 26, 2001) (to be codified at 8
C.F.R. pt. 245).



                                                                                                          24
it would have generated.47 In a negligence determination, the risk-reduction that the
courts would naturally consider I believe to be the reduction from the level of risk that the
actor already was accomplishing, and for this basic reason the negligence determination
should result in desirable grandfathering. Consider an example similar to that in the
Introduction: A refinery had installed device A to reduce the risk of an explosion. This
device was state-of-the-art five years ago, when the refinery was built, but a new, cheaper
device B that is slightly more effective in risk-reduction became available last year. If
the refinery did not install B last year and as a result an explosion occurred, would a court
hold the refinery negligent? It is unlikely, since the court would presumably reason that
the additional risk-reduction that device B would have accomplished would be minor,
given the risk-reduction already generated by device A. Yet if the refinery had just been
built last year and had installed device A even though B was available at the time, the
refinery would be found negligent for not having chosen the safety device that was more
effective and cheaper. In other words, the duty of care for a new facility is different from
that for an old facility. This illustration shows why conventional application of the
negligence rule should tend to lead to grandfathering, even though it would not be
described as such.
        Regulation of power plant air pollution and grandfathering. Electric power
generating plants are an important source of air pollution, responsible for approximately
two-thirds of the country’s SO2 emissions, a quarter of its NOx emissions, and two fifths
of its CO2 emissions.48 These plants are regulated in significant ways under the Clean
Air Act of 1970 and amendments to it.49
        A salient feature of the Clean Air Act is grandfathering: power plants built before
1970 do not face the standards applying to plants built afterward, which are obligated to
meet more rigorous, contemporaneous pollution control requirements. Many of these
pre-1970 plants, mostly coal-fired, still operate today and are responsible for most of the
air pollution generated by power plants.50


         47
           See, e.g., the description of the negligence determination in Dobbs (2000) at ch. 7, and the
discussion in Landes and Posner (1987) at 85–88, 102, and in Shavell (1987) at 19–20.
         48
              See, e.g., Reitze (2002) at 371–72.
         49
             The original Clean Air Act, passed in 1963, provided grants to state governments for research
and air pollution control programs, acknowledged the danger of motor vehicle exhaust, and promoted
emissions standard development for motor vehicles and stationary sources. See Am. Meteorological Soc’y,
Legislation: A Look at U.S. Air Pollution Laws and their Amendments, at
http://www.ametsoc.org/sloan/cleanair/index.html (last visited August 28, 2007). The current national air
pollution program is based on the 1970 Clean Air Act amendments, enacted the same year that the EPA
was established. Further significant amendments were made in 1977 and 1990. Pub. L. No. 95-95; 91 Stat.
685; Pub .L. No. 101-549, 104 Stat. 2399. For useful accessible internet sources on the Clean Air Act, see
Envtl. Literacy Council, Clean Air Act, at www.enviroliteracy.org/article.php/6.html (last visted August
28, 2007); Environmental Protection Agency, Clean Air Act, at www.epa.gov/air/oaq_caa.html (last visited
August 28, 2007). See also Nat’l Res. Def. Council, Clean Air & Energy, at www.nrdc.org/air/default.asp
(last visited August 28, 2007). Other general sources on the Clean Air Act include Squillace and Wooley
(1999), Belden (2001), and Reitze (2001).
         50
              See, e.g, Reitze (2002) at 384–85 and Varadarajan (2003) at 2553–54.



                                                                                                          25
         Although plants built before 1970 are grandfathered, these plants may have to
forfeit their grandfathered status if they are modified. That happens under certain rules
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”), but only if a plant carries
out a major modification resulting in a significant increase in regulated pollutant
emissions.51 If a change in a plant does not significantly increase regulated emissions or
if the change is limited to routine maintenance, grandfathering status is ordinarily
preserved.52 The definitions and interpretations of a “significant” increase in regulated
pollutants and of “major modifications” versus “routine maintenance” are complex and
have been the subject of continuing debate and litigation, given their importance to firms
because of the financial advantage of sustained grandfathering.53 Whether a modification
results in a significant emissions increase varies from pollutant to pollutant,54 and
complicated subrules govern the calculation of increases.55 Whether a change is major or
constitutes routine maintenance depends on whether the change is routine in the
industry.56 Also, under a proposed rule, recently vacated by the courts, whether a change
would be considered a modification would depend on whether its cost exceeded 20% of
the capital costs of replacement components.57
         What can be said about the grandfathering of power plants under the Clean Air
Act in the light of the analysis of this article? That there should be some grandfathering
of power plants is obviously consistent with the analysis. On one hand, the costs of
changing pollution control methods are often large, involving significant expenditures on

          51
             For useful overviews of the rules regarding modifications, see Nash and Revesz (2007) and
Varadarajan (2003).
          52
             See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. §§ 51.166(a)(7), 51.166(b)(2). These features of the regulation of
modifications are applicable under the rules of New Source Review in “attainment” areas (where goals
under the National Ambient Air Quality Standards have been met), to which I will largely refer in the text.
The regulation of modifications is different in non-attainment areas. See Environmental Protection
Agency, New Source Review: Basic Information, at http://www.epa.gov/nsr/info.html (last visited August
28, 2007). Moreover, modifications are also governed by the New Source Performance Standards
(“NSPS”), which state in part that an alteration amounting to a “reconstruction” could result in the loss of
grandfathered status even if the amount of pollution does not increase. To be a “reconstruction,” the cost of
the alteration must exceed 50% of the cost of building a comparable new facility and meeting NSPS
regulations must be technologically and economically feasible. See 40 C.F.R. § 60.15(b).
          53
           See, e.g., Wisconsin Elec. Power Co. v. Reilly, 893 F.2d 901 (7th Cir. 1990); United States v.
Duke Energy Corp., 278 F. Supp. 2d 619 (M.D.N.C. 2003); United States v. Alabama Power Co., 372 F.
Supp. 2d 1283 (N.D. Ala. 2005); Notice of Final Action on Reconsideration, 70 Fed. Reg. 33838 (June 10,
2005) (summarizing debate over rule governing equipment replacement as routine maintenance). See also
Decision Leaves High Court as EPA’s Last Option to Reverse NSR Ruling, CLEAN AIR REPORT, July 13,
2006, at sec. 14 (summarizing recent court decisions concerning the same).
          54
               See 40 C.F.R. §§ 51.166(b)(23), 51.166(b)(39).
          55
               See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. §§ 51.166(a)(7)(iv)(b), 51.166(b)(3).
          56
           See Duke Energy Corp. (holding that the New Source Review test for determining whether a
modification constitutes routine maintenance is whether the modification is routine in the industry).
          57
               See 40 C.F.R. § 51.166(y) (vacated by New York v. Envtl. Prot. Agency, 443 F.3d 880 (D.C. Cir.
2006)).



                                                                                                          26
durable capital and perhaps alterations of plant design, and on the other hand, the
equipment in place already achieves a reduction in pollution, making the benefits of
compliance with new control methods marginal rather than total in nature.
         Yet the potentially unlimited duration of grandfathering of plants raises
questions.58 With the passage of time, an initial social advantage of grandfathering of a
plant may diminish and then disappear, for two basic reasons. First, the expenses of
maintaining and repairing old plants tend to increase over time, as equipment and
buildings degrade. This reduces the cost advantage of grandfathering (see section 3.2).
Second, the pollution control benefits of changes in abatement methods tend to rise over
time, as the technology of pollution reduction advances. Moreover, it seems that, in fact,
the expected harm due to pollution has increased (for example, the greenhouse effect is
now widely believed to be serious59). These factors increase the marginal payoff from
change, such as switching fuel from coal to natural gas. It is of course possible that
administrative cost savings could justify an unlimited-in-time grandfathering rule, but
given the high social costs of pollution, that does not appear plausible. Hence, it seems
that a superior regime to that of the Clean Air Act would limit the duration of
grandfathering of power plants or require a showing of evidence for its continuation.
         The conditions under which modifications result in loss of grandfathering also
provoke some skepticism. A significant reason is that in important contexts any
modification that does not raise the level of pollution is permitted – only modifications
that increase pollution may result in loss of grandfathering. This approach seems
mistaken. It could well be that a modification does not increase pollution yet ought to
result in the loss of grandfathering status (see section 3.5) because it results in an
opportunity to relatively cheaply install up-to-date pollution control technology, or to
change from coal to natural gas, and thereby substantially lower emissions.
         Other questions about modifications and grandfathering may also be raised. As I
stressed in section 3.7, modifications are relevant to the decision whether to continue
grandfathering especially to the degree that they inform us about the costs of changing to
new pollution control technology; the expenditure or extent of a modification is only a
weak indicator of these costs. However, the EPA criteria that determine whether a
modification is classified as major do not seem to be closely tied to the costs of changing
to new technology (certainly the proposed 20% rule mentioned above was not closely
tied to these costs).
         Regulation of real estate by zoning and building codes, and grandfathering. In
most areas of the country, real estate is regulated by zoning ordinances, building codes,
and related rules, with requirements covering, among many other factors, lot size, setback
distances of structures from property lines, percentages of land area covered by
structures, height of structures, the safety and adequacy of the design of structures, and
the materials and methods of construction.60

        58
            Many critics have made points along the lines of this paragraph. See, for example, Nash and
Revesz (2007) and Varadarajan (2003).
         59
            See Nat’l Res. Def. Council, Global Warming, at
http://www.nrdc.org/globalWarming/default.asp (last visited August 28, 2007); Union of Concerned
Scientists, Global Warming, at http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming (last visited August 28, 2007).
        60
          See, e.g., ANDERSON, supra note 25; METZENBAUM, supra note 25; MCQUILLIN, supra note 26;
13 AM. JUR. 2D Buildings § 5 (2000); 101A C.J.S. Zoning and Land Planning § 101 (2005). See also, e.g.,


                                                                                                          27
        These regulations often include grandfathering provisions. The general nature of
the grandfathering is that if a structure was built before the passage of the regulation, the
structure is permitted to be noncompliant and without limit of time.61 Thus, if a setback
rule says that buildings must be at least 50 feet from roads, but a building that was
constructed beforehand is only 30 feet from a road, the building will not ever have to be
moved or demolished in order to comply. Still, not all regulations include grandfathering
provisions, and notably, rules bearing on safety and health often do not.62 For instance,
certain requirements regarding septic tank hook up to sewer systems, safety fencing, and
signage must be adhered to by all parties.63
        A grandfathered structure may lose its grandfathered status if modified. A typical
rule would disallow continuation of grandfathering if the cost of the modification
exceeded a percentage, such as 50%, of the value of the structure.64


NEW YORK CITY, N.Y., ZONING RESOLUTION (2006); NEW YORK CITY, N.Y., ADMIN. CODE tits. 26–27
(2006); MASS. REGS. CODE tit. 780.
         61
            See, e.g., 101A C.J.S. Zoning and Land Planning § 101 (2005) (“Since users of land generally
acquire rights which cannot be cut off, zoning regulations operate only prospectively, in the absence of
special provision to the contrary.”); MASS. GEN. LAWS ANN. ch. 40A § 6 (2006) (“[A] zoning ordinance or
by-law shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or
special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing on such ordinance or by-
law.”); BLOOMINGTON, IND., MUNICIPAL CODE § 20.08.01.01 (“Any structure, or any use of land or
structure, which does not conform with one or more provisions of this zoning ordinance, but which
lawfully existed upon the effective date of the provisions of this zoning ordinance with which the structure
or use does not conform, shall be a lawful nonconforming use or structure.”).
         62
            See MCQUILLIN, supra note 26, at § 24.512 (“[A]ccording to considerable authority, building
codes or ordinances, or certain of their provisions may be made applicable to existing buildings....The
question in these cases is whether the public welfare demands retroactive application and whether the
property owners affected suffer unreasonable exactions as compared with the resulting public benefits.
Thus, provisions relating to repairs, reconstructions, and alterations thereafter to be made, or requirements
for the protection of health and lives of persons occupying buildings may be made applicable to existing
structures.”).
         63
            See, e.g., Renne v. Township of Waterford, 252 N.W.2d 842 (Mich. Ct. App. 1977) (affirming
judgment that septic tank users must forgo using their septic tanks and pay for connecting to a new sewer
system); Town of Hempstead v. Goldblatt, 9 N.Y.2d 101, 172 N.E.2d 562 (1961) (requiring compliance
with local ordinance providing for safety fencing, setbacks, degrees of slope, barricades, lights, retaining
walls, and maximum groundwater level before continuing sand pit operation); Lyman G. Realty Corp. v.
Gillroy, 172 N.Y.S.2d 907 (App. Div. 1958) (ruling that company must obtain a permit to maintain its roof
sign, even though the sign was constructed before the sign-safety-promoting permit requirement was
enacted).
         64
           See 83 AM. JUR 2D Zoning and Planning § 605 (2003). See also, e.g., Marris v. City of
Cedarburg, 176 Wis.2d 14, 498 N.W.2d 842 (1993) (considering claim that property had lost its
grandfathered nonconforming status because of alterations, as defined by city ordinance, that exceeded
50% of the property’s assessed value); Marcus v. Village of Mamaroneck, 283 N.Y. 325, 328, 28 N.E.2d
856, 858 (1940) (featuring local ordinance according to which “no existing building devoted to a non-
conforming use may be altered at a cost for the alteration of a sum exceeding fifty percent of the assessed
value of the lot and building.”).




                                                                                                           28
        The grandfathering of real estate as just summarized seems broadly consistent
with the analysis of this article, as is illustrated by setback regulation. A home that is
only 30 feet from a road, instead of 50 feet as required by a zoning rule, presumably
would be very expensive to move; the cost would be at least in the tens of thousands of
dollars. The social benefit of having a greater setback is probably largely aesthetic and
much lower than the cost of moving the home. If so, the grandfathering of a
noncomplying setback would be socially sensible, and similar observations apply to
many other regulated aspects of real estate, such as building dimensions and height. At
the same time, the exceptions to grandfathering also display a rough rationality.
Requiring sewer hook-up, even by existing septic tank users, may make economic sense
(connection costs are relatively low and long-term benefits may be substantial) and
likewise installation of safety fencing and for removal of dangerous signs (costs are not
great, the benefits of compliance are large, especially because they involve enhancement
of personal safety).
        That the grandfathering that we observe is typically indefinite in duration also
seems explainable. The passage of time is not likely to change greatly the high cost of
changing the location or physical characteristics of structures, or of lot size, nor is it
likely to alter substantially the lower and often modest aesthetic benefits of compliance.
(Note the contrast between this conclusion and the opinion discussed above that
grandfathering of power plants should be of limited duration, because both the costs of
noncompliance and the incremental benefits of compliance with pollution regulation rise
over time.)
        Finally, that modifications may result in loss of grandfathering status if their cost
surpasses a threshold is understandable for the general reasons explained in the
discussion in section 3.7. For example, a major renovation of a home may provide an
opportunity to cheaply bring wiring up to code requirements, since walls are likely to be
opened up, electricians, carpenters, and painters are likely to be working on-site, and the
like. Of course, this is not to say that the percentage criterion cannot be improved,
perhaps made dependent on the nature of the noncompliance. Also, it is possible that
when a modification is made, its expense should not be examined, but rather the direct
approach should be pursued of estimating whether and how much the cost of compliance
(like that of bringing wiring up to code) really does change as a consequence. The
problem with this direct approach is its administrative expensive in relation to that of use
of the modification expenditure threshold, and thus it may well be inadvisable. (Note
again the contrast with the case of power plants, where incurring the administrative cost
of the direct approach might be justified by the magnitude of the costs and the benefits of
optimal regulation of each single power plant.)

6. Related Views and Literature
        I comment here on the general notion that the law ought to be stable because it is
relied upon, the literature concerning legal transitions, and economically-oriented writing
on optimal legal rules.
        The view that the law should display stability, because parties rely upon the
constancy of legal rules. A frequently expressed view is that because parties rely in
many ways on legal rules, the stability of legal rules is socially desirable.65 The rationale
       65
            See again note 3 supra.


                                                                                           29
given here for the stability of legal rules is consistent with this view. As has been the
major theme of this article, if parties rely on present legal rules and comply with them by
making required durable investments (such as in smoke scrubbers), then it will often be
socially desirable for their legal duties not to change. The reason is that a change could
be inefficient (a new smoke scrubber might cost more than the incremental gains it would
achieve over the scrubber in place). It follows that keeping the law fixed may be
desirable if explicit grandfathering is not feasible, as was discussed in section 3.8. In
other words, stability of the law may be socially advantageous because it avoids forcing
many parties to inefficiently alter the durable investments they had made in compliance
with the law.
         The foregoing rationale for the stability of legal rules is not, however, the
instrumental justification that I believe most of its proponents have in mind, which is that
participation in activities would be undesirably chilled if legal standards might be raised
in the future.66 This argument is problematic. It is true that participation in activities will
be discouraged if there is a risk that legal standards would become more rigorous, but it is
not true that this reduction in participation in activities is likely to be socially undesirable.
As noted in section 3.9 and as is well understood, participation in potentially harmful
activities tends to be socially excessive under a regime of legal standards (because parties
do not have to pay for harm done given compliance with the standards). Hence, although
the level of participation in activities will be reduced if parties have to adhere to increases
in legal standards, the level of participation will still be too great from a social
perspective, assuming that the standards are properly chosen.67
         Literature on legal transitions. Beginning with Michael Graetz (1977), a
literature has developed on whether legal relief from the burdens of legal change may be
socially desirable to grant.68 This “transitions” literature originally emphasized tax law,
but reaches broader conclusions, especially in Louis Kaplow (1986), notably that
grandfathering is a generally undesirable policy.69 The nub of the argument made in the
transitions literature against grandfathering is that it interferes directly with the social
purposes of change in legal rules because by its nature it protects parties from having to
obey socially desirable changes in rules. Grandfathering is also thought to undermine
social welfare indirectly because, if parties are shielded from future changes in legal
rules, they will not be induced to plan their present actions keeping the possibility of


         66
            There is also a commonly encountered noninstrumental justification for the stability of law:
individuals expect the law to be stable; it is undesirable per se to upset parties’ expectations; hence the law
should be stable. For this justification to apply, it must be explained why individuals expect the law to be
stable, either in fact or in theory. Thus, whatever may be its merits, the justification is incomplete.
         67
           This is not meant to deny that if legal standards are revised without proper basis, parties’
motives to participate in activities could be undesirably dulled.
         68
          See, e.g., Fisch (1997), Kaplow (1986), Kempler (1984), Levmore (1998, 1999), Logue (2003),
Quinn and Trebilcock (1982), Shaviro (2000), and Troy (2000).
         69
            Graetz (1977) at 68–73, 87, and Kaplow (1986) at 584–87. There are many differences in
position among these and other authors in the transitions literature on the demerits of grandfathering, but
there is no need for me to distinguish them for my purposes.



                                                                                                              30
subsequent legal changes in mind. The only potentially valid basis for grandfathering
discussed in the transitions literature is as an implicit form of insurance against losses
suffered when legal rules change. But the literature argues that grandfathering would be
an inefficient form of insurance and also that parties who desire insurance should seek to
purchase it on private insurance markets.
        How can the negative conclusion about grandfathering in the transitions literature
be reconciled with the conclusion developed here that grandfathering is often socially
good? The key to understanding the difference in conclusions is to note that the
transitions literature does not distinguish between legal rules based on legal standards and
rules based on strict liability. Let me examine the criticisms of grandfathering made in
transitions literature under each of these two major forms of legal rules.70
        In the case of rules based on legal standards, does grandfathering interfere directly
with socially desirable legal change? No, it does not, because, by the design of the
regulators, grandfathering is granted to a party only when requiring the party to alter its
behavior would be socially undesirable. A firm will be grandfathered and permitted to
continue using its old smoke scrubber only when switching to a better smoke scrubber
would be socially undesirable (because the cost of the new scrubber would exceed the
marginal benefit it would yield). Conversely, a firm will not be grandfathered whenever
the firm ought to replace its old smoke scrubber with a better one. Hence, grandfathering
does not result in direct interference with socially desirable changes in precaution, and
grandfathering may be needed to prevent socially undesirable changes in precaution.
Moreover, there will generally be many circumstances where changes in precautions are
socially undesirable, and thus where grandfathering is called for, because of the durability
of many precautions.71
        Continuing, does grandfathering reduce social well-being indirectly, because it
means that parties’ present behavior will fail to properly anticipate possible future
changes in law? Again, the answer is no. In the first place, parties’ present behavior is
by hypothesis regulated – it must satisfy a legal standard; it is not behavior that parties
are free to choose and thus that could be influenced by anticipated future changes in law.
The smoke scrubber that a firm installs today is not one that the firm is free to choose; in
a regulated world, the scrubber must be of the type prescribed by the regulators.72

         70
            I will not address the criticism concerning provision of implicit insurance as a rationale for
grandfathering. The reason is that issues of insurance have no relevance to the rationale for grandfathering
that I have advanced in this article. (However, I happen to agree that grandfathering should not be adopted
in order to provide implicit insurance to those who would lose as a result of legal change.)
         71
            In the transitions literature, it seems to be assumed, at least implicitly, that a change in a legal
rule is socially desirable for all parties. Here, as the reader knows, that is not assumed, and indeed the
major question addressed is whether or not a legal change that is desirable for new entrants to an activity is
desirable for those already engaging in the activity and complying with a past legal standard.
         72
           Of course, in reality, the regulated world is more complicated than I just described it to be, and
some dimensions of behavior affecting risk are not effectively controlled by regulation. Grandfathering
could affect decisions about such dimensions of behavior. For example, as I explained in section 3.9,
grandfathering might lead parties to enter into regulated activities more often than they otherwise would.
However, such observations should not distract us from the central point under discussion that there can be
no incentive effects of grandfathering on regulated dimensions of behavior because, by definition, they are
controlled by the state.


                                                                                                             31
Furthermore, by the design of the regulators, present regulated behavior will in principle
properly reflect all possible future changes in the world. In the model that I examined,
for example, the level of precautions chosen by the regulator to be the legal standard in
period 1 impounds appropriately all possible future changes in harm in period 2.73
         Now let us turn to rules based on strict liability. Here the criticisms of
grandfathering made in the transitions literature do apply. That is, were parties protected
against having to pay for changes in the harm that they might cause in the future, they
might not take appropriate precautions later, and they might also take inadequate
precautions today. But these criticisms of grandfathering are of a piece with mine.
Recall (see section 2.4) that I also said that grandfathering is undesirable under strict
liability because grandfathering would dilute the level of precautions taken to alleviate
the risk of harm.
         It is interesting to observe that the foregoing point, that grandfathering is
undesirable when liability is strict, bears on the evaluation of grandfathering in the area
of taxation, to which the transitions literature was initially directed. In that domain, there
is good reason to think that grandfathering is socially undesirable, because taxes often
have strict liability aspects. To illustrate where this is almost literally true, suppose that a
tax rule is designed to reduce pollution and that the tax is set equal to the expected harm
caused by polluting activities. If new information emerges indicating that pollution is
more harmful than had been thought, one can readily show that it is socially desirable for
the tax to be increased commensurately, so that, in particular, there should be no
grandfathering in the form of retention of the old, lower tax for parties who had been
paying only that. Of course, many taxes have a purpose different from a corrective
pollution tax and are designed to raise revenue, but I believe that arguments similar to
those applying under strict liability would frequently be valid with respect to them.
         To conclude, my assessment of the transitions literature is that its fundamental
criticisms of grandfathering have relevance mainly in the context of strict liability and
probably also of taxation. In the domain of law governed by legal standards, the
criticisms of the transitions literature are misplaced. In that domain, which comprises the
great majority of our legal rules, the benchmark for thinking should be that
grandfathering is sometimes socially desirable, for the reasons elaborated in the analysis
of this article.
         Economically-oriented literature on legal rules. There exists, of course, a well-
developed economic literature on optimal behavior to prevent harm and the inducement
of that behavior through the use of legal rules. This literature generally views parties as
choosing precautions on a blank slate – past behavior is not considered.74 Hence, what
the present article contributes to economic analysis of legal rules and optimal behavior is


         73
             In section 2.3 I explain informally how optimal precaution in period 1 depends on the array of
possible outcomes in period 2, and in section 4.2 I explain this formally. In particular, condition (3) of
section 4.2 determines the optimal level of durable precaution x1* in period 1, and this condition involves
the entire distribution of possible future harms through the terms E(h), Pr(I(x1)), and E(h|I(x1)).
          74
              The paradigm for the use of legal rules to channel behavior desirably is that developed in the
literature on the economics of tort law, on which see generally Calabresi (1970), Landes and Posner (1987),
and Shavell (1987); these sources do not take past behavior into account in discussing later optimal
behavior. Likewise, recent surveys of the economics of liability omit mention of the relevance of past
behavior to subsequent optimal behavior; see, e.g., Brown (1998).


                                                                                                         32
the examination of the influence of past behavior on presently optimal behavior and the
implications of this dependence for the design of legal rules.

7. Conclusion
         I have considered here the general question whether, and how, legal rules should
change in the light of new circumstances and conditions. The main point of emphasis has
been that the steps that it is socially desirable for parties to take depend on their past
actions when those actions have durable aspects. This gave rise to the conclusion that it
is often undesirable for parties to make changes, even though a new entrant into a
regulated activity ought to take previously unrequired actions. And what flowed from
that conclusion was that grandfathering may be desirable, or else, if grandfathering is
infeasible, that it may be best for legal duties not to be altered.
         The issues addressed here seem to me to be important to a consideration of legal
change because of my empirical judgment that much of our behavior that is regulated by
law displays significant durable aspects. Hence, explicit recognition of that point in the
analysis of legal change should be included in our intellectual agenda.
         Also, one hopes, the analysis offered here may help to clarify thinking and
possibly to offer guidance to policymakers and courts. In this regard, I suggested that
legal authorities could improve the rules determining whether modifications result in loss
of grandfathered status under the Clean Air Act. Moreover, legal authorities could avoid
the whole task of policing modifications and grandfathering by adopting the rule of strict
liability or by employing pollution taxes. As I explained, under this type of rule, legal
authorities eliminate in a fell swoop the entire need to consider past behavior in their
decisions; private actors themselves are induced to take their past behavior into proper
account with no oversight from without.
         Last, let me comment on the positive aspect of the analysis of this article. I have
suggested that the fact that we observe grandfathering, and more generally, a certain
measure of stability in the law, is in substantial respects explained by the central point of
the analysis here, namely, that the expense of legal change may not be worth the
incremental benefits over what society obtains from past compliance with legal rules.
What I have not examined, however, is doubtless a significant part of the explanation for
grandfathering. Namely, grandfathering is in the selfish interest of incumbents in an
activity, especially of firms in an industry, and allows them to benefit without appearing
to stand in the way of legal change. Quite apart from the social desirability that
grandfathering may possess, then, grandfathering enjoys a type of political and economic
appeal for incumbents that may help to explain why we have as much grandfathering as
we do, and perhaps too much.




                                                                                          33
References

Arrow, Kenneth J. and Anthony C. Fisher. 1974. Environmental Preservation,
       Uncertainty, and Irreversibility. Quarterly Journal of Economics 88: 312-319.

Becker, Randy and Vernon Henderson. 2000. Effects of Air Quality Regulation on
       Polluting Industries. Journal of Political Economy 108: 379-421.

Belden, Roy S. 2001. The Clean Air Act. American Bar Association, Section of
       Environment, Energy, and Resources, Chicago.

Brown, John P. 1973. Toward an Economic Theory of Liability, Journal of Legal
      Studies 2: 323-350.

Brown, John P. 1998. Economic Theory of Liability Rules, in The New Palgrave
      Dictionary of Economics and the Law (Peter Newman ed.) 2: 15-19.

Bushnell, James B., and Catherine Wolfram. 2006. The Economic Effects of Vintage
      Differentiated Regulations: The Case of New Source Review. Unpublished
      paper, University of California at Berkeley.

Calabresi, Guido. 1970. The Costs of Accidents. Yale University Press, New Haven.

Crandall, Robert W. 1983. Controlling Industrial Pollution: The Economics and Politics
      of Clean Air. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Dixit, Avinash, and Robert S. Pindyck. 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton
        University Press, Princeton.

Dobbs, Dan B. 2000. The Law of Torts. West, St. Paul, Minn.

Fisch, Jill E. 1997. Retroactivity and Legal Change: An Equilibrium Approach. Harvard
        Law Review 110: 1055-1123.

Gollop, Frank M., and Mark J. Roberts. 1983. Environmental Regulations and
       Productivity Growth: The Case of Fossil-fueled Electric Power Generation.
       Journal of Political Economy 91: 654-674.

Graetz, Michael. 1977. Legal Transitions: The Case of Retroactivity in Income Tax
       Revision. University of Pennsylvania Law Review. 126: 47-87.

Gruenspecht, Howard K. 1982. Differentiated Regulation: The Case of Auto Emissions
      Standards. American Economic Review 72: 328-331.




                                                                                       34
Hochman, Charles B. 1960. The Supreme Court and the Constitutionality of Retroactive
     Legislation. Harvard Law Review 73: 692-727.

Kaplow, Louis. 1986. An Economic Analysis of Legal Transitions. Harvard Law
      Review 99: 509-617.

Kempler, David I. 1984. Transitional Rules as a Tool for Effective Tax Reform. Baylor
      Law Review 36: 765-811.

Landes, William M., and Richard A. Posner. 1987. The Economic Structure of Tort
      Law. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Levmore, Saul. 1998. Retroactive Taxation, in The New Palgrave Dictionary of
      Economics and the Law (Peter Newman ed.) 3: 340-44.

Levmore, Saul. 1999. Changes, Anticipations, and Reparations. Columbia Law Review
      99: 1657-1700.

Logue, Kyle D. 2003. Legal Transitions, Rational Expectations, and Legal Progress.
       Journal of Law and Contemporary Problems 13: 211-260.

Nash, Jonathan Remy, and Richard L. Revesz. 2007. Grandfathering and Environmental
       Regulation: The Law and Economics of New Source Review. Northwestern
       University Law Review 102: xxx-xxx.

Nelson, Randy A., Tom Tietenberg, and Michael R. Donihue. 1993. Differentiated
       Environmental Regulation: Effects on Electric Utility Capital Turnover and
       Emissions. Review of Economics and Statistics 75: 368-373.

Pindyck, Robert S., and Avinash K. Dixit. 1994. Investment under Uncertainty.
      Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Pindyck, Robert S., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 2001. Microeconomics, 5th ed. Prentice-
      Hall, New York.

Quinn, John, and Michael J. Trebilcock. 1982. Compensation, Transitions Costs, and
       Regulatory Change. University of Toronto Law Journal 32: 117-175.

Reitze, Arnold W., Jr. 2001. Air Pollution Control Law: Compliance and Enforcement.
        Environmental Law Institute, Washington, D.C.

Reitze, Arnold W., Jr. 2002. State and Federal Command-and-Control Regulation of
        Emissions from Fossil-Fuel Electric Power Generating Plants. Environmental
        Law Journal 32: 369-433.

Shavell, Steven. 1980. Strict Liability versus Negligence. Journal of Legal Studies. 9:
       1-25.


                                                                                      35
Shavell, Steven. 1987. Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Harvard University Press,
       Cambridge.

Shaviro, Daniel. 2000. When Rules Change. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Squillace, Mark S., and David R. Wooley. 1999. Air Pollution, 3rd ed. Anderson
       Publishing, Cincinnati.

Stavins, Robert N. 2006. Vintage-Differentiated Environmental Regulation. Stanford
       Environmental Law Journal. 25: 29-63.

Troy, Daniel E. 2000. Toward a Definition and Critique of Retroactivity. Alabama Law
       Review 51: 1329-1353.

Varadarajan, Deepa. 2003. Billboards and Big Utilities: Borrowing Land-Use Concepts
      to Regulate “Nonconforming” Sources Under the Clean Air Act. Yale Law
      Journal. 112: 2553-2588.

Weitzman, Martin L. 2003. Income, Wealth, and the Maximum Principle.
      Harvard University Press, Cambridge.




                                                                                     36
