                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE ASSET PRICE APPROACH 'TO THE ANALYSIS
                    OF CAPITAL INCOME TAXATION


                       Lawrence H. Summers




                      Working Paper No. 1356




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1981




Much of the research summarized in this paper was contained in rry
doctoral thesis. I am indebted to the many people thanked in my
thesis for a variety of types of assistance in connection with the
research reported here. Financial support was provided by the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Computational assistance was
provided by Data Resources Incorporated. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper 1t1356
                                        May 1984


             The Asset Price Approach to the Analysis
                    of Capital Income Taxation


                             ABSTRACT



     This paper summarizes my recent research directed at the
development of an asset price approach to the analysis of
capital income taxation. While asset prices play a crucial
role in many macroeconomic models, they have been subordinate
in most previous efforts to study the effects of capital income
taxation on economic behavior. A number of reasons for
focusing on the role of asset prices in analyzing public

finance questions are discussed. These include the role of
asset prices in determining investment decisions, and the fact
that changes in asset prices are indicators of the horizontal
and vertical equity effects of tax reforms. Recent empirical
research in which asset price information is studied in order
to measure the effects on economic behavior of tax reforms and

to distinguish between alternative models of the effects of
capital income taxation is reviewed. Directions for future
research in public finance, focusing on asset markets, are also
discussed.



                                        Lawrence H. Summers
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Littauer Center 229
                                        Harvard University
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
     This paper summarizes and attempts to place in a broader
context my recent research directed at developing an asset

price approach to the analysis of the effects of capital income
taxation. The link between asset markets and real investment
decisions has been an important theme of much recent research

in macroeconomics dating at least from Tobin's seminal q theory
of investment. However, asset markets have been subordinate in
most previous theoretical and empirical efforts to model the
effects of capital income taxation on economic behavior.

Although changes in asset prices are the proximate determinants
of who gains and loses following tax reforms, asset markets are
suppressed in standard models used to study tax incidence.
     A recurring theme in much of the empirical work described
here is the effect of inflation on the tax system. Empirical
work on the macroeconomic effects of tax reforms has always
been difficult because of the paucity of statutory changes. In
this limited respect, inflation has been salutary, because its
frequent increases during the 1970's and recent sharp decreases
have significantly altered the effective taxation of real
income because of nominal accounting practices. Indeed, it is
fair to say that most of the variation in tax rates on

corporate capital over the last two decades can be traced to
the effects of inflation.
                             —2—
     Beyond its scientific interest, an analysis of capital
income taxation and particularly its interactions with infla-
tion is highly pertinent in light of recent economic events.
The inflationary decade of the 1970's witnessed important

changes in traditional patterns of capital accumulation and
valuation in the American economy. The real price of corporate
capital relative to consumption goods declined by almost 50
percent. Almost as dramatic was the real appreciation in the
relative price of owner—occupied housing and land. As a con-
sequence of these changes, the relative value of the two prin-
cipal forms of wealth in the economy changed by a factor of
more than two. During late 1982, the rate of expected
inflation fell very sharply, and the stock market rose very

dramatically, while real housing prices remained relatively
stable. These large changes in relative prices were reflected
in movements in rates of investment. The growth rate of non-
residential business capital employed per man hour declined
from 3.4 percent during the 1949—74 period to .2 percent during
the 1976—80 interval, while the share of net investment devoted
to residential capital rose significantly.
     The first section of this paper describes in more detail
what is meant by the asset price approach to capital income
taxation and discusses its advantages for studying certain

public finance questions.
    The second section illustrates how the effects of tax
reforms on both asset prices and investment can be estimated in
                             —3--

a simple partial equilibrium setting. The third and final
section of the paper summarizes research on the relationship

between taxes and the pricing of capital assets and suggests
directions for future research.

                  I. The Asset Price Approach
     The asset price approach to capital income taxation
provides a united framework in which three traditional issues
in the analysis of capital income taxation can be addressed.
These issues include the short—run effects of tax reforms on

investment, their long—run effects on capital accumulation and
growth and their effects on horizontal and vertical equity.
The relationship between the asset price and traditional
approaches to each of these issues is discussed below.
Taxation and Investment

     Before discussing the advantages of focusing on asset

prices in analyzing the effects of capital income taxes on
investment, it is useful to review briefly more standard

approaches to the problem. There exists a large literature
attempting econometric evaluation of the effects of investment
incentives. This literature which is extensively summarized in
Eisner and Chirinko (1980) is all based on extensions of the
flexible accelerator approach to investment developed in the
                             —4—
seminal work of Hall and Jorgenson (1967). These studies all
model investment as an adjustment process to a desired capital
stock. The desired capital stock is postulated to be a func-
tion of the past levels of real output and the cost of

capital. Often, as in Jorgenson's work, theory is used to
tightly constrain this function. As Eisner and Chirinko
illustrate, there is room for substantial disagreement about
these constraints and the specification of the cost of
capital. Here I leave these issues aside, and consider two
more fundamental problems with the use of flexible accelerator—
type econometric investment equations to model the effects of
investment incentives.

     The major conceptual difficulty with flexible accelerator
approaches is that they treat output as predetermined from the
point of view of the firm's investment decision. The desired
capital stock is chosen conditional on output rather than being
simultaneously determined. This is an important problem.
Presumably, government's reason for offering investment tax
incentives is the belief that reductions in the cost of capital
will raise the level of output firms desire to supply. This in
turn leads to increased investment. It is difficult to imagine
how investment incentives could be beneficial, if they have no
impact on the level of output firms expect to produce. Yet
this constraint is imposed a priori in studies using flexible
accelerator approaches to model investment.
                             —5—
     This objection is sometimes met by embedding equations of
this type in large scale Keynesian models, and simulating the
path of the economy, under alternative asumptions about tax

policy. This approach brings with it all the well—known
problems with such models. More importantly, it does not
really meet the objection that meaningful evaluation of the
effects of the effects of investment incentives requires
analysis of their effects on the desired supply of output. In
standard Keynesian models, output is demand determined with
essentially no role left for the effects of policies on

aggregate supply.
     A second problem with flexible accelerator models is the
treatment of expectations. Presumably the desired capital
stock should be a "forward looking variable" depending on

expectations about the future marginal product and cost of
capital. Standard approaches assume that these variables can
be adequately proxied by lagged values of output and the cost
of capital. This seems implausible. Announced but not yet
implemented tax policies will clearly have effects on the level
of investment, but this possibility is precluded in standard

investment equations. A second example is provided by changes
in the production function through time. Flexible accelerator

approaches typically assume that the marginal product of
capital is a stable function of the capital output ratio. The
substantial variation in observed rates of profit suggests that
this assumption is unwarranted. These examples are merely
                                           —6--

illustrations of Robert Lucas's (1976) famous critique of

standard large scale econometric models. In general, the
estimated parameter will be complex combinations of underlying
structural parameters, and the stochastic processes followed by
policy and other exogenous variables. It is unlikely that the
estimates will be stable from period to period, especially when
_._,.__,..   ._•I
             .L.    .J..   ..L. LJ. LL .

        The asset price approach to analyzing the effects of
capital taxation relied on here takes as its point of departure
a different strand of the literature on investment. A number
of authors including Eisner and Strotz (1963), Lucas (1967),
Treadway (1968), and Abel (1980) have recognized the ad—hoc
character of the delivery lags introduced in many models of
investment, and developed models of investment in which costs

of adjustment enter explicitly. In these models, the level of
investment depends on the shadow price associated with the
capital accumulation constraint. When the value of capital

rises, firms are willing to incur more adjustment costs in
order to rapidly increase their capital stock. As Hayashi's
(1982) important paper demonstrates, these models of

competitive firms facing adjustment costs, are under constant
returns to scale assumptions, closely related to q investment
models of the type pioneered by Tobin (1969). In models the
rate of investment is a function of q, the ratio of the market
value of the capital stock to its replacement cost. In fact,
the observed q ratio can be used to infer the shadow price of
                               —7—
capital goods in the model of a firm facing costs of adjust-
ment.

        These linkages are important because they imply that an
asset price approach can avoid the difficulties with standard
econometric evaluations of investment incentives which were

considered above. When adjustment costs are introduced, it is
    i hi   tc 9v1 rr mn nrifii 1 1-hrr, rF 11rr1
                           -- ————-——J-—--:-r-—J
firms   with constant returns to scale. In any given period, the
firm will choose its desired level of output depending on its

previous capital stock. The growth rate of the capital stock
will depend on the return on capital investment. Thus the
asset price approach is supply based and so can be used to
evaluate the effects of investment incentives.

     The link between the observable q ratio and the shadow

price of capital in the firm's dynamic optimization problem
also solves the problem of modelling expectations. The q ratio
will summarize the expectations of future profitability and
costs of capital on which investment depends. Thus it obviates

the need to adopt complex procedure for estimating expectations
about these future variables. The relationship between invest-
ment and q, is structural in the sense that it should be

invariant with respect to changes in policy rules, depend only
on technology. Therefore the asset price approach can be used
to estimate the effects of policy announcements, and temporary
measures, which are not susceptible to analysis using
alternative econometric approaches.
                             —8—
Taxation and Capital Accumulation
     The asset price approach also bears on the literature in

public finance examining the long—run effects of capital income
taxation on both the accumulation and allocation of capital,
and the long—run efficiency and incidence implications of
capital income taxation. This literature originating in
Harberger's (1962) seminal paper on the corporate income tax
has largely ignored the process of investment. The models
employed are not well suited to analyzing the short and inter-
mediate—run response of the economy to changes in tax policy
since they assume that there are no costs of adjustment
impeding the accumulation or reallocation of capital. As a

consequence, sectoral marginal products of capital are always
equated. This means that there is essentially no scope for
variation in the asset price of existing capital goods.
     The evident volatility of observed asset prices
demonstrates the unrealism of the maintained assumption of
instantaneous adjustment. In order for large relative price
changes to occur, it is necessary that adjustment be slow so
that divergences of the marginal product of capital and its
cost endure. The asset price approach developed here provides
a basis for explicitly estimating the extent of these adjust-
ment costs and modeling more realistically the transition of

the economy following tax changes.
                             —9—
Tax Incidence
     The presence of large adjustment costs also has important
implication for the analysis of the incidence of capital income
taxation. The implausibility of standard models without

adjustment costs may be seen by noting that they imply that
corporate shareowners would not gain relative to homeowners

from an equalization of the tax rates on residential and cor-

porate capital. This is because the standard approach to tax
incidence ignores an important aspect of the actual economy's
response to such a tax change. In the short run, the price of

existing corporate capital would rise, and of existing homes
would fall, as investors adjusted their portfolios. The price
changes would capitalize the expected present value of the
effects of the tax reform on future returns, conferring wind-
fall gains on the owners of corporate capital, and losses on
homeowners. These price changes would act as signals to the

suppliers of new capital, calling forth more plant and equip-
ment and fewer homes, until their relative prices were again
equated to their relative long—run marginal costs of

production.
     Because an essential step in the asset price approach is
the estimation of the effects of tax reforms on the market
valuation of existing assets, it is ideally suited for
evaluating the short—run incidence of tax policy changes. Such
an analysis is important to evaluating the effects of tax
reforms on both vertical and horizontal equity. Given informa-
tion on the effects of tax reforms on asset prices, and the
                              — 10 —


distribution   of wealth holding, it is possible to evaluate the
vertical equity effects of tax reforms. As Feldstein (1976)

pointed out, horizontal equity is best achieved by avoiding
reforms that give rise to windfall gains and losses.

     The asset price approach also highlights the very
different incidence of reforms that reduce taxes on all capital
income and those which benefit only new investments. While

appropriately chosen reforms of these two types may have an

equal impact on investment, they are likely to have very
different effects on existing wealthholders. Measures that
reduce the tax burden on all capital are likely to substan-

tially raise the market value of existing assets, conferring a
windfall gain on the holders of existing assets. On the other
hand, measures that subsidize only new capital may well
actually reduce the wealth of owners of the existing capital

which must compete with newly subsidized capital. These dis-
tinctions are not recognized within standard analyses which
focus on the effects of tax policy changes on after tax rates
of return but not on the value of existing assets.

      II. The Dynamics of Investment and Market Valuation
     The asset price approach to public finance and its
implications for investment and market valuation can be
illustrated in the context of simple stylized model. A more
complex version of this framework is used in much of the
research described in the next section.
                               — 11 —


     The dynamics of investment and market valuation are

considered in a model in which there is no inflation, capital
does not depreciate, investment is financed through retained
earnings, and the only tax is a proportional levy on corporate
income. In this setting it is reasonable to assume that
investment depends on the ratio of the market value of existing

capital to its replacement cost. Unless an investment of one
dollar increases the market value of the firm by more than one
dollar, there is no reason to invest. Given the costs of

adjustments and lags in recognition and implementation, there
is no reason to expect that all investments that increase

market value by more than their cost will be made immediately.
As Tobin argued, these considerations lead to an investment
equation of the form:
          I =   I(V\K                              (1)




          1(1) = 0      11>0

where I represents gross investment and V/K is the q ratio of
market value to replacement cost. Since inflation is assumed
to be zero, the price of capital can be taken to be 1. The
assumption that the ratio of I/K depends on q ensures that the
growth rate of the capital stock is independent of the scale of
the economy. It is important to recognize that the investment
schedule given by equation (1) is a technological relation that
depends on the adjustment cost function.
                                        — 12 —


     It   is assumed that equity owners require a fixed real rate
of return to induce them to hold the existing stock of equity.
This return comes in the form of dividends ——              equal to after—
tax profits minus retained earnings for new investment —— and

capital gains. Hence the condition,
                  Div+V                                         (2)
                   V         V
which implies:
           v =pv —       (1—T) F'(K)K + I/V\K,                  (3)
                                                K)
where Y   is   the corporate tax rate, and the production function,
with labor input fixed, is given by F(K). Because it is
assumed that the economy's fixed labor force is fully employed,
the rate of profit, F'(K), declines as the capital stock
increases. It will be convenient to examine the dynamics in
terms of K and q. Equations 2 and 3 imply that the system's
equations of motion are:
           K =    1(q)   K                                      (4)



           q =    Ep— 1(q)]        q + 1(q) — (1—7)F'(K)        (5)

     The steady state properties of the model are easily found
by imposing the conditions K = 0 and q = 0.             These imply:
                                 q =   i-   (0) =   1           (6)




                                 p= (1—r)F'(rc)                 (7)

     Equation 6 indicates that in the steady state, the value

of q must equal 1 so that the market value of capital goods
                             — 13 —


equals their replacement cost. Equation 7 indicates that, in
equilibrium, firms equate their net marginal product of capital
to the cost of capital. Inspection of 6 and 7 makes clear that
a change in the corporate tax rate affects the steady—state
capital stock but has no effect on steady—state q because the
change does not influence the cost to the firm of acquiring new

capital goods.

     The dynamics of adjustment following a tax change are

illustrated in Figure 1, a phase diagram representing equations
4 and 5. In the figure, the arrows depict the equations of
motion of the system when it is not in equilibrium. The dark

line represents the saddle-point path along which the system
will converge to a steady state. A reduction in the corporate
tax rate does not immediately affect the capital stock. The
value of q jumps from E1 to B, as shown in Figure 2. As
capital is accumulated, the marginal product of capital falls

and the system converges to E2, where q is again equal to its
equilibrium value. This path assumes that investors have
perfect foresight and take account of the capital losses that
occur as capital is accumulated. An alternative assumption is

that the investors have myopic expectations and fail to foresee
the effects of capital accumulation. In this case, the system
jumps from E1 to A and then converges to E2 along the q = 0
schedule; along this transition path investors consistently
earn less than their required rate of return.
                                        - 14   -


        An alternative type of tax reform benefits only new

investment. Consider the introduction of a subsidy at rate s,
a new investment. This reduces the effective purchase price of
capital goods to firms. It also reduces corporate tax payments
for any firm that invests. The effects of such a subsidy are
displayed in Figure 3. Unambiguously, the steady state level
c)f
—      rit1 infn11-v         ine-            vr- the hort—run effect
of    the tax change on the market valuation of existing capital
is unclear as illustrated in Figure 3. There are two off-
setting effects. The investment subsidy reduces tax payments
tending to increase market valuation, but it also increases the
competition for old capital tending to reduce the value of
existing capital. The crucial distinction between tax reforms
which benefit all capital, and those which benefit only new
capital, discussed in the previous section can be readily
observed by comparing Figures 2 and 3.
       This discussion illustrates the asset price approach to
the analysis of tax policy in a particular simple context.
Note that all that is necessary to evaluate the effects of

implementing any given tax policy path, is knowledge of the
profit function F(k) and the investment schedule 1(q). Both
are estimable from observable data and do not depend on

commeasurable expectations. Given knowledge of these
                               — 15 —


functions,   equations (3) and (4), together with an initial
condition on the capital stock and the terminal condition (6)
can be used to calculate the evolution of V, K, and I.

Formally, solution of a two—point boundary value problem is
involved. While this can be difficult in models with multiple

assets, Lipton, Poterba, Sachs, and Summers (1982) have
developed an algorithm that can be used to solve problems of
moderate size.

     III. Summary of Research on Taxation and Asset Prices

     In Summers (1981), I developed a q theory of investment.
The linkage between the "average q" as measured on financial

markets, and marginal q, the shadow price of investment in a

dynamic model of firm investment decisions when adjustment is
costly is established. The model considered is stochastic and
includes a fairly detailed tax structure. The performance of

standard q investment equations, and equations using a q
variable which is adjusted for the effect of taxation, in
explaining fluctuations in investment at both the firm and the
aggregate level are then contrasted. The econometric results

support the theory. The tax adjusted q variable outperforms
the standard variable in explaining both aggregate and firm
investment. These results are confirmed using data on
individual firms in Salinger and Summers (1983).
                             — 16 —


     The next stage in this research also described in Surnnters

(1981) involves using these econometric results to calibrate a

partial equilibrium simulation model capable of examining the
effects of alternative tax reforms on investment and stock
market valuation. The model used is partial equilibrium in the
sense that it takes as exogenously fixed the real after tax
rate of return required by equity investors. Results of
simulations suggest that the interaction of inflation and the
tax system can significantly reduce investment and the level of
the stock market. The estimates suggest that indexation of the
tax system would raise the stock market by about 20 percent and
investment by about 15 percent. Various statutory tax reforms
are then considered. The results suggest that measures

directed at reducing capital gains taxes and accelerating
depreciation have the largest impact on investment per dollar
of revenue foregone.
     Summers (1982) takes a first step towards the construction
of a general equilibrium model in which the effect of taxation
on asset prices and investment can be studied. The model
incorporates owner—occupied housing and land as well as

corporate capital. In the model, consumption is determined by
interternporal optimization. The model is designed to capture
the wealth effects of fiscal policies which are ignored in
standard models used in public finance. Three substantive con—
                              — 17 —


clusions   emerge from the analysis. First, the supply of funds
to the nonfinancial corporate sector is likely to be highly
elastic so that tax policies will have relatively little impact
on required rate of return. Second, indexation of the tax

system would generate significant windfall gains for equity
owners and stimulate corporate investment. Large losses would
be suffered by bond owners. Home owners and landowners would
also lose as portfolio reallocations towards corporate capital
reduced the value of their investment. Third, the form of tax
incentives has a major impact. The elimination of the
corporate income tax, and the implementation of an accelerated

depreciation program like that recently enacted, have similar

effects on long—run corporate capital intensity. However, they
have very different effects on the stock market in the
short—run. The former measure raises the value of the market
by about 80 percent relative to the latter. The consumption
caused by the greater increase in wealth leads to higher

interest rates, so the crowding out effects of eliminating
corporate taxes are much greater than those of instituting

accelerated depreciation.
     The research described so far is directed at developing
estimates of the effects of tax reforms; assuming the validity

of the assumptions underlying the asset price approach. A
major virtue of working with asset price information is that it
can be used to provide tests of alternative models of the
effects of tax changes.
                              — 18 —


     Microeconomic tests of the asset price model are presented
in Summers (1981). The tests rely on differences between the
firms in the tax effects on inflation. The "tax effects"

hypothesis predicts that high leverage firms, using LIFO
inventory accounting, for which depreciation is a small part of
cash flow, should benefit from increases in inflation relative
to firms with opposing characteristics. The "inflation
illusion" view of Modigliani and Cohn, has the opposite
implications. These hypotheses are tested using a sample of
1,200 firms drawn from the compustat tapes. The econometric
results are generally favorable to the tax effects hypothesis.

The data suggest that FIFO firms lose substantially from
inflation, relative to others. Highly levered firms appear to
benefit from inflation. The evidence on depreciation is more
mixed, with the results suggesting that inflation illusion was
present in the 1960's but had almost vanished by the late
1970's. The cross—sectional results are then used to try to
explain the disastrous performance of the market during the
1970's.   I conclude that tax effects can explain about a 15

percent decline, with another 25 percent potentially
attributable to increasing awareness of the need to adjust

reported historic cost depreciation.
    The adjustment of nominal interest rates to changes in
expected inflation plays a critical role in any analysis of
                              — 19 —


inflation—tax   interactions. This issue is taken up in Summers
(1982b). A simple general equilibrium model in which the
effects of taxation on the Fisher relationship can be studied

is developed. Theoretical analysis with almost any plausible
parameter values suggests that in the presence of taxes, steady
inflation should raise nominal interest rates by more than

point for point. Theoretical analysis does not identify the
short—run relationship between interest rates and inflation,
which depends on the sources of stochastic shocks. Standard
econometric procedures are therefore not well suited to testing
the predictions of the model. Tests of the Fisher relationship
are presented which use band—spectrum regression to filter out
high frequency movements in the variables. The results are
disappointing in suggesting the failure of nominal interest
rates to adjust for inflation as fully as theory would

predict. This conclusion is robust, holding over 120 years of
American data. The possibility that the failure of interest
rates to rise with inflation, is the result of correlation
between inflation and measures of either the marginal product
of capital or the measures of risk is considered and rejected.
The possibility that financial markets exhibit inflation
illusion is entertained tentatively.

     Recognition of the importance of changes in asset prices
has crucial implications for the analysis of the effects of
                              — 20 —


taxation   of risky assets. Bulow and Summers (1982) demonstrate
that previous analyses which have typically assumed that depre-
ciation rates are constant and that the future price of capital

goods is known with certainty are very misleading as guides to
the effects of corporate taxes. In an environment where asset
prices are variable, the concept of economic depreciation
requires careful definition. We show that an appropriate
ex ante depreciation schedule depends on future asset price
risk. Some empirical calculations suggest that the appropriate
adjustments for risk are large and greatly affect the estimated
burden of the corporate income tax.
     Data on asset prices can also be used to test alternative

hypotheses regarding corporate financial policy. Poterba and
Summers (1983) exploit the substantial variations in British
dividend taxation that have occurred over the last 30 years, to
contract the "tax capitalization" and "traditional" models of
the effects of dividend taxation. The tests rely on the
specification of investment equations based on alternative

specifications of "tax adjusted q" variable.
    Asset prices can also be used to study questions in other
areas of public finance. Rosen (1982) uses information on
housing prices to assess the effects of California's

Proposition 13 on individual localities. Potentially this
approach could be extended to consider other types of

governmental spending programs. These might include
agricultural measures whose incidence is reflected in changes
                               — 21 —


in   the price of farm land, and direct or indirect subsidies to

industries which affect stock prices. The research described

here illustrates two propositions. First, the effect of tax
policies on asset prices can be estimated and used to measure

their incidence. Second, asset price data can be used to
answer otherwise very difficult empirical questions in public
finance. Future research on the issues mentioned here and
others will contribute to our understanding of the effects of
the functioning of taxation on our economy.
                           References


Abel, Andrews B., 1980, Empirical investment equations: An -
  integrative framework, in: Karl Brunner and Alan H. Metzler,
  eds., On the State of Macro—Economics, Carnegie—Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy, 12 (Amsterdam: North
  Holland) 39—91.
Bulow, Jeremy I. and L. Summers, 1982, Risk and taxes
  reconsidered, mimeo.
Eisner, Robert and Robert Chirinko, 1980, Tax policy and
  business investment, unpublished.
Eisner, Robert and R.H. Strotz, 1963, Determinants of business
  investment, in Commission on Money and Credit, Impacts of
  Monetary Policy (Prentice—Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ) 59—337.
Feldstein, Martin, 1976, Toward a theory of tax reform,
  Journal of Public Economics. (need vol., mo., & pp.)
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson, 1967, Tax policy and
  investment behavior, American Economic Review 57, June,
  391—414.

Harberger, Arnold, 1962, The incidence of the corporation
  income tax, Journal of Political Economy (need vol., mo, pp.)

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin's marginal q and average q: A
  neoclassical interpretation, Econometrica 50, Jan., 213—224.
Lipton, David and James Poterba, Jeffrey Sachs, Lawrence
  Summers, 1982, Multiple shooting in rational expectations
  models, Econometrica, Sept.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1967a, Adjustment costs and the theory
  of supply, Journal of Political Economy 75, Aug., 321-334.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1976, Econometric policy evaluation: A
  critique, ed., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,
  Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1
  (Amsterdam: North Holland) 19—46.
Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers, 1983, Dividend taxes,
  corporate investment and q, forthcoming, Journal of Public
  Economics.

Rosen, Kenneth T., 1982, The impact of proposition 13 on house
  prices in Northern California, Journal of Political Economy,
  Feb., 191.
                              —2—
Salinger, Michael and Lawrence Summers, 1983, Corporate tax
  reform and securities prices; A simulation approach, forth—
  coming in National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
  Volume on Tax Simulation Analysis.

Summers, Lawrence, 1981, Taxation and corporate investment: A q
  theory approach, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  January, 67—127.

Summers, Lawrence, 1983, Taxation and asset prices in a general
  equilibrium model, unpublished.


Surrsners, Lawrence, 1983, The non—adjustment of nominal interest
  rates: A study of the Fisher effect, In: J. Tobin, ed.,
  Macroeconomics: Prices and quantities, Brookings Institution,
  201—247.

Summers, Lawrence, 1982, Inflation and the valuation of
corporate equities, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper.

Tobin, James, 1969, A general equilibrium approach to monetary
  theory, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 1, Feb., 15—29.
Treadway, Arthur B., 1969, On rational entrepreneurial behavior
  and the demand for investment, Review of Economic Studies
  36, 227—239.
