NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WILL MONETARY POLICY BECOME MORE OF A SCIENCE?
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 13566
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13566

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

Prepared for the Deutsche Bundesbank conference "Monetary Policy Over Fifty Years," held in Frankfurt
am Main, Germany, September 21, 2007. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily
those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System. I thank Michael Kiley, Andrew Levin,
and Robert Tetlow for their helpful comments and assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 13566
October 2007
JEL No. E2,E44,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the progress that the science of monetary policy has made over recent decades.
This progress has significantly expanded the degree to which the practice of monetary policy reflects
the application of a core set of "scientific principles". However, there remains, and will likely always
remain, elements of art in the conduct of monetary policy: in other words, substantial judgment will
always be needed to achieve desirable outcomes on both the inflation and employment fronts. However,
as case studies discussed here suggest, even through art will always be a key element in the conduct
of monetary policy, the more it is informed by good science, the more successful monetary policy
will be.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Ave., N.W.
Room B-2052
Stop 47
Washington, DC 20551
and NBER
frederic.mishkin@frb.gov

Over the past three decades, we have seen a remarkable change in the performance of
monetary policy. By the end of the 1970s, inflation had risen to very high levels, with many
countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
experiencing double-digit inflation rates (figure 1). Most OECD countries today have
inflation rates around the 2 percent level, which is consistent with what most economists see as
price stability, and the volatility of inflation has also fallen dramatically (figure 2). One
concern might be that the low and stable levels of inflation might have been achieved at the
expense of higher volatility in output, but that is not what has occurred. Output volatility has
also declined in most OECD countries (figure 3). The improved performance of monetary
policy has been associated with advances in the science of monetary policy, that is, a set of
principles that have been developed from rigorous theory and empirical work that have come
to guide the thinking of monetary policy practitioners.
In this paper, I will review the progress that the science of monetary policy has made
over recent decades. In my view, this progress has significantly expanded the degree to which
the practice of monetary policy reflects the application of a core set of “scientific” principles.
Does this progress mean that, as Keynes put it, monetary policy will become as boring as
dentistry--i.e., that policy will be reduced to the routine application of core principles, much
like filling cavities?1 I will argue that there remains, and will likely always remain, elements of
art in the conduct of monetary policy; in other words, substantial judgment will always be
needed to achieve desirable outcomes on both the inflation and employment fronts.

1

Given that my wife was a dentist, I have to say that Keynes may have been unfair to dentists. I am sure that
many of them find their work very exciting.
-1-

I.
Advances in the Science of Monetary Policy in Recent Decades

Over the last five decades, monetary economists have developed a set of basic scientific
principles, derived from theory and empirical evidence that now guide thinking at almost all
central banks and explain much of the success in the conduct of monetary policy. I will outline
my views on the key principles and how they were developed over the last fifty or so years.
The principles are: 1) inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon; 2) price
stability has important benefits; 3) there is no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and
inflation; 4) expectations play a crucial role in the determination of inflation and in the
transmission of monetary policy to the macroeconomy; 5) real interest rates need to rise with
higher inflation, i.e., the Taylor Principle; 6) monetary policy is subject to the timeinconsistency problem; 7) central bank independence helps improve the efficiency of monetary
policy; 8) commitment to a strong nominal anchor is central to producing good monetary
policy outcomes; and 9) financial frictions play an important role in business cycles. I will
examine each principle in turn.

1. Inflation is Always and Everywhere a Monetary Phenomenon
By the 1950s and 1960s, the majority of macroeconomists had converged on a
consensus view of macroeconomic fluctuations that downplayed the role of monetary factors.
Much of this consensus reflected the aftermath of the Great Depression and Keynes’ seminal
-2-

The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Prices, which emphasized shortfalls in
aggregate demand as the source of the Great Depression and the role of fiscal factors as
possible remedies. In contrast, research by Milton Friedman and others in what became
known as the “monetarist” tradition (Friedman and Meiselman, 1963; Friedman and Schwartz,
1963a,b) attributed much of the economic malaise of the Depression to poor monetary policy
decisions and more generally argued that the growth in the money supply was a key
determinant of aggregate economic activity and, particularly, inflation. Over time, this
research, as well as Friedman’s predictions that expansionary monetary policy in the 1960s
would lead to high inflation and high interest rates (Friedman, 1968), had a major impact on
the economics profession, with almost all economists eventually coming to agree with the
Friedman’s famous adage, “Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon”
(Friedman 1963, p. 17), as long as inflation is referring to a sustained increase in the price
level (e.g., Mishkin, 2007a).
General agreement with Friedman’s adage did not mean that all economists subscribed
to the view that the money growth was the most informative piece of information about
inflation, but rather that the ultimate source of inflation was overly expansionary monetary
policy. In particular, an important imprint of this line of thought was that central bankers
came to recognize that keeping inflation under control was their responsibility.2

2

Furthermore, monetarist research led Keynesian economists--for example Franco Modigliani--to search for
transmission mechanisms linking monetary policy to output and inflation (Mishkin, 2007a, chapter 23).
-3-

2. The Benefits of Price Stability
With the rise of inflation in the 1960s and 1970s, economists, and also the public and
politicians, began to discuss the high costs of inflation (for example, see the surveys in
Fischer, 1993; and Anderson and Gruen, 1995). High inflation undermines the role of money
as a medium of exchange by acting as a tax on cash holdings. On top of this, a high-inflation
environment leads to overinvestment in the financial sector, which expands to help individuals
and businesses escape some of the costs of inflation (English, 1996). Inflation leads to
uncertainty about relative prices and the future price level, making it harder for firms and
individuals to make appropriate decisions, thereby decreasing economic efficiency (Lucas,
1972; Briault, 1995). The interaction of the tax system and inflation also increases distortions
that adversely affect economic activity (Feldstein, 1997). Unanticipated inflation causes
redistributions of wealth, and, to the extent that high inflation tends to be associated with
volatile inflation, these distortions may boost the costs of borrowing. Finally, some
households undoubtedly do not fully understand the implications of a general trend in
prices--that is, they may suffer from nominal illusion--making financial planning more
difficult.3 The total effect of these distortions became more fully appreciated over the course
of the 1970s, and the recognition

3

Of course, economic theory implies that inflation can be either too high or too low. The discussion has
emphasized costs associated with high inflation. But there are also potentially important costs associated with
rates of inflation that are very low. For example, Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996) suggest that downward
nominal wage rigidity could result in severe difficulties for economic performance at some times when inflation is
too low. Other research has shown that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates can lower economic
efficiency if inflation is too low (e.g., Reifschneider and Williams, 2000). Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)
discuss strategies to address the zero-lower-bound problem.
-4-

of the high costs of inflation led to the view that low and stable inflation can increase the level
of resources productively employed in the economy.4, 5

3. No Long-Run Tradeoff Between Unemployment and Inflation
A paper published in 1960 by Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow argued that work by
A.W. Phillips (1958), which became known as the Phillips curve, suggested that there was a
long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation and that this tradeoff should be
exploited. Under this view, the policymaker would have to choose between two competing
goals--inflation and unemployment--and decide how high an inflation rate he or she would be
willing to accept to attain a lower unemployment rate. Indeed, Samuelson and Solow even
mentioned that a nonperfectionist goal of a 3 percent unemployment rate could be achieved at
what they considered to be a not-too-high inflation rate of 4 percent to 5 percent per year.
This thinking was influential, and probably contributed to monetary and fiscal policy activism
aimed at bringing the economy to levels of employment that, with hindsight, were not
sustainable. Indeed, the economic record from the late 1960s through the 1970s was not a
happy one: Inflation accelerated, with the inflation rate in the United States and other

4

A further possibility is that low inflation may even help increase the rate of economic growth. While time-series
studies of individual countries and cross-national comparisons of growth rates were not in total agreement
(Anderson and Gruen, 1995), the consensus grew that inflation is detrimental to economic growth, particularly
when inflation rates are high.
5
The deleterious effects of inflation on economic efficiency implies that the level of sustainable employment is
probably lower at higher rates of inflation. Thus, the goals of price stability and high employment are likely to be
complementary, rather than competing, and so there is no policy tradeoff between the goals of price stability and
maximum sustainable employment, the so-called dual mandate that the Federal Reserve has been given by
Congress (Mishkin, 2007b).
-5-

industrialized countries eventually climbing above 10 percent in the 1970s, leading to what has
been dubbed “The Great Inflation.”
The tradeoff suggested by Samuelson and Solow was hotly contested by Milton
Friedman (1968) and Edmund Phelps (1968), who independently argued that there was no
long-run tradeoff between unemployment and the inflation rate: Rather, the economy would
gravitate to some natural rate of unemployment in the long run no matter what the rate of
inflation was. In other words, the long-run Phillips curve would be vertical, and attempts to
lower unemployment below the natural rate would result only in higher inflation. The
Friedman-Phelps natural rate hypothesis was immediately influential and fairly quickly began
to be incorporated in formal econometric models.
Given the probable role that the attempt to exploit a long-run Phillips curve tradeoff had
in the ‘Great Inflation,” central bankers have been well served by adopting the natural rate, or
no-long-run-tradeoff, view. Of course, the earlier discussion of the benefits of price stability
suggests a long-run tradeoff--but not of the Phillips curve type. Rather, low inflation likely
contributes to improved efficiency and hence higher employment in the long run.

4. The Crucial Role of Expectations
A key aspect of the Friedman-Phelps natural rate hypothesis was that sustained inflation
may initially confuse firms and households, but in the long run sustained inflation would not
boost employment because expectations of inflation would adjust to any sustained rate of
increase in prices. Starting in the early 1970s, the rational expectations revolution, launched in
a series of papers by Robert Lucas (1972, 1973, and 1976), took this reasoning a step further
-6-

and demonstrated that the public and the markets’ expectations of policy actions have important
effects on almost every sector of the economy.6 The theory of rational expectations emphasized
that economic agents should be driven by optimizing behavior, and therefore their expectations
of future variables should be optimal forecasts (the best guess of the future) using all available
information. Because the optimizing behavior posited by rational expectations indicates that
expectations should respond immediately to new information, rational expectations suggests
that the long run might be quite short, so that attempting to lower unemployment below the
natural rate could lead to higher inflation very quickly.
A fundamental insight of the rational expectations revolution is that expectations about
future monetary policy have an important impact on the evolution of economic activity. As a
result, the systematic component of policymakers’ actions--i.e., the component that can be
anticipated--plays a crucial role in the conduct of monetary policy. Indeed, the management of
expectations about future policy has become a central element of monetary theory, as
emphasized in the recent synthesis of Michael Woodford (2003).7 And this insight has
far-reaching implications, for example, with regard to the types of systematic behavior by
policymakers that are likely to be conducive to macroeconomic stability and growth.8
6

The 1976 Lucas paper was already very influential in 1973, when it was first presented at the CarnegieRochester Conference. Note that although Muth (1961) introduced the idea of rational expectations more than ten
years earlier, his work went largely unnoticed until resurrected by Lucas.
7
Indeed, one implication of rational expectations in a world of flexible wages and prices was the policy
ineffectiveness proposition, which indicated that if monetary policy was anticipated, it would have no real effect
on output; only unanticipated monetary policy could have a significant impact. Although evidence for the policy
ineffectiveness proposition turned out to be weak (Barro, 1977; Mishkin, 1982a,b, 1983), the rational expectation
revolution’s point that monetary policy’s impact on the economy is substantially influenced by whether it is
anticipated or not has become widely accepted.
8
Of course, the recognition that management of expectations is a central element in monetary policymaking raises
to the forefront the credibility of monetary policy authorities to do what they say they will do. It does not
diminish, however, the importance of actions by the monetary authorities because “actions speak louder than
words”: Monetary authorities will be believed only if they take the actions consistent with how they want
expectations to be managed.
-7-

5. The Taylor Principle
The recognition that economic outcomes depend on expectations of monetary policy
suggests that policy evaluation requires the comparison of economic performance under
different monetary policy rules.9 One type of rule that has received enormous attention in the
literature is the Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993a), which describes monetary policy as setting an
overnight bank rate (federal funds rate in the United States) in response to the deviation of
inflation from its desired level or target (the inflation gap) and the deviation of output from its
natural rate level (the output gap).10 Taylor (1993a) emphasized that a rule of this type had
desirable properties and in particular would stabilize inflation only if the coefficient on the
inflation gap exceeded unity. This conclusion came to be known as the “Taylor principle”
(Woodford, 2001) and can be described most simply by saying that stabilizing monetary policy
must raise the nominal interest rate by more than the rise in inflation. In other words, inflation
will remain under control only if real interest rates rise in response to a rise in inflation.
Although, the Taylor principle now seems pretty obvious, estimates of Taylor rules, such as
those by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998), indicate that during the late 1960s and 1970s many
central banks, including the Federal Reserve, violated the Taylor principle, resulting in the

9

Although Lucas (1976) was a critique of the then-current practice of using econometric models to evaluate
specific policy actions, it leads to the conclusion that monetary policy analysis should involve the comparison of
economic performance arising from different rules.
10
Variants of the Taylor rule also allow for interest rate smoothing, as in Taylor (1999).
-8-

“Great Inflation” that so many countries experienced during this period.11 Indeed, as inflation
rose in the United States, real interest rates fell.12

6. The Time-Inconsistency Problem
Another important development in the science of monetary policy that emanated from the
rational expectations revolutions was the discovery of the importance of the time-inconsistency
problem in papers by Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978), and Barro and Gordon (1983).
The time-inconsistency problem can arise if monetary policy conducted on a discretionary, dayby-day basis leads to worse long-run outcomes than could be achieved by committing to a policy
rule. In particular, policymakers may find it tempting to exploit a short-run Phillips curve
tradeoff between inflation and employment; but private agents, cognizant of this temptation, will
adjust expectations to anticipate the expansionary policy, so that it will result only in higher
inflation with no short-run increase in employment In other words, without a commitment
mechanism, monetary policy makers may find themselves unable to consistently follow an
optimal plan over time; the optimal plan can be time-inconsistent and so will soon be
abandoned. The notion of time-inconsistency has led to a number of important insights
regarding central bank behavior--such as the importance of reputation (formalized in the
concept of reputational equilibria) and institutional design.

11

In contrast, Orphanides (2003) argues that the Federal Reserve did abide by the Taylor principle but pursued
overly expansionary policies during this period because of large and persistent misperceptions of the level of
potential output and the natural unemployment rate.
12
E.g., the estimates in Mishkin (1981, 1992).
-9-

7. Central Bank Independence
Indeed, the potential problem of time-inconsistency has led to a great deal of research
that examines the importance of institutional features that can give central bankers the
commitment mechanisms they need to pursue low inflation. Perhaps the most significant has
been research showing that central bank independence, at least along some dimensions, is
likely very important to maintaining low inflation. Allowing central banks to be instrument
independent, i.e., to control the setting of monetary policy instruments, can help insulate them
from short-run pressures to exploit the Phillips-curve tradeoff between employment and
inflation and thus avoid the time-inconsistency problem.13
Evidence supports the conjecture that macroeconomic performance is improved when
central banks are more independent. When central banks in industrialized countries are ranked
from least legally independent to most legally independent, the inflation performance is found
to be the best for countries with the most independent central banks (Alesina and Summers,
1993; Cukierman, 1993; Fischer, 1994; and the surveys in Forder, 2000, and Cukierman,
2006).
A particularly interesting example occurred with the granting of instrument
independence to the Bank of England in May of 1997 (Mishkin and Posen, 1997; Bernanke and
others, 1999); before that date, the Chancellor of the Exchequer (the finance minister) set the

13

For an example of how the time-inconsistency problem can be modeled as resulting from political pressure, see
Mishkin and Westelius (forthcoming). Instrument independence also insulates the central bank from the myopia
that can be a feature of the political process. Instrument independence thus makes it more likely that the central
bank will be forward looking and adequately allow for the long lags from monetary policy actions to inflation in
setting their policy instruments.
- 10 -

monetary policy instrument, not the Bank of England. As figure 4 illustrates, during 1995-96
the U.K. retail inflation rate (RPIX) was fairly close to 3 percent, but the spread between
nominal and indexed bond yields--referred to as 10-year breakeven inflation--was substantially
higher, in the range of 4 percent to 5 percent, reflecting investors’ inflation expectations as
well as compensation for perceived inflation risk at a 10-year horizon. Notably, breakeven
inflation declined markedly on the day that the government announced the Bank of England’s
independence and has remained substantially lower ever since. This case study provides a
striking example of the benefits of instrument independence.
Although there is a strong case for instrument independence, the same is not true for
goal independence, the ability of the central bank to set its own goals for monetary policy.14
In a democracy, the public exercises control over government actions, and policymakers are
accountable, which requires that the goals of monetary policy be set by the elected
government. Although basic democratic principles argue for the government setting the goals
of monetary policy, the question of whether it should set goals for the short-run or
intermediate-run is more controversial. For example, an arrangement in which the government
set a short-run inflation or exchange rate target that was changed every month or every quarter
could easily lead to a serious time-inconsistency problem in which short-run objectives would
dominate. In practice, however, this problem does not appear to be severe because, for
example, in many countries in which the government sets the annual inflation target, the target
is rarely changed once price stability is achieved. Even though, in theory, governments could

14

The distinction between goal and instrument independence was first made by Debelle and Fischer (1994) and
Fischer (1994).
- 11 -

manipulate monetary policy goals to pursue short-run objectives, they usually do not if the
goal-setting process is highly transparent.
However, the length of the lags from monetary policy to inflation is a technical issue that
the central bank is well placed to determine. Thus, for example, deciding how long it should take
for inflation to return to a long-run goal necessarily requires judgment and expertise regarding the
nature of the inflation process and its interaction with real activity. That need for judgment and
expertise argues for having the central bank set medium-term goals because the speed with which
it can achieve them depends on the lags of monetary policy. Whether the central bank or the
government should set medium-term inflation targets is therefore an open question.

8. Commitment to a Nominal Anchor
The inability of monetary policy to boost employment in the long run, the importance of
expectations, the benefits of price stability, and the time-inconsistency problem are the reasons
that commitment to a nominal anchor--i.e., stabilization of a nominal variable such as the
inflation rate, the money supply, or an exchange rate--is crucial to successful monetary policy
outcomes.
An institutional commitment to price stability via establishing a nominal anchor provides
a counterbalance to the time-inconsistency problem because it makes it clear that the central
bank must focus on the long-run and thus resist the temptation to pursue short-run expansionary
policies that are inconsistent with the nominal anchor. Commitment to a nominal anchor can
also encourage the government to be more fiscally responsible, which also supports price
stability. For example, persistent fiscal imbalances have, in the absence of a strong nominal
anchor, led some governments, particularly in less-developed economies, to resort to the so- 12 -

called inflation tax--the issuing/printing of money to pay for goods and services that leads to
more inflation and is thus inconsistent with price stability.
Commitment to a nominal anchor also leads to policy actions that promote price stability,
which helps promote economic efficiency and growth. The commitment to a nominal anchor
helps stabilize inflation expectations, which reduce the likelihood of “inflation scares,” in which
expected inflation and interest rates shoot up (Goodfriend, 1993). Inflation scares lead to bad
economic outcomes because the rise in inflation expectations leads not only to higher actual
inflation but also to monetary policy tightening to get inflation back under control that often
results in large declines in economic activity. Commitment to a nominal anchor is therefore a
crucial element in the successful management of expectations; and it is a key feature of recent
theory on optimal monetary policy, referred to as the new-neoclassical (or new-Keynesian)
synthesis (Goodfriend and King, 1997; Clarida, Gali, and Gertler, 1999; Woodford, 2003). A
successful commitment to a nominal anchor has been found to produce not only more-stable
inflation but lower volatility of output fluctuations ( Fatás, Mihov, and Rose, 2007; Mishkin and
Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002, 2007).

9. Financial Frictions and the Business Cycle
Research that outlined how asymmetric information could impede the efficient
functioning of the financial system (Akerlof, 1970; Myers and Majluf, 1984; and Greenwald,
Stiglitz, and Weiss, 1984) suggests an important link between business cycle fluctuations and
financial frictions. When shocks to the financial system increase information asymmetry so
that financial frictions increase dramatically, financial instability results, and the financial
- 13 -

system is no longer able to channel funds to those with productive investment opportunities,
with the result that the economy can experience a severe economic downturn (Mishkin, 1997).
The rediscovery of Irving Fisher’s (1933) paper on the Great Depression led to the recognition
that financial instability played a central role in the collapse of economic activity during that
period (Mishkin, 1978; Bernanke, 1983; and the survey in Calomiris, 1993), and it has
spawned a large literature on the role of financial frictions in business cycle fluctuations (e.g.,
Bernanke and Gertler, 1999, 2001; Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999; Kashyap and Stein,
1994). Indeed, it is now well understood that the most severe business cycle downturns are
always associated with financial instability, not only in advanced countries but also in
emerging-market countries (Mishkin, 1991, 1996). Minimizing output fluctuations thus
requires that monetary policy factors in the impact of financial frictions on economic activity.

II.
Advances in the Applied Science of Monetary Policy
Scientific principles are all well and good, but they have to be applied in a practical
way to produce good policies. The scientific principles from physics or biology provide
important guidance for real-world projects, but it is with the applied fields of engineering and
medicine that we build bridges and cure patients. Within economics, it is also important to
delineate the use of scientific principles in policymaking, as this type of categorization helps us
understand where progress has been made and where further progress is most needed. I will
categorize the applied science of monetary policy as those aspects that involve systematic, or
- 14 -

algorithmic, methods such as the development of econometric models. Other, more
judgmental aspects of policymaking are what I will call the “art” of policymaking.
So, how have the basic scientific principles outlined above been used algorithmically? I
focus particularly on the U.S. examples because they are the ones I am most familiar with
given my experience as an American central banker, but similar developments have occurred
elsewhere.
Early Keynesian econometric models of the macroeconomy did not give monetary
policy a prominent role (for example, Tinbergen, 1939; Adelman and Adelman, 1959; Klein,
1968). In contrast, the policy-oriented models developed in the 1960s--such as the MIT-PennSSRC (MPS) model, developed by Franco Modigliani and collaborators and used as the
workhorse model for policy analysis at the Federal Reserve until 1996--incorporated a very
important role for monetary policy, broadly similar to the main channels of the monetary
policy transmission mechanism that are embedded in the current generation of models.15
In this sense, the notion that inflation is a monetary phenomenon has been embedded in formal
models for several decades.
Very early versions of the MPS model did display a long-run tradeoff between
unemployment and inflation, as the principle that there should be no long-run tradeoff took
some time to be accepted (e.g., Gramlich, 2004). By the early 1970s, the principle of no longrun tradeoff was fully ensconced in the MPS model by the adoption of an accelerationist
Phillips curve (Pierce and Enzler, 1974; Brayton and others, 1997). The recognition in their

15

Brayton and Mauskopf (1985) describe the MPS model. As pointed out by Gramlich (2004), the researchers at
the Federal Reserve were instrumental in the building of this model and it might more accurately be described as
the Fed-MIT model or the Fed-MIT-Penn model.
- 15 -

models that lower unemployment could not be bought by accepting higher inflation was a
factor driving central banks to adopt anti-inflationary policies by the 1980s.
Although accelerationist Phillips curves became standard in macroeconometric models
used at central banks like the MPS model through the 1970s, expectational elements were still
largely missing. The next generation of models emphasized the importance of expectations.
For example, the staff at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System developed
their next-generation model, FRB/US (Brayton and Tinsley, 1995; Reifschneider, Stockton,
and Wilcox, 1997; Reifschneider, Tetlow, and Williams, 1999), to incorporate the importance
of expectations in the determination of real activity and inflation. The FRB/US model, and
similar models developed at other central banks such as the Bank of Canada’s QPM model
(Coletti and others, 1996) and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s FPS model (Hunt, Rose,
and Scott, 2000) were an outgrowth of the rational expectations revolution, and they allowed
expectations to be derived under many different assumptions, including rational expectations.
Policy simulations to help guide monetary policy decisions, such as those that are shown to the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), explicitly emphasize assumptions about future
expectations and how they are formed. Policymakers have thus come to recognize that their
decisions about policy involve not only the current policy setting but also how they may be
thinking about future policy settings.
The focus on optimizing economic agents coming out of the rational expectations
revolution has led to modeling efforts at central banks that not only make use of rational
expectations, but that are also grounded on sounder microfoundations. Specifically, these
models build on two recent literatures, real business cycle theory (e.g., Prescott, 1986) and
- 16 -

new-Keynesian theory (e.g., Mankiw and Romer, 1991). In contrast to older Keynesian macro
modeling, new-Keynesian theory provides microfoundations for Keynesian concepts such as
nominal rigidities, the non-neutrality of money, and the inefficiency of business cycle
fluctuations by deriving them from optimizing behavior. The real business cycle approach
makes use of stochastic general equilibrium growth models with representative, optimizing
agents. The resulting new class of models, in which new-Keynesian features such as nominal
rigidities and monopolistic competition are added to the frictionless real business models, have
become known as dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models. Simple versions of
such models have already provided a framework in which to think about key aspects of
monetary policy design--insights perhaps best illustrated in the Woodford (2003) discussion of
policy issues in the now-textbook, three-equation new-Keynesian model. Larger, more
empirically-motivated DSGE models are now in their early stages of development and are
beginning to be used for policy analysis at central banks (e.g., at the European Central Bank,
Smets and Wouters, 2003, and Coenen, McAdam, and Straub, 2007; and at the Federal
Reserve Board, Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust, 2006, and Edge, Kiley, and Laforte, 2007).
There are two very important implications from policy analysis with DSGE models, as
emphasized by Gali and Gertler (forthcoming): First, “monetary transmission depends
critically on private sector expectations of the future path of the central bank’s policy
instrument.” Second, “the natural (flexible price equilibrium) values of both output and the
real interest rate provide important reference points for monetary policy--and may fluctuate
considerably.” I can attest that both of these propositions indeed are now featured in the
Bluebook (the staff’s main document for analyzing policy options for the FOMC) .
- 17 -

The basic logic of the Taylor principle--that is, raising nominal interest rates more than
one-for-one in response to an increase in inflation--was developed in conjunction with the
analysis of Taylor’s multicountry model and other macroeconometric models (Taylor, 1993a,b;
Bryant, Hooper, and Mann, 1993). However, although the Taylor principle is
a necessary condition for good monetary policy outcomes, it is not sufficient. Central bankers
require knowledge about how much difference the Taylor principle makes to monetary policy
outcomes. They also require an understanding of how much greater than one the response of
nominal interest rates should be to increases in inflation and also need to know how the policy
rate should respond to other variables. Studying the performance of different rules in
macroeconometric models has become a major enterprise at central banks, and the conclusion
is that the Taylor principle is indeed very important. Analysis of policy rules in
macroeconometric models that are not fully based on optimizing agents has been very extensive
(e.g., Bryant, Hooper, and Mann, 1993; Levin, Wieland, and Williams, 1999), and we are
now seeing similar analysis using DSGE models (e.g., Levin and others, 2006; Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe, 2006).
The second principle, and the sixth through the eighth principles -- which emphasize the
benefits of price stability and the importance of the time-inconsistency problem, central bank
independence and a commitment to a nominal anchor -- have important applications to the
design of monetary policy institutions.
The argument that independent central banks perform better and are better able to resist
the pressures for overly expansionary monetary policy arising from the time-inconsistency
problem has led to a remarkable trend toward increasing central bank independence. Before
- 18 -

the 1990s, only a few central banks were highly independent, most notably the Bundesbank,
the Swiss National Bank, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the Federal Reserve. Now almost
all central banks in advanced countries and many in emerging-market countries have central
banks with a level of independence on par with or exceeding that of the Federal Reserve. In
the 1990s, greater independence was granted to central banks in such diverse countries as
Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and those in the euro zone.
The increasing recognition of the time-inconsistency problem and the role of a nominal
anchor in producing better economic outcomes has been an important impetus behind
increasing central banks’ commitments to nominal anchors. One resulting dramatic
development in recent years has been a new monetary policy strategy, inflation targeting--the
public announcement of medium-term numerical targets for inflation with commitment and
accountability to achieve this target, along with increased transparency of the monetary policy
strategy through communication with the public (Bernanke and Mishkin, 1997). There has
been a remarkable trend toward inflation targeting, which was adopted first by New Zealand in
March 1990, and has since been adopted by an additional 23 countries (Rose, 2006). The
evidence, is in general quite favorable to inflation targeting, although countries that have
adopted inflation targeting have not improved their monetary policy performance beyond that
of nontargeters in industrial countries that have had successful monetary policy (e.g., Bernanke
and others, 1999; Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002, 2007; Rose, 2006). And, in contrast to
other monetary policy regimes, no country with its own currency that has adopted inflation
targeting has been forced to abandon it.16

16

Spain and Finland gave up inflation targeting when they entered the euro zone.
- 19 -

The scientific principle that financial frictions matter to economic fluctuations has led to
increased attention at central banks to concerns about financial stability. Many central banks
now publish so-called Financial Stability reports, which examine vulnerabilities to the financial
system that could have negative consequences for economic activity in the future. Other
central banks are involved in prudential regulation and supervision of the financial system to
reduce excessive risk-taking that could lead to financial instability. Central banks also have
designed their lending facilities to improve their ability to function as a lender of last resort, so
they can provide liquidity quickly to the financial system in case of financial disruptions.

III.
The Art of Monetary Policy
I have argued that there have been major advances in the science of monetary policy in
recent years, both in terms of basic scientific principles and applications of these principles to
the real world of monetary policymaking. Monetary policy has indeed become more of a
science. There are, however, serious limitations to the science of monetary policy. Thus, as
former vice-chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Blinder (1998, p.17), has
emphasized, “central banking in practice is as much art as science.” By “art,” I mean the use
of judgment--judgment that is informed by economic theory and data but in a manner that is
less explicitly tied to formal models or algorithms.
There are several reasons why judgment will always be an important element in the
conduct of monetary policy. First, models are able to make use of only a small fraction of the
- 20 -

potentially valuable information that tells us about the complexity of the economy. For
example, there are very high frequency data--monthly, weekly, and daily--that are not
incorporated into macroeconometric models, which are usually estimated on quarterly data.
These high-frequency data can often be very informative about the near-term dynamics of the
economy and are used judgmentally by central-bank forecasters (e.g., Reifschneider, Stockton,
and Wilcox, 1997).
Second, information that can be very useful in forecasting the economy or deciding
whether a particular model makes sense is often anecdotal and is thus not easily quantifiable.
The Federal Reserve makes extensive use of anecdotal information in producing its forecasts.
The staff at the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks monitor a huge amount of anecdotal
information, and such information is discussed extensively in the publicly released Beige Book,
which reports information from contacts in the Federal Reserve Districts, and by the
participants in FOMC meetings.
Third, although monetary policy makers make extensive use of models in both
forecasting and evaluating different policies, they are never sure that one model is the correct
one. Active, and sometimes bitter, debates about which modeling approaches are the right
ones are ongoing in macroeconomics, and there often is not a consensus on the best model. As
a result, central banks must express some degree of humility regarding their knowledge of the
structural relationships that determine activity and prices. This humility is readily apparent in
the practice at central banks, which involves looking at many different models--structural,
reduced-form, general equilibrium and partial equilibrium, and continually using judgment to
decide which models are most informative.
- 21 -

Fourth, the economy does not stand still but, rather, changes over time.

Economic

relationships are thus unlikely to remain stable, and it is not always clear how these
relationships are changing.17 Therefore, policymakers must sometimes put less weight on
econometrically estimated equations and instead make informed guesses about how the
economy will evolve.
Fifth, as part of managing expectations, monetary policy makers communicate with
economic agents who are not automatons but instead process information in complex ways.
Subtle changes can make a big difference in the effectiveness of communication strategies--i.e.,
details matter--and judgment is therefore always an important element of good
communication.18
Although, for the reasons outlined above, judgment will always be a necessary element
of monetary policy, good decisions require that judgment be disciplined--not too ad hoc--and
be well informed by the science of monetary policy. As Blinder (1998, p. 17), has put it,
“Nonetheless, while practicing this dark art, I have always found the science quite useful.”
Here I will discuss two recent episodes in the United States--the financial-headwinds period in
the early 1990s and the new-economy, productivity burst of the late 1990s--to illustrate how
judgment informed by science was able to produce good economic outcomes.

17

The housing channel is one example in which the monetary transmission mechanism has changed substantially
and is likely to continue to do so over time, e.g., Bernanke (2007) and Mishkin (2007c).
18
Because subtle details matter, there is an important rationale for the use of case studies to research best practice
in central bank communication strategies and this is why I have been drawn to case-study research (Bernanke and
Mishkin, 1992; Bernanke and others, 1999; Mishkin, 1999).
- 22 -

Financial Headwinds in the Early 1990s

The last scientific principle discussed in the paper’s first section emphasizes the link
between financial frictions and the business cycle, but it is unfortunately quite hard to model
the role of these frictions in a general equilibrium, macroeconometric model. The late 1980s
saw a boom and then a major bust in the commercial real estate market leading to huge loan
losses that caused a substantial fall in capital at depository institutions (banks). At the same
time, regulators were raising bank capital requirements to ensure compliance with the Basel
Accord. The resulting capital shortfalls meant that banks had to either raise new capital or
restrict their asset growth by cutting back on lending. Because of their weak condition, banks
could not raise much new capital, so they chose the latter course. The resulting slowdown in
the growth of credit was unprecedented in the post-World War II era (Reifschneider, Stockton,
and Wilcox, 1997). Because banks have informational advantages in making certain loans
(e.g., Mishkin, 2007a), many bank-dependent borrowers could no longer get access to
financing and thus had to cut back on their spending.
Although the large-scale macromodel then in use at the Federal Reserve Board did not
explicitly have financial frictions in its equations, officials at the Federal Reserve were aware
that these frictions could be very important and were concerned that they might be playing a
critical role at that juncture. In part reflecting this concern, many Fed economists were
actively engaged in research on the impact of bank credit on economic activity. This research,
together with anecdotal reports that businesses were finding themselves credit constrained and
survey information indicating that bank credit standards were being tightened, gave rise to the
- 23 -

view among Federal Reserve policymakers that the capital crunch at banks was noticeably
constraining credit flows and hence spending by households and firms. Indeed, Federal
Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan (1992) suggested that financial conditions in the early1990s was holding back activity like a “50-mile per hour headwind,” and in that period the
FOMC reduced the federal funds rate to levels well below that suggested by the Taylor rule
(e.g., Rudebusch, 2006). Indeed, the recovery from the 1990-91 recession was very slow, and
the Fed kept the federal funds rate at 3 percent (which, with an inflation rate of around 3
percent, implied a real rate of zero) until February of 1994--a very accommodative policy
stance. The Fed’s expansionary policy stance at the time has in hindsight been judged as very
successful, with the economy finally recovering and inflation remaining contained.

The New-Economy, Productivity Burst of the late 1990s

By the beginning of 1997, the unemployment rate had declined to 5.3 percent, and the
Board staff was forecasting that the unemployment rate would fall to 5 percent--an outcome
that followed by midyear. The forecast of a 5 percent unemployment rate was well below
most estimates of the NAIRU (nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment). As a result,
the staff forecast was for a rise in inflation (Svensson and Tetlow, 2005). The staff forecast
and the recommendation in the February Bluebook suggested that a period of monetary policy
tightening would be needed to “forestall a continuous rise in core inflation” (Federal Reserve
Board, 1997, p. 7). Although the FOMC did raise the federal funds rate in March 1997, it
desisted from raising rates further; in fact, the FOMC reduced the federal funds rate in the fall
- 24 -

of 1998 after the episode involving the Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund and the
Russian-bond meltdown. Despite an unemployment rate continually below estimates of the
NAIRU, the outcome was not the acceleration that the Board staff’s models predicted
(Svensson and Tetlow, 2005; Tetlow and Ironside, 2006) but instead a decline in the inflation
rate.
Why did the FOMC hold off and not raise rates in the face of economic growth that
was forecasted to be far in excess of potential growth--a decision that, ex post, appears to have
resulted in desirable outcomes for inflation and employment? The answer is that Fed
Chairman Greenspan guessed correctly that something unusual was going on with productivity.
For example, he was hearing from businesspeople that new information technologies were
transforming their businesses, making it easier for them to raise productivity. He was also a
big fan of the historical work by Paul David (1990), which suggested that new technological
innovations often took years to produce accelerations in productivity in the overall economy
(Meyer, 2004). Chairman Greenspan was led to the conclusion that the trend in productivity
growth was accelerating, a conclusion that the Board staff’s forecast did not come to fully
accept until late 1999 (Svensson and Tetlow, 2005). Moreover, he appeared to be convinced
that the acceleration in productivity would cap inflationary pressures, implying that inflation
would not accelerate even with rapid economic growth. His view prevailed in the FOMC
(Meyer, 2004).19
The types of information used to foresee the effects of a productivity acceleration are
inherently difficult to incorporate into formal models. This is obvious with respect to the
19

Chairman Greenspan’s successful use of judgment during this period is one reason why he was dubbed the
“maestro” by Woodward (2000).
- 25 -

anecdotes I have mentioned. But even the systematic data available at the time required the use
of judgment. For example, part of the story of the late 1990s reflected the different signals
being sent by real-time measures of gross domestic product and gross domestic income--or at
least the component of the latter produced by nonfinancial corporations, which is perhaps
better measured (Corrado and Slifman, 1999) and provided some advance signal of the
productivity acceleration. Of course, these two measures--GDP and GDI--are the same in our
formal models, and only a judgmental filtering of the information content in each can be useful
in real time.
Good judgment benefits not only from a good feel for the data and the successful
processing of anecdotal information but also from the use of scientific models, and the
late-1990s episode is no exception. At the July 1997 FOMC meeting, the Board staff
presented simulations using the FRB/US model examining what would happen if productivity
were to accelerate (Meyer, 2004; Tetlow and Ironside, 2006). Their simulations produced
several results that were consistent with what seemed to be happening. An acceleration of
productivity would raise profits and the value of equities, which would boost aggregate demand
because higher stock values would stimulate business investment and boost consumer spending
through wealth effects. The acceleration in productivity would also be disinflationary and
could therefore explain why inflation would fall despite a declining unemployment rate. An
unexpected rise in productivity growth would not be immediately reflected in higher wage
rates, so unit labor costs (wages adjusted for productivity growth) would fall, leading to a
decline in inflation. Another way of looking at this is through the NAIRU framework. For a
given rate of unemployment, an unexpected acceleration in productivity would produce an
- 26 -

inflation rate lower than it otherwise would be, so that the NAIRU at which the unemployment
rate would not lead to an acceleration of inflation would decline. As events unfolded in line
with these simulation results, the FOMC became more convinced that a productivity boom was
under way and that there was less need for a monetary tightening.
The two episodes discussed here illustrate several points about the art of central
banking. First, monetary policy is more likely to produce better outcomes when central
bankers recognize the limitations of their formal models. However, judgment cannot be
undisciplined. The accuracy of judgment is likely to be enhanced when it is informed by the
science of monetary policy, either through use of model simulations or applications of basic
scientific principles.

IV.
Further Advances to Make Monetary Policy More of a Science
Although art will always be a feature of monetary policy, the science of monetary
policy will keep advancing, making monetary policy more of a science. In this section I will
briefly discuss where I think future advances in the science of monetary policy are likely to be
made.
The push to build sound microfoundations into general equilibrium macroeconometric
models is ongoing as the expanding literature on DSGE models indicates (survey in Gali and
Gertler, forthcoming; and the discussions of model enhancements in Erceg, Gust, and
Guerrieri, 2006, and in Edge, Kiley, and Laforte, 2007). However, these DSGE models are
only now starting to be brought to the data and are not nearly as rich in their coverage of
- 27 -

features of the economy as are older, more-Keynesian models such as FRB/US.20 Models like
FRB/US do have elements that are more ad hoc, but at the current juncture central bankers see
them as more realistic. Building macroeconometric models thoroughly grounded on solid
microfoundations, but with treatment of more sectors of the economy, will be one of the main
challenges for the science of monetary policy in the future.
Nominal rigidities are central to understanding quantitatively the impact of monetary
policy on the economy. The canonical DSGE model makes use of a simple new-Keynesian
Phillips curve framework because it makes the model very tractable.21 This framework is
highly stylized, however, and does not allow for endogenous changes in how often contracts
are renegotiated. Furthermore, there may be other reasons why prices are not reset too often,
such as rational inattention.22 Better explanations--and more empirical validation--regarding
the source of nominal rigidities may lead to important advances in the science of monetary
policy.23
Tractability has led to models based on microfoundations, such as DSGE models, to
rely on representative agents, which is a serious drawback. I have a strong sense that what
drives many macroeconomic phenomena that are particularly interesting is heterogeneity of
economic agents. Building heterogeneous agents into macroeconometric models will by no
means be easy, but it has the potential to make these models much more realistic.
Furthermore, it may allow us to understand the link between aggregate economic fluctuations
20

To be fair, models like FRB/US do have much in common with DSGE models in that many of their equations,
but not all, are built on solid microfoundations.
21
These models often use the Calvo (1983) staggering construct or the quadratic adjustment costs of Rotemberg
(1982); these specifications yield identical Phillips curve specifications.
22
Mankiw and Reis (2002) introduce this type of model; Kiley (2007) compares the ability of this type of model
to improve upon the fit of more familiar sticky-price models.
23
Microeconomic studies have begun to make interesting progress (e.g., Bils and Klenow, 2004; Nakamura and
Steinsson, 2006).
- 28 -

and income distribution, a hot topic in political circles. Heterogeneity of economic agents is
also crucial to understanding labor market frictions. In some DSGE models, all fluctuations in
employment are from variation in hours per worker, and yet in the real world, changes in
unemployment are a more important source of employment fluctuations. Bringing the search
and matching literature more directly into microfounded macroeconometric models will make
them more realistic and also allow better welfare comparisons of different monetary policies.
Although, as discussed above, monetary policy makers understand the importance of
financial frictions to the business cycle, general equilibrium macroeconometric models, for the
most part, ignore financial market imperfections. Research has begun to incorporate financial
market imperfections into quantitative dynamic general equilibrium models (e.g., Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999), and some of this research has even begun to estimate these types
of DSGE models (e.g., Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno, 2007). But we need to know a lot
more about the how to scientifically incorporate financial frictions into policy deliberations.
For the time being, the role for art is this area is very important.
The new field of behavioral economics, which makes use of concepts from other social
sciences such as anthropology, sociology, and, particularly, psychology, suggests that
economic agents may not always be the rational, optimizing agents we assume in our models.
Embedding behavioral economics into macro models can make a major difference in the way
these models work (Akerlof, 2007). How important are deviations from rationality to our
views on the monetary transmission mechanism, and what are welfare-enhancing monetary
policies? How can systematic deviations from rationality be modeled in a serious way and

- 29 -

built into macroeconometric models? Answers to these questions may further enhance the
realism of macroeconometric models used for policy purposes.
One of the rationales for the use of judgment (art) in the conduct of monetary policy is
that the economy is not stationary, but rather is changing all the time. This means that
economic agents are continually learning about the state of the economy, so the rational
expectations assumption that depends on stationarity to derive expectations often may not be
valid. Research on the how agents learn and its implications for business cycles is an active
area of research (Bullard and Mitra, 2002; Evans and Honkapohja, 2003) that should have
major payoff in helping us to better understand the impact of monetary policy on the economy.
Another rationale for keeping art in monetary policymaking is that we can never be
sure what is the right model of the economy. As I mentioned earlier, this argues for humility
at central banks. It also argues for advances in scientific techniques to think about which
monetary policies are more robust in producing good economic outcomes. Research in this
area is also very active. One approach examines parametric uncertainties in which methods
are examined to ensure that a prescribed policy works well in an entire class of models (e.g.,
Levin, Wieland, and Williams, 1999). Nonparametric approaches look at designing policies
that protect against model misspecifications that cannot be measured (e.g., Hansen and
Sargent, forthcoming; Tetlow and von zur Muehlen, 2001).
The list of areas here that will advance the science of monetary policy is necessarily
incomplete. Some of the most important advances in economic science are often very hard to
predict.

- 30 -

V.
Concluding Remarks

The science of monetary policy has come a long way over the past fifty years, and I
would argue that its advances are an important reason for the policy successes that so many
countries have been experiencing in recent years. Monetary policy will however never become
as boring as dentistry. Monetary policy will always have elements of art as well as science.
(That is good news because it will keep life interesting for monetary economists like me.)
However, the advances in the science of monetary policy that I have described here suggest
that monetary policy will become more of a science over time. Furthermore, even though art
will always be a key element in the conduct of monetary policy, the more it is informed by
good science, the more successful monetary policy will be.

- 31 -

References
Adelman, Irma, and Frank L. Adelman (1959). “The Dynamic Properties of the KleinGoldberger Model,” Econometrica, vol. 27 (October), pp. 596-625.
Akerlof, George A. (1970). “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality, Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84 (August), pp. 488-500.
Akerlof, George A. (2007). “The Missing Motivation in Macroeconomics,” American Economic
Review, vol. 97 (March), pp. 5-36.
Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, George L. Perry, Robert J. Gordon, and N. Gregory
Mankiw (1996). “The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, vol. 1996 (no. 1), pp. 1-59.
Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). “Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62.
Anderson, Palle, and David Gruen (1995). “Macroeconomic Policies and Growth,” in Palle
Anderson, Jacqueline Dwyer, and David Gruen, eds., Productivity and Growth: Proceedings
of a Conference held at the H.C. Coombs Centre for Financial Studies, Kirribilli, Australia,
July 10-11. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 279-319.
Barro, Robert J. (1977). “Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United
States,” American Economic Review, vol. 67 (March), pp. 101-15.
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model
of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (no. 1), pp. 101-22.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression,” American Economic Review, vol. 73 (June), pp. 257-76.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). “Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy,” speech
delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole,
Wyo., August 31, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1999). “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility” in
New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.
77-128, www.kc.frb.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/1999/sym99prg.htm.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (2001). “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in
Asset Prices?” American Economic Review, vol. 91 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 253-57.
- 32 -

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, part 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1341-93.
Bernanke, Ben, and Frederic Mishkin (1992). “Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy of
Monetary Policy: Observations from Six Industrialized Countries,” in NBER Macroeconomics
Annual. Cambrige, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 183-228.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (Spring), pp. 97-116.
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999). Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004). “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economics, vol. 112 (October), pp. 947-85.
Blinder, Alan S. (1998). Central Banking in Theory and Practice, Lionel Robbins Lectures.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Brayton, Flint, Andrew Levin, Ralph Lyon, and John C. Williams (1997). “The Evolution of
Macro Models at the Federal Reserve Board,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, vol. 47 (December), pp. 43-81.
Brayton, F., and P. Tinsley, eds. (1996). “A Guide to FRB/US: A New Macroeconomic Model of
the United States,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 1996-42. Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/.
Brayton, Flint, and Eileen Mauskopf (1985). “The Federal Reserve Board MPS Quarterly
Econometric Model of the U.S. Economy,” Economic Modelling, vol. 2 (July), pp. 170-292.
Briault, Clive (1995). “The Costs of Inflation,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol. 35
(February), pp. 33-45.
Bryant, Ralph C., Peter Hooper, and Catherine L. Mann, eds. (1993). Evaluating Policy
Regimes: New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington: Brookings Institution.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002). “Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 49 (September), pp. 1105-29.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1993). “Financial Factors in the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 7 (Spring), pp. 61-85.

- 33 -

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1978). “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
Economy,” Econometrica, vol. 46 (no. 6), pp. 1411-28.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983). “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (September), pp. 383-98.
Christiano, Lawrence, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2007). “Shocks, Structures or
Monetary Policies? The EA and US After 2001.” Mimeo: Northwestern University (February).
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1998). “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
115 (February), pp. 147-80.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-707.
Coenen, Günter, Peter McAdam, and Roland Straub (2007). “Tax Reform and Labour Market
Performance in the Euro Area: A Simulation-Based Analysis Using the New Area-Wide Model,”
European Central Bank Working Paper 747. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, April,
www.ecb.eu/pub/scientific/wps.
Coletti, Donald, Benjamin Hunt, David Rose, and Robert Tetlow (1996). “The Dynamic Model:
QPM,” the Bank of Canada’s New Quarterly Projection Model, Part 3, Bank of Canada
Technical Report 75. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/res/tr.
Corrado, Carol, and Lawrence Slifman (1999). “Decomposition of Productivity and Unit
Costs,” American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 328-32.
Cukierman, Alex (1993). “Central Bank Independence, Political Influence and Macroeconomic
Performance: A Survey of Recent Developments” Cuadernos de Economía (Santiago), vol. 30
(no. 91), pp. 271-91.
Cukierman, Alex (2006). “Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policy Making Institutions:
Past, Present, and Future,” Journal Economía Chilena, vol. 9 (April), pp. 5-23.
David, Paul A. (1990). The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the
Modern Productivity Paradox,” American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May, Papers and
Proceedings), pp. 355-61.
Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Phillipe Laforte (2007). “Natural Rate
Measures in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 2007-8. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
March, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds.

- 34 -

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 1), pp. 139211.
English, William B. (1996). “Inflation and Financial Sector Size,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 1996-16. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds.
Erceg, Christopher, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2006). “SIGMA: A New Open
Economy Model for Policy Analysis,” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (March),
pp. 1-50.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja (2003). “Adaptive Learning and Monetary Policy
Design,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 35 (December, Part 2), pp. 1045-72.
Fatás, Antonio, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew K. Rose (2007). “Quantitative Goals for Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (August), pp. 1163-76.
Federal Reserve Board (1997). Monetary Policy Alternatives. Washington: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, February.
Feldstein, Martin (1997). “The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price
Stability,” in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation
and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 123-66.
Fischer, Stanley (1993). “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 32 (December), pp. 485-512.
Fischer, Stanley (1994). “Modern Central Banking,” in Forrest Capie, Stanley Fischer,
Charles Goodhart, and Norbert Schnadt, eds., The Future of Central Banking: The
Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.
Fischer, Stanley, and Guy Debelle (1994). “How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?” in
Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers, Proceedings from the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 38. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, pp. 195-221.
Fisher, Irving (1933). “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica, vol. 1
(October), pp. 337-57.
Forder, James (2000). “Traps in the Measurement of Independence and Accountability of Central
Banks,” University of Oxford Economics Series Working Papers 023. Oxford: University of
Oxford, www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Research/WorkPapers.asp.
- 35 -

Friedman, Milton (1963). Inflation: Causes and Consequences. New York: Asia Publishing
House.
Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, vol. 58
(March), pp. 1-17.
Friedman, Milton, and David Meiselman (1963). “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity
and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897-1958” in Stabilization Policies, a Series
of Research Studies Prepared for the Commission on Money and Credit. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, pp. 165-268.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963a). Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960, National Bureau of Economic Research Publications. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963b). “Money and Business Cycles,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 45 (February, Part 2), pp. 32-64.
Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (forthcoming). “Macroeconomic Modeling for Monetary Policy
Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Goodfriend, Marvin (1993). “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 79 (Winter), pp. 1-24.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King (1997). “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role
of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83.
Gramlich, Edward M. (2005). “The Board’s Modeling Work in the 1960s,” in Models and
Monetary Policy: Research in the Tradition of Dale Henderson, Richard Porter, and Peter
Tinsley. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
www.federalreserve.gov/Events/conferences/mmp2004.
Greenspan, Alan (1992). Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs, U.S. Senate, July 21.
Greenwald, Bruce, Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss (1984). “Informational Imperfections
in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, vol. 74
(May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 194-9.
Hansen, Lars P., and Thomas J. Sargent (forthcoming). Robustness. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

- 36 -

Hunt, Benjamin, David Rose, and Alasdair Scott (2000). “The Core Model of the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand’s Forecasting and Policy System,” Economic Modelling, vol. 172 (April), pp.
247-74.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein (1994). “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending,” in N.
Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in
Business Cycles, vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 221-56.
Kiley, Michael T. (2007). “A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information
Models of Price Setting,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February,
Supplement), pp. 101-25.
Klein, Lawrence R. (1968). An Essay on the Theory of Economic Prediction. Helsinki: Yrjö
Jahnssonin.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-92.
Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams (1999). “Robustness of Simple Monetary
Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in J.B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 31. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 263-99.
Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams (2005). “Monetary
Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in Mark Gertler and
Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.
229-87.
Lucas, Robert E. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103-24.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1973). “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,”
American Economic Review, vol. 63 (June), pp. 326-34.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1976). “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19-46.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2002). “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A
Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
117 (November), pp. 1295-328.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and David Romer (1991) New Keynesian Economics. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

- 37 -

Meyer, Laurence H. (2004). A Term at the Fed: An Insider’s View. New York: Harper Business.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1978). "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression," Journal
of Economic History, vol. 38 (December), pp. 918-37.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1981). "The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation," CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 15 (Autumn), pp. 151-200.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982a). “Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90 (February), pp. 22-51.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982b). “Does Anticipated Aggregate Demand Policy Matter? Further
Econometric Results,” American Economic Review, vol. 72 (September), pp. 788-802.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1983). A Rational Expectations Approach to Macroeconometrics: Testing
Policy Ineffectiveness and Efficient Markets Models. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991). “Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical
Perspective,” in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1992). “Is the Fisher Effect for Real? A Reexamination of the Relationship
Between Inflation and Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 30 (November), pp.
195-215.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1996). “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country
Perspective,” in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics 1996. Washington: World Bank, pp. 29-62.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1997). “The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons for
Policymakers,” in Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy. Kansas City: Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 55-96.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1999). “International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy
Regimes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June), pp. 579-605.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007a). The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets, 8th ed.
Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b).“Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate,” speech delivered at
Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007c). “Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism,” Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, September, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds.
- 38 -

Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen (1997). “Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four
Countries,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol. 3 (August), pp.
9-110.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2002). “One Decade of Inflation Targeting in
the World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and
Raimundo Soto, eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges. Santiago: Central
Bank of Chile, pp. 171-219.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, eds. (2007). “Does Inflation Targeting
Matter?” in Monetary Policy Under Inflation Targeting. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, pp.
291-372.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas Westelius (forthcoming). “Inflation Band Targeting and
Optimal Inflation Contracts,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Muth, John F. (1961). “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,”
Econometrica, vol. 29 (July), pp. 315-35.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf (1984). “Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial
Economics, vol. 13 (June), pp. 187-221.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2006). “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
Cost Models,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “The Quest for Prosperity Without Inflation,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1968). “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium,” Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 76 (July/August, Part 2), pp. 687-711.
Phillips, A.W. (1958). “The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money
Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957,” Economica, vol. 25 (November), pp. 283-99.
Pierce, James L., and Jared J. Enzler (1974). “The Effects of External Inflationary Shocks,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1974 (no. 1), pp. 13-54.
Prescott, Edward C. (1986). “Theory Ahead of Business-Cycle Measurement,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 25, pp. 11-44.

Reifschneider, David L., David J. Stockton, and David W. Wilcox (1997). “Econometric Models
and the Monetary Policy Process,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
47 (December), pp. 1-37.
- 39 -

Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John Williams (1999). “Aggregate Disturbances,
Monetary Policy, and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US Perspective,” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
vol. 85 (January), pp. 1-19.
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November, Part 2), pp. 93666.
Rose, Andrew K. (2006). “A Stable International Monetary System Emerges: Inflation Targeting
is Bretton Woods, Reversed,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12711.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November, www.nber.org/papers.
Rotemberg, Julio J. (1982). “Sticky Prices in the United States,” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 90 (December), pp. 1187-211.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2006). “Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?” International Journal
of Central Banking, vol. 2 (December), pp. 85-135.
Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow (1960). “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy,”
American Economic Review, vol. 50 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 177-94.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe (2006). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a
Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model,” European Central Bank Working Paper 612. Frankfurt:
European Central Bank, April, www.ecb.eu/pub/scientific/wps.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003). “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 (September),
pp. 1123-75.
Svensson, Lars E.O., and Robert J. Tetlow (2005). “Optimal Policy Projections,” International
Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1 (December), pp. 177-207.
Taylor, John B. (1993a). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
Taylor, John B. (1993b). Macroeconomic Policy in a World Economy: From Econometric
Design to Practical Operation. New York: Norton Press.
Taylor, John B., ed. (1999) Monetary Policy Rules, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tetlow, Robert J., and Brian Ironside (2006). “Real-Time Model Uncertainty in the United
States: The Fed from 1996-2003,” European Central Bank Working Paper 610, Frankfurt:
European Central Bank, April, www.ecb.eu/pub/scientific/wps.

- 40 -

Tetlow, Robert J., and Peter von zur Muehlen (2001). “Robust Monetary Policy with
Misspecified Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 25 (June), pp. 911-49.
Tinbergen, Jan (1939). Business Cycles in the United States of America: 1919-1932, Statistical
Testing of Business Cycle Theories, vol. 2. Geneva: League of Nations.
Woodford, Michael (2001). “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,” American
Economic Review, vol. 91 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 232-7.
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Woodward, Bob (2000). Maestro: Greenspan’s Fed and the American Boom, 1st ed. New York:
Simon & Schuster.

- 41 -

