NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN CAPITAL AND ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE FIRST ERA OF GLOBALIZATION
Michael D. Bordo
Christopher M. Meissner
Working Paper 13577
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13577
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Comments from Olivier Jeanne, Paolo Mauro, Brian Pinto, Moritz Schularick and conference participants
at the World Bank, Strasbourg Cliometrics, the World Economy and Global Finance Conference at
Warwick and the Conference on Globalization and Democracy at Princeton University were very helpful.
Seminar audiences at Carlos III, Manchester University, Nova University Lisbon, Paris School of
Economics, and Trinity College Dublin also provided generous feedback on an earlier version. Antonio
David and Wagner Dada provided excellent research assistance for early data collection. We thank
Michael Clemens, David Leblang, Moritz Schularick, Alan Taylor, and Jeff Williamson for help with
or use of their data. The financial assistance from the UK's ESRC helped build some of the data set
that underlies this paper and supported this research. We acknowledge this with pleasure. Errors remain
our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Capital and Economic Growth in the First Era of Globalization
Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 13577
November 2007, Revised May 2010
JEL No. E22,F21,F32,F43,N1,N20
ABSTRACT
We explore the association between income and international capital flows between 1880 and 1913.
Capital inflows are associated with higher incomes per capita in the long-run, but capital flows also
brought income volatility via financial crises. Crises also decreased growth rates of income per capita
significantly below trend for at least two years leading to important short term output losses. Countries
just barely made up for these losses over time, so that there is no conditional long-run income loss
or gain for countries that experienced crises. This is in contrast to the recent wave of globalization
when capital importing countries that experienced a crisis seemed to grow relatively faster over fixed
periods of time. We discuss some possibilities that can explain this finding.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

Foreign Capital and Economic Growth in the First Era
of Globalization
May 20, 2010
Michael D. Bordo
(Rutgers University and NBER)
Christopher M. Meissner
(University of California, Davis and NBER)

Abstract
We explore the association between income and international capital flows between 1880 and
1913. Capital inflows are associated with higher incomes per capita in the long-run, but
capital flows also brought income volatility via financial crises. Crises also decreased growth
rates of income per capita significantly below trend for at least two years leading to important
short term output losses. Countries just barely made up for these losses over time, so that
there is no conditional long-run income loss or gain for countries that experienced crises. This
is in contrast to the recent wave of globalization when capital importing countries that
experienced a crisis seemed to grow relatively faster over fixed periods of time. We discuss
some possibilities that can explain this finding.

1. Introduction
The period from 1880 to 1913 witnessed rising international integration in both
goods and financial markets. Many countries joined the industrial bandwagon in this
period and others made an effort at jumpstarting the process. What role did foreign
capital play in this process? A traditional view holds that a lower cost of capital and
greater inflows should have contributed to higher long-run incomes and stronger growth
in the late nineteenth century (Fishlow, 1986, Foreman-Peck, 1994, and Collins and
Williamson, 2001).
Indeed, many countries experienced a process of industrialization or the
transformation to export-orientation and sustained growth of output per capita. At the
same time, European capital flowed in large quantities across borders. The areas of recent
1

European settlement such as Australia, Canada, the United States, and even parts of
Argentina and Brazil enjoyed high wages and incomes witnessing long periods of strong
economic growth. Inward investment to these areas, coming largely from Great Britain,
mushroomed prior to 1913. In theory these inflows should have boosted the marginal
product of labor (and other inputs) and raised incomes in the medium term via
accumulation. The conventional view is that foreign capital funded infrastructure such as
railroads, harbors, and municipal public works raising productivity.
But the largest recipients of British capital also possessed valuable natural
resource endowments and burgeoning populations due to immigration. Indeed, Clemens
and Williamson (2004) illustrate that the correlates of strong ‘catch-up’ growth and highsteady state income levels such as human capital, a low dependency ratio and an
abundant natural resource endowment were the primary determinants of these capital
inflows. The question remains whether there is a relation between changes in aggregate
income and capital inflows holding other factors constant in this period.
Schularick and Steger (forthcoming) is the only other paper we are aware of that
studied this question historically at the aggregate level in a cross-country comparative
framework. 1 They find a positive marginal impact of capital inflows and growth during
five year periods between 1880 and 1913 due to a strong correlation between capital
inflows and investment.
We continue further in this vein exploring three new facets of the problem. First
we investigate the relation between changes in income per capita and foreign capital over
short and long horizons. Different growth models have different implications for the time
period over which capital flows should matter. Second, we look for evidence that the
sector to which foreign capital was directed mattered for the relationship between inflows
and incomes. Investment in the many large infrastructure projects of the past may have
affected growth differently than inflows of foreign portfolio capital for ‘government’
purposes.
1

Standard theory suggests opening up to global capital markets can make crucial investment funds
available at a lower world cost of capital, but Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian (2007) find little evidence of
a positive direct impact of foreign capital on the average growth rate of emerging markets over the last 30
years. Henry argues that recent capital market liberalizations are likely to have had positive but temporary
impacts on growth as a neoclassical model of economic growth would predict (Henry, 2007). An extensive
list of other similar studies is available in Prasad et. al.

2

Third, we link capital inflows to the recurrent financial crises of the late
nineteenth century. In today’s reincarnation of globalization, financial crises have been
blamed on premature capital account liberalization in emerging markets but even the
overall impact of these ostensibly vicious shocks are still debated. Rancière, Tornell and
Westermann (2008) argue that crises cause significant income losses in capital importing
countries. However, they also suggest capital inflows deliver rapid growth in non-crisis
periods which is likely to offset the negative effects of crises. Countries with high capital
inflows grow faster on average than countries with low capital inflows. Other evidence
suggests, to the contrary, that decoupling from the global capital market with capital
controls in the post-World War II period has protected countries from financial crises in
and raised growth (Eichengreen and Leblang, 2003). Which, if any, of these dynamics
obtained further back in the past? We investigate by looking at the long and short run
association between capital inflows and income losses via their tendency to raise the
probability of a banking, currency or debt crisis.
Our results differ significantly from Rancière et. al (2008). In the nineteenth
century, many countries with high inflows were indeed more crisis prone like today, but
unlike in the Rancière et. al sample for 1961-2000, crisis prone countries in the first wave
of globalization did not raise incomes fast enough to significantly make up for the income
shocks associated with crises. In other words capital receiving countries exposed to crises
in the nineteenth century did not grow faster than non-crisis capital receiving countries.
This is not obviously related to differences in the possibility of default and systemic
bailouts (key assumptions in the Rancière et. al. framework) though it could be consistent
with their model if crises happened frequently enough.
However, consistent with Schularick and Steger, we do find that capital flows
yielded a positive ‘level effect’ on incomes or were associated with above average
growth rates of income in the medium run. Still crises, also seem to be associated with
substantial negative shocks to income that drag these gains down. Alternatively, the
growth rate in non-crisis periods does not seem to have been sufficiently high to offset
the lost income associated with crises.
Despite this finding, certain countries avoided crises and took advantage of capital
inflows to raise growth. Avoiding crises depended upon a number of financial and policy

3

fundamentals that not all countries shared equally. Canada grew rich on the back of
capital inflows and avoided severe crises while Argentina also took large inflows but
suffered several important crises. We speculate in our conclusions about how the
increased volatility mattered, why our results differ from earlier findings for the period,
and why they are different from those for the recent period of globalization.
Looking to the past can be useful for guidance on how capital inflows matter for
economic growth. Researchers of today’s “globalization” have not come to a clear
consensus on the growth impact of foreign capital flows. Their time period of observation
has been relatively short, the number of less developed countries willing to completely
liberalize has been small and, arguably, the rules of the game have changed considerably
since central banks, fiscal authorities and multilateral institutions often intervene in
market outcomes. History provides insight into a world without these constraints.

2. International Capital Markets and Economic Growth, 1880 - 1913

International capital flows were an important feature of late nineteenth century
globalization. Although many studies have highlighted their relationship to local
investment, empire building, and economic cycles, little recent work has been done using
the techniques of the modern empirical growth literature. 2 To understand the role of
foreign capital itself, there are a number of challenges including measuring the amount of
integration, discerning whether capital simply chased other factors and flowed to areas
with higher potential for growth (i.e., endogeneity) and how much capital’s impact
depended on local conditions such as property rights, credible commitments, local
financial development and other institutional factors. Finally there are more transparent
theoretical and empirical identification issues. We discuss each in turn.

2.1 Measuring Integration prior to World War I

2

Schularick and Steger (forthcoming) is an exception.

4

The period between 1880 and 1913 was one of rapidly rising integration in
international capital markets. 3 Capital moved across borders free of government controls.
Cross border, market-based financing for public and private projects in both the
developed and the less-developed regions played an important role in shaping the amount
of capital available in local economies. We focus here on how much capital flowed
across borders relative to local GDP.
Several different data sets are available for scholars to assess net capital inflows
by country in the nineteenth century. Indirect measures of capital inflows are available by
using the simple balance of payments accounting identity. Such data are only available
for a limited set of countries and they often do not contain reliable information on data
from income earned on foreign investments, transfers and ‘invisible’ services.
An alternative source of information on capital inflows is information on capital
issues on the London financial market from the financial press and other primary sources.
Leland Jenks and Matthew Simon used such sources, and their data are re-compiled in
the ‘capital calls’ data published by Stone (1999). These data come largely from
information on new equity and bond issues in London which were listed in the Investors’
Monthly Manual though many other leading financial newspapers, parliamentary reports
and prospectuses were also used as documented in Stone (1999) Appendix A. In the
original data, the use of other reports and a detailed analysis of each security allowed
Simon to ascertain the actual amount of money paid by investors to the issuer. That said,
the actual amount of new ‘real’ or physical investment abroad is not obviously equal to
the value of the ‘capital calls’ listed in the financial press and other sources. The actual
amount of new physical investment in the receiving economy which resulted from such
issues would depend on the use to which such funds were put and where they were used.
This is why the literature on British capital flows before 1913 distinguishes between
financial capital and real capital transfers. Also the ultimate purchaser of the securities
listed would affect the amount of net capital flows to the issuing country. In this regard, it
is not clear that 100 percent of all purchasers were British residents, but, assuming assets
issued abroad simultaneously were a small portion of overall capital issued, this is a

3

Cottrell (1975), Edelstein (1982) and Davis and Huttenback (1986) provide an overview of British capital
exports during the nineteenth century.

5

reasonable assumption. Stone’s data are best at highlighting portfolio capital flows, and
they do not adequately capture short-term movements of capital nor long-term direct
investment. 4
The literature on measuring capital flows is voluminous and scholars such as
Davis and Huttenback (1986) have produced alternative series, but still, their series
correlate with those from Stone (1999) with a correlation coefficient of 0.92 (Davis and
Huttenback, p. 37). Stone’s data on capital calls also correlate highly with the current
account information available from Jones and Obstfeld (2003). Country-fixed effects
regressions of the current account deficit on the ratio of capital calls to GDP yield
coefficients of .38 (t-statistic = of 5.26), and raw correlation coefficients are higher.
Figure 1 shows within group average ratios of capital calls to GDP in three types
of countries: a low-income but institutionally advanced core, the high-income per capita
British offshoots plus the United States, and the poorer regions of the world. 5 Foreign
investment often equalled up to 20 percent of total capital formation in the typical
developing country of the time and up to 50 percent in Australia, Canada, Argentina and
Brazil (cf. Fishlow, 1986, Williamson, 1964 and Edelstein, 1982).

2.2 Where Did the Capital Go?

Up to 40 percent of all British lending between the 1860s and 1913 went to the
British Empire, and, of this portion, the bulk ended up in Canada and Australasia.
Ferguson and Schularick (2006) argue that lending within the British Empire demanded a
lower risk premium than other similar countries outside of the empire. This was natural
because property rights were hard to enforce outside the Empire, political ties were
stronger, and other institutions, such as the Joint Stock Acts, increased demand for

4

Svedberg (1978) argued that by 1913 direct investment accounted for over 60 percent of all foreign
investment.
5
We define the core countries to include Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland. We place
Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States into the “offshoots” category. These regions were
extensive capital importers and also had a special institutional heritage being members (or once having
been members) of the British Empire. The periphery is defined to include Argentina, Austria-Hungary,
Brazil, Chile, Egypt, Finland, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Turkey,
Uruguay

6

colonial assets. Membership in the British Empire allegedly reassured investors that debts
would be repaid. And as a matter of fact no British colony ever defaulted in this period.
Clemens and Williamson (2004) take issue with this market failure view and
suggest that factor endowments mattered more for the direction of these flows. Canada,
the various colonies of Australasia and other new world regions such as the USA which
received heavy inflows (both relative to local GDP and in terms of overall British
outflows) were richly endowed in natural resources, high in human capital and scarce in
labor and physical capital. Such a combination made for the expectation of a relatively
safe and high rate of return on investment relative to the domestic opportunities and those
available in labor abundant/resource poor Europe. After controlling for these factors, they
find that the British empire did not receive greater inflows from Britain than other
comparable regions.

2.3 What Happened to the Capital Inflows?

Fishlow (1986) characterized countries as revenue borrowers or development
borrowers. Development borrowers financed large infrastructure which should have
catalyzed economic growth and raised living standards. Revenue borrowers were likely to
have severe fiscal deficiencies due to emergency situations or deeper institutional flaws
which limited their ability to tax. Borrowing by such countries would not necessarily be
expected to raise incomes or growth rates.
Figure 2 shows the shares of capital calls on London from Stone’s data for three
categories of activity. The government category accounted for about a third of British
capital exports. This category included bonds carrying guarantees provided by local
governments on interest payments for private and state-owned railways . The countries
that devoted the largest share of the inflows to government uses are located on the right
of Figure 2 and include Norway, Germany, Denmark, Austria and Australia. Railways
(fully private concerns in terms of ownership) captured roughly another third of British
capital exports between 1880 and 1913, and Stone (1999) reports that these outflows
were concentrated in the US, Canada, Argentina and India which received over 80
percent of these outflows. The US, Argentina and Canada are amongst those devoting the

7

highest share of their inflows to railways. Finally, the ‘private’ category included
investments in utilities (sewage, water treatment, electrical generation etc.), financial
firms, raw materials extraction, and other industrial and ‘miscellaneous’ enterprises.
Information from sovereign bond prospectuses published in Fenn on the Funds
can also be examined to see in more detail the intended uses of foreign capital. 6 The
colonies of Australasia, the future South Africa, and Canada and its provinces borrowed
almost exclusively to fund railroads, harbors, sewage systems, and other infrastructure.
For these places, the Fenn’s summary of investments would often state something to the
effect, ‘the vast majority of funds have been for internal improvement’.
Other countries like Russia (an issue to strengthen the specie [reserve] fund),
Japan (to pay charges on pensions), Egypt (Pasha loan for re-payment of existing debt),
and Austria (an issue in 1851 to improve upon the value of the paper florin) borrowed to
plug revenue gaps or to fund offensive, defensive and civil wars. 7 Many of these same
countries had considerable amounts of their total debt issues dedicated to unspecified
ends.
Of course risky foreign investment was often greeted by the market with low
prices at initial public offerings in order to compensate investors. To roughly gauge the
6

It is difficult to sort out whether the listed prospectuses for new issues with unspecified projects were
simple consolidations of old productive debt, whether war finance should be classified as productive
spending or not (since the vanquished often paid large war indemnities or suffered economic repression,
while victors may have seen real benefits), and to know the actual share for each country of sovereign
borrowing versus private borrowing. Therefore we have not been able to systematically assess whether
countries were revenue or development borrowers for each and every year of the period. Future work could
attempt to delineate more clearly each kind of borrower and to correlate this variable with subsequent
economic growth. Another problem is that it is not clear whether this source and the productive/revenue
dichotomy could adequately characterize countries’ prospects. For 1874 we catalogued the issues for the
entire set of economically important countries. We found that for countries like the US (federal financing of
the Civil War we know), and even Canada (which the very same source reported as being a sound
infrastructure borrower), a majority of their issues were listed but with unspecified ends. Compounding the
difficulties would be judging between the quality and management of the projects such as railroads that
actually seem on paper to be for productive purposes. For example, in Bolivia, one issue was for the
construction of a canal to the Atlantic. This project failed to prove technically feasible and the market value
of the issue sank.
7
In 1876 Egypt defaulted on its sovereign debts leading to foreign administration of taxation and spending.
See Mitchener and Weidenmier (forthcoming) for a recent summary of the episode. Information about the
use to which Egypt put its borrowing was sketchy at best during the run up to default. Fenn’s Compendium
does not list a single bond prospectus for Egypt thus leaving the reader unaware of how the funds would
have been invested. The Cave Report (quoted in Issawi, 1982) which summarized Egypt’s finances after
the default claimed “…[Egypt] suffers from the ignorance, dishonesty, waste and extravagance of the East,
such as have brought her Suzerin [Pasha] to the verge of ruin…caused by hasty and inconsiderate
endeavours to adopt the civilization of the West”. Even after default, British auditors found it difficult to
evaluate the ultimate destination of borrowed funds.

8

penalty on the cost of capital, we totalled the face value of each bond listed in Fenn’s
1874 edition that clearly stated in the abstracted prospectus whether the bond was issued
for infrastructure or other productive investment. 8 We then divided this value by the total
face value of bonds outstanding. In Figure 3 we plotted a sovereign long-term bond yield
on a representative bond minus the British consol yield (i.e., one simple proxy for the
country risk premium) against this development/revenue measure. 9 The spread is
calculated for a long-term issue listed in London and payable in gold minus the British
consol yield.
The yield spread roughly captures the development vs. revenue borrower
distinction. The correlation between the spread and the ratio of bonds issued for
productive purposes to total bonds is -0.25. Figure 3 plots the spread versus the ratio and
reveals a negative correlation. The coefficient on the spread in a regression is -0.03 and
has a robust t-statistic of -1.96 (p-value = 0.06). Thus the bond spread can be considered
a more continuous measure of development versus revenue financing. Figure 3 reveals
that both types of countries were able to issue at least some debt on international markets
during this period of open capital flows. However, it is clear from the evidence on capital
flows presented in Clemens and Williamson (2004) that the development borrowers
received the bulk of these funds.
Moreover, the calculation is not perfect. The Ottoman Empire was a fiscal disaster
and had a high spread, but Brazil and the US have equivalent (low) measures of
productive spending and low spreads. The latter two had sound finances and solid
reputations (on Brazil see Summerhill, forthcoming). It is likely that markets had the
belief that repayment was not an issue due to previously established credibility.
In sum, a sort of proto-Washington Consensus of free trade, fixed exchange rates,
and fairly liberal economies more or less reigned between 1880 and 1913. Capital
markets became strongly integrated and many different types of nations relied on foreign
capital to finance new projects aimed at developing the local economy, producing for
export and stabilizing finances. Recent research leaves as an open question whether
8

The real cost of capital is only roughly related to the risk premium as we measured it. Other factors
include the underwriting fees, price at initial public offering, loan specific contractual factors determining
the maturity and so forth.
9
Sovereign yields come from the annual average of all weekly observations on a representative long-term
bond in London as compiled by Kris Mitchener and Marc Weidenmier.

9

capital inflows mattered for sustaining and stabilizing incomes or other factors mattered
more.

3. Economic Growth and Foreign Capital: Some Testable Hypotheses

3.1 Foreign Capital and Economic Growth in a Neoclassical World and Beyond

The most general theoretical case for capital market integration is nearly the same
as that for free trade. Opening to foreign capital allows for resources to be efficiently
allocated. One view in development economics is that poor countries are savings
constrained, and so foreign capital inflows ease this constraint making greater investment
possible. In addition, risk sharing is allegedly enhanced with globally integrated capital
markets. It is also argued that policy is improved since footloose capital harnesses errant
policy makers. What are the theoretical predictions for economic growth from basic
theory?
The effect on growth of a sustained rise in the level of capital inflows is naturally
transitory in a neoclassical growth model (Henry, 2007). 10 The reason is that opening up
simply accelerates a country towards its steady state. Booms and busts in capital inflows
would be associated with alternate periods of high and low growth relative to a steadystate trend growth value. And, as is well known, long run growth rates depend only on
the rate of technological advance. Furthermore, Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) argue that
the welfare effects of capital market liberalization in a neoclassical model are surprisingly
small since countries are usually near their steady states already. For capital inflows to
support a larger impact on consumption (and income) and a longer lasting impact on
growth, one would have to argue that they accompany an unobserved change in the
steady state potential of a country or that they improve the growth rate of total factor
productivity. Alternatively in an endogenous growth model of the ‘AK’ variety, the

10

Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005) find that growth increases by one percent after a liberalization in
the modern period.

10

growth rate would depend directly on the investment rate. As long as investment is
sustained, growth remains high.
In addition there is the possibility that there are lags in the impact of foreign
capital on economic growth. This is especially relevant in the nineteenth century. Since
foreign capital in this period frequently funded large infrastructure projects like railroads
or utilities, it may have taken considerable time until the completion of such projects led
to significant improvements in GDP beyond higher investment rates. These could occur
via their effect on market access, improved public health or incentives for urbanization.
Williamson (1964), Cottrell (1975) and Eichengreen (1995, p. 79) suggest there were
long lags between capital inflows and the real impact on the domestic economies of
Canada and the USA but made no systematic cross-country comparison. If this were the
case, we would expect the relationship between foreign capital inflows and output to
appear in the medium to long run (e.g., after five to 15 years).
We also have the argument put forward by Fishlow that many countries simply
mismanaged these inflows. This would suggest that the unconditional relationship
between foreign capital and economic growth might be very slight. Two countries
receiving equal amounts of capital could have very different outcomes depending on how
such funds were spent.
Finally, and importantly, some countries suffered financial crises, which arguably
arose directly due to their connection with foreign capital markets. These crises were
likely to be associated with diminished economic growth bringing post-crisis incomes
below where pre-crisis trends would have led the economy. 11 It is also an open question
as to whether income levels eventually returned to the levels suggested by the pre-crisis
trend with growth rising above the pre-crisis trend until then or whether income levels
would stay permanently depressed relative to trend with growth simply returning to the
pre-crisis trend.

11

Evidence from the IMF World Economic Outlook (2009) looks at the ‘output gap’ from zero to seven
years after banking crises. The output gap is defined as the percentage point difference between where
output would have been had growth followed the pre-crisis trend (i.e., the linear trend based on output
movements from seven to three years before a crisis) and where output actually went. The average output
gap since the 1970s has been seven percent for banking crises and 2.5 percent for currency crises. Similar
values were noted prior to 1913 by Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez-Peria (2001) but using a
slightly different metric.

11

3.2 Capital Flows and Financial Crises: An Indirect Association between Growth
and Capital Flows

Balance of payments problems, sudden stops, and crises are, and have been, part
and parcel of international financial markets over the last 200 years.12 Figure 4 reports
sample frequencies of crises (number of first years of crises divided by total number of
country years without a crisis). Crises are rare, but the average country could expect some
sort of crisis every 15 years or so. Crises are known to be costly events in terms of output
losses (Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martínez-Peria, 2001), and they most likely
reduce welfare due to market coordination failures and the absence of complete financial
markets. 13 Many factors cause financial crises, but it appears that one key ingredient is
capital inflows.
Rancière, Tornell and Westermann (2008) build a model based on the idea that
systemic financial crises (i.e., periods of inefficiently low investment and growth well
below trend), are the side effect of receiving foreign capital flows. 14 There are two key
necessary conditions for the Rancière et. al. finding. First the economy benefits from a
systemic bailout in the event of a crisis and, second, that contract enforcement problems
exist but are neither too severe nor too mild. When this is so, agents take on foreign debt,
use leverage to increase returns and investment and growth is higher than without foreign
inflows. Along this equilibrium path however, a time-invariant probability of crisis and
crash exists. 15 Countries with high skewness of the growth of real credit in emerging
12

Sudden stops are defined as large swings in the net inflow of foreign capital. They are often measured
with positive changes in the current account or trade balance above a threshold level accounting for
changes in reserve positions. The threshold is chosen so that the swings are abnormally large in a statistical
sense at the country level.
13
Allen and Gale (2000) analyze theoretically the possibility that banking and currency crises can be
optimal. Crisis periods allow for optimal risk sharing. Marion (2000) argued that the assumptions of their
model are unlikely to be fulfilled in practice. What one needs is that countries can issue large of amounts of
debt in their own currency abroad and lend in equally large amounts to other countries in foreign currency.
Since debt was largely contracted in foreign currency even in this period, it is unlikely that financial crises
were optimal in the sense of Allen and Gale. More generally, crises could be beneficial in purging the
system of inefficient over-investment as in older models of the business cycle.
14
Two other sufficient conditions for systemic crises are that governments offer bailouts in systemic crises
and that there are contract enforceability problems (i.e., borrowers cannot commit to re-pay their debt)..
15
This is not due to a risk/return tradeoff. They assume the expected return on risky projects is lower than
the safe project. Actors are also risk neutral. Volatility is higher when foreign borrowing occurs by
assumption. Foreign borrowing can be welfare enhancing when crisis costs are not too large, crises are not
too frequent and so forth. A shortcoming of this model is a lack of attention to risk aversion which could

12

markets, i.e., with periods of financial crisis, grow faster in expectation. However,
because of the time-invariant probability of crises there exist ‘unlucky’ paths where even
such economies fail to grow faster than countries which take the safe path and do not
borrow abroad.
Figure 5 illustrates three possible paths of output for hypothetical countries
consistent with the model studied in Rancière et al. (2008) and similar to their Figure II.
The risky paths represent two dynamic equilibria with capital inflows and the same ex
ante probabilities of a financial crisis. They are distinguished from each ex post due to a
different number of realizations of crisis events, and the lower ‘unlucky’ path is unable to
attain higher long-run growth for this reason only. In the long run, or with a larger
number of paths represented. the cross-sectional distribution of incomes would be
representative of the long-run distribution of paths under capital inflows. The crosssectional mean growth rate and mean income levels would be higher than in the ‘safe’ no
capital inflows equilibrium.
Figure 6 displays actual time-series paths of the logarithm of GDP per capita
between 1880 and 1913. 16 In Figure 6 we study two groups of countries: “high” capital
importers had an average ratio of capital inflows to GDP above the median of the average
within country capital flow ratio (taken over the period 1885-1913). 17 In our sample this
is a ratio above 0.63 percent of GDP. The countries in the “High” group are Argentina,
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Uruguay and the USA.
The “Low” group consists of Austria, Denmark, France Germany, India, Italy, Japan,
Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. A trend is also plotted in Figure 5 which is calculated as the
average growth rate of the average level of the natural logarithm of GDP per capita
within each group. There is no significant difference in the 34 year trend rates, they are
1.3 and 1.4 percent per year for the low and high groups respectively.
This similarity masks a long period of below trend growth for the “high” receivers
in the 1890s and a period of above trend growth beginning roughly in 1900 and which
coincides with the revival of international capital flows. The period between 1890 and
alter the costs and benefits of foreign capital flows substantial (Rancière et al, 2008 p.375 ftnt.11). Also
crisis probabilities are exogenous to other crucial determinants of financial fragility that we explore below.
16
Data on real GDP per capita are those underlying Obstfeld and Taylor (2003).
17
The period is from 1885-1913 so as to include Argentina which has GDP data from 1885 only. Results
are nearly identical without Argentina.

13

1900 was marked by a major financial crisis for Argentina and several other recipients
(Australia and the US amongst them) and also in London. This led to a major slowdown
in global capital inflows. The first decade of the twentieth century witnessed a resurgence
in capital flows.
Despite the apparent similarity in trend growth, there is evidence of slightly
higher volatility in the “high” importing countries. Figure 7 presents a kernel density plot
of average growth rates for the “high” and “low” group. This evidence suggests that the
“high” capital importers faced somewhat more volatile growth rates without substantially
altering their mean long-run growth rate of per capita GDP.
Figures 8a-8d provide further evidence on the relation between crises and income
levels. Here we present plots similar to those in IMF (2009). Average income levels
across countries are calculated in a window beginning six years before all the way to six
years after banking, currency and debt crises as well as an indicator equal to one if any
type of financial crisis occurred. We include here only the first year of any type of crisis.
The dashed line represents the average growth rate for the countries in a window from six
to three years before the crisis event. We stop the trend calculation three years prior to the
crisis to avoid including abnormally high growth rates in the midst of economic booms.
The trend is indexed relative to its value six years after the crisis and the deviation from
this trend in index points is given by the solid line. The figures suggest medium term
recovery from banking and currency crises but not from debt crises. In the short to
medium-run (between 0 and three years) the income losses from these crises are quite
visible. The data suggest a loss of one percent of income relative to the trend in the first,
second and third years after a crisis for a cumulative loss of roughly three percent of
income relative to trend. When we examine the ‘all crisis’ indicator which includes debt
crises we see no return to pre-crisis trend levels even after six years.
Finally we present Figure 9 which displays a scatter plot of average growth rates
of real GDP per capita between 1880 and 1913 versus the cumulative number of crisis
events between these years. Each crisis event is the first year in any type of financial
crisis so as to avoid counting, say, a currency and debt crisis that follow a banking crisis
as three different events (although the plot is not much different to such a definition).

14

Figure 9 shows that in the long-run there was no significant difference in growth rates
between countries plagued by crises and those that avoided them all together.
The evidence from Figures 6 through 9 is not fully consistent with that from the
recent period. Rancière et al. (2008) report that over ten year periods, between 1961 and
2000, countries in their sample with financial crises tend to grow on average faster.
Although crises bring income down, the growth rates of these economies is strong
enough preceding these events to make for higher average growth rates. They explain this
in terms of a model of risk taking with moral hazard and default as described above. We
find no evidence of this type of relationship in the nineteenth century. Growth rates are
perhaps somewhat stronger coming out of crises relative to pre-crisis trends as Figures
8a-8d highlight, but not sufficiently high for long enough to make for higher trend
growth. We discuss below whether this is because the countries of the late nineteenth
century found an ‘unlucky’ path as illustrated in our Figure 5 and Figure II of Rancière et
al. or whether the assumptions made in Rancière et al. are invalid for the late nineteenth
century.
Still, findings more consistent with ours are available. Sebastian Edwards (2007)
demonstrates that Latin American economic growth in the late twentieth century was
significantly below trend due to sudden stops and current account reversals.

18

Eichengreen and Leblang (2003) study the period 1880-1913 together with the
subsequent 100 years. They conclude that capital controls are associated with higher
growth, crises are associated with lower growth, and that capital controls limit the
probability of a crisis which should lead to lower volatility. Rancière, Tornell and
Westermann (2006) also investigate the impact of capital market liberalization (19802002) on annual growth in GDP per capita and an indirect channel going from
liberalization to crises and back into (lower) growth. They find a direct positive effect of
liberalization on growth in the short-run and a negative indirect effect on growth.
Countries have higher growth rates (on the order of one percentage point faster) after

18

Edwards does not study the direct impact of international capital market integration on growth.

15

liberalization, but the average country that liberalized had its expected annual growth rate
brought down by 0.15 percentage points due to increased exposure to crises. 19
In the next section, we attempt to gauge the impact of capital market integration
on income and the indirect, and possibly negative effects on income, via financial crises.
We also aim to sort out the long-run versus the short-run relationships.

4. Growth and International Capital Market Integration: The Empirical Evidence

4.1 Pitfalls in Measurement

Multivariate econometric estimation of the impact of capital flows and crises is
complicated by the fact that the time horizon over which one measures the outcomes of
interest matters. Of course, estimating growth regressions in a cross-country panel raises
many other econometric issues including endogeneity, heterogeneity and model selection
in addition to data measurement problems. Yet, the pitfalls must be gauged against the
ability to control more explicitly for unobservable heterogeneity, common factors across
countries and other variables important for determining growth, In this spirit, we present
some preliminary econometric evidence below that tries to disentangle the relationship
between income and capital flows in the face of these obstacles to identification and
specification.
Figures 4 and 5 illustrate one way in which the identification of the impact of
capital flows in the data may be difficult. Assume that countries that receive more capital
grow faster and take the country-year as the unit of analysis. In any given non-crisis year,
the country more open to foreign financing will be growing more rapidly. In a crisis year,
however, growth and output may be lower, but (by assumption here) crises are directly
related to capital inflows. In a regression of growth of GDP per capita on capital flows
and other controls, without controlling for crises, would tend to bias downwards the
coefficient on capital inflows.

19

Conditional on having a twin banking and currency crisis, the output loss is on the order of 10 percent of
GDP. The value of 0.15 is the increased likelihood of having a crisis due to liberalization times the output
loss of having a crises. This is roughly the expected loss from liberalization.

16

Also by changing the unit of observation to five, ten or 30 year periods inferences
can change dramatically. 20 Assuming that crises are not too frequent, and are not too
severe in terms of output losses, then over longer spans of time, say ten years, the crisisprone country may still have a higher growth rate. Such growth specifications are at risk
of being incomplete since they would ignore the increased volatility and (again, by
assumption) the lower income per capita relative to its pre-crisis trend. Also, the long-run
measured growth rate can be brought down significantly via crises, and if crises occur
sufficiently often, or are sufficiently severe, the measured growth rate of the large capital
importer can decline to that below the non-receiving country. Finally, if there are
diminishing marginal returns to capital, the identification of the positive growth impact of
capital flows (assumed in this example) could be even harder to disentangle from the
negative side effect of crises.

4.2 Long and Short-Run Associations between GDP per capita, Capital Inflows and
Crises

4.2.1 Model and Data
Table 2 implements an autoregressive distributed lag model (ARDL (p, q)) for the
logarithm of real GDP per capita with country fixed effects in error correction form
otherwise known as a dynamic fixed effects model. The error correction representation
allows us to explicitly study short-run and long-run relationships between capital flows,
crises and output per capita. Our estimating equation is
p −1

q −1

j =1

j =0

Δy it = ψ j Δy it − j +  δ j ΔX it − j + ϕ [ y it −1 − (βX it −1 )] + ε it .

(1)

The dependent variable in equation (1) is the annual change (denoted by Δ) in the
logarithm of real GDP per capita (y). Short run associations between variables on the
right hand side of equation (1) and GDP per capita are captured by using annual changes

20

Schularick and Steger look at growth and income levels over five-year periods for the 1880-1913 and
1980-2002, Rancière, Tornell and Westermann (2008) study 10 year periods between 1961 and 200 and
Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian (2007) look at the entire period 1970-2000.

17

in the explanatory variables (X). Further lags in these changes yield an indication of the
medium run impact of such variables.
Long run relationships between GDP per capita are isolated in the error correction
term in square brackets. Lagged levels of the explanatory variables and the dependent
variable (i.e., the lagged level of the log of GDP per capita) are used here. The error term,
ε, is a composite error term consisting of year dummies, country fixed effects and
country-time idiosyncratic white noise errors. We report the product of long run
coefficients β and the speed of adjustment φ below.
Our dynamic fixed effects model (1) assumes common transition dynamics across
countries. Another approach is to allow for differences in the short-run coefficients across
countries or both differences in the short-run and long-run coefficients. Those methods,
the pooled mean group estimator and the mean group estimator along with the dynamic
fixed effects model are discussed theoretically in Pesaran and Smith (1995). 21 Our
specification is comparable to that of Loayza and Rancière (2005) who investigated the
short and long run impacts of financial development on growth. Another benefit of this
method is that inclusion of sufficient lags of the variables of interest can mitigate
endogeneity problems.
We include the contemporaneous change in capital inflows and up to four lags of
this variable, the cumulative number of crises up to year t and two lags of this variable.
We also include one lag of the log difference of GDP per capita. For other variables we
only include the contemporaneous annual changes to conserve on degrees of freedom.
This particular lag structure allows us to get an indication of the possible horizons over
which capital flows and crises can have an impact on output per capita as discussed
above. Finally, since we have roughly 30 periods for each country, this estimation

21

If there is a unique vector defining the long-run relationship between the variables and the lag orders are
appropriately chosen and sufficiently long, then the error correction version of the auto-regressive
distributed lag model provides consistent estimates of the parameters, regardless of whether the variables
are stationary only after first differencing. The ‘Nickell bias’ arises when the lagged dependent variable and
the error term are correlated due to the inclusion of country fixed effects. The bias diminishes as the length
of the panel increases. In our case, since we have over thirty years of observations, the bias is likely to be
minimal. The pooled mean group estimator and the mean group estimator allow for heterogeneous
dynamics or different coefficients for each country on the short run changes. If heterogeneity exists then the
dynamic fixed effect model is inconsistent.

18

approach may be preferable to the system GMM models used by Schularick and Steger
(forthcoming) which are suited for “large N small T” panels. 22
We have chosen a lag structure based on minimization of the Akaike Information
Criterion and the Bayesian Information Criterion. We allowed for up to four lags of the
difference in capital inflows, up to three lags of the difference in cumulative crises.
However, we limit the lag values on all other control variables at 0 so as not to ask too
much of the relatively small data set. Both information criteria suggest a lag length of 0
for the ratio of capital inflows to GDP and inclusion of the first and lagged difference of
the cumulative crisis variable.
Our sample covers the years 1880 to 1913 and includes a maximum of 20
countries: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France,
Germany, India, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United
States, Uruguay. For a set of twelve countries we have savings data.

23

This is a key

control in standard empirical growth models, but it is unavailable for many countries. For
comparison we also look at results omitting the savings variable from the same twelve
plus eight other countries without such data between 1880 and 1913. 24
Our data make a slightly unbalanced panel of countries using annual observations.
The list of auxiliary explanatory variables includes the key robust determinants of growth
according to Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer and Miller (2004). These also coincide with key
variables used by Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) and later papers in the empirics of
economic growth and capital flows. We include: the population growth rate, the
percentage of the population enrolled in primary school, and the level of exports divided
by GDP.
To capture the direct impact of global capital market integration we use the ratio
of Stone’s capital calls to GDP. Finally we control for the impact of crises by creating a
22

See Roodman (2007) on this latter point.
Where we do include savings, we do not adjust the savings variable downward for countries with capital
outflows. Also the current account data is not directly comparable with the Stone data which would make a
proper adjustment difficult. These savings data are from Taylor (2002) who calculated the ratio of savings
to GDP as the current account surplus divided by GDP plus the ratio of investment to GDP. We also
experimented with the investment ratio but found it to be insignificant..
24
The set of twelve countries includes: Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden, United States. The full sample of 20 countries includes: Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United States, Uruguay.
23

19

variable measuring the cumulative number of crises a country has had. The crisis could
be a currency, banking, twin (i.e., banking and currency) or debt crisis. A banking crisis
in one year followed by a currency crisis in the next year would be counted as separate
crisis events as would an ongoing banking, debt or currency crisis. For debt crises, we
only code the first year of a debt crisis to avoid including the often long periods without
negotiated settlement but in which the economy may have recovered.
We report tests for stationarity and cointegration in Table 1. Using the test for unit
roots in panel data developed by Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003) we cannot reject that all
variables in levels are non-stationarity except the growth rate of population. After first
differencing (i.e., year-to-year differences) we reject the hypothesis that all variables are
non-stationary except the school enrolment rate. In the lower panel of Table 1 we use the
Im, Pesaran and Shin test on the residuals from country level regressions of the log of
GDP per capita on the right hand side control variables to test for cointegration between
income and these variables. We present tests that account for common time trends, a
country-level intercept and with and without country level trends. These test statistics are
given for the two main samples we work with. In all cases we find evidence of
cointegration by rejecting the null hypothesis of stationarity of these residuals. 25

4.2.2 Baseline Results
Table 2 shows our results for three baseline models. 26 Column 1 presents results
for the sample of twelve countries with savings data, column 2 presents results for the
same countries without savings and column 3 reports results for the larger sample. First,
rises in capital inflows generally have no statistically significant relationship in the shortrun with income per capita. Coefficients on changes in capital flows are significant in
only the specification for 12 countries and when controlling for savings.. In both samples,
there is a positive and significant relationship in the long run between income and capital
25

Johansen trace statistics using one lag of all included variables and an intercept term for a trend in levels
reject the null hypothesis of no cointegrating relationship between the variables in levels for all countries.
Similarly, tests developed by Westerlund rejected no cointegration in a test suitable for panels.
26
We correct standard errors for heteroscedasticity by using robust standard errors. We also cluster these at
the country level to control for bias in the standard errors arising from arbitrary forms of serial correlation
in the error term.

20

inflows. This suggests capital flows during the nineteenth century had long gestation lags
as discussed above, and it is consistent with the fact that the large infrastructure projects
and railways that it often funded took many years to develop. The marginal long-run
impact of capital inflows in column 1A is 2.02 (-1 *(0.376/-0.186)). A one standard
deviation rise in the capital inflows to GDP ratio would be associated with a roughly
seven percent rise in GDP in the ‘long run’. The speed of adjustment parameter suggests
that half of such a gain would be realized in three and a half years. In other words, a rise
in inflows of this magnitude could have raised income per capita significantly. Moreover,
it would have raised growth rates roughly one half of a percentage point above the
average growth rate for 5 to 7 years. The long run impact in the larger sample is about
half of the size in column 3 compared to that in column 1.
For both samples, crises bring income down in the year following a crisis. The
coefficients are again larger in the smaller sample, but they imply income falls by
between 1.5 percent to three percent in the short-run. This is equivalent to two years of
growth for the average country. The long run coefficients reported on the right hand
panel of Table 2 show that countries’ income levels do not suffer in the long run by
being crisis prone. Income per capita, conditional on observables and other covariates is
not any lower for countries with a higher number of crises. This suggests that nations
made up for crisis losses in income in the medium term as is also consistent with Figure
6.
The point estimates on the other coefficients support general results from crosscountry growth regressions although individually, many of the variables here are not
statistically significant. There is some evidence consistent with conditional convergence
based on the fact that lagged levels of GDP per capita are negatively associated with the
annual growth rate. Overall, this specification suggests that crises bring incomes down in
the short term but not in the longer-term, while capital flows are not associated with
higher incomes in the short-run but are positively related to income in the long-run. 27

27

Results from the pooled mean group estimator suggest a positive relationship between income and capital
inflows in the long run, but a negative relationship in the short run. Crises are associated with lower
incomes in the short run, but the coefficients are insignificant. There may be quite a lot of heterogeneity in
the data giving rise to the variance between these results and those in Table 2. We discuss this further
below when we estimate crisis probabilities.

21

4.2.3 Alternative Specifications: The Uses of Foreign Capital

Table 3 investigates whether the uses to which British capital were put led to
differential associations with income. Infrastructure spending based on “development
borrowing” was heralded by Fishlow as the key to benefiting from participation in global
capital markets. Schularick and Steger (2008) show that investment rates are positively
associated with Stone’s capital inflows. A result which we also can confirm in an
unreported regression.
We break Stone’s capital call data down into three subcomponents: Capital
directed to railways, capital directed to utilities and private entities (financial firms, raw
materials firms and other industrial and miscellaneous private uses) and that directed to
the government for other purposes. Stone’s data give no further information on the use of
government flows, but in some prominent cases, some of these funds might have gone to
government sponsored infrastructure investment so some caution should be exercised in
interpreting these results. Also there appears to be strong correlation between these flows
when they are scaled by GDP. By including all three components collinearity may be
clouding the results in Table 3.
In any case, Table 3 shows that there is no strong evidence of a short-run impact
on income levels of inflows in any of these individual categories. The coefficient on the
first difference of private inflows is positive and significant in the shorter sample. In both
models of Table 3, financial crises are still associated with short-run downturns in income
but have no long-run negative impact on income. The long-run coefficients on capital
inflows show that larger inflows of railway capital were associated with lower income in
the long run with the coefficient being significant in the shorter sample. However,
countries that received higher private and government inflows had higher incomes in the
long run. The negative sign on the level of railways investment is indicative of possible
problems in collinearity among the regressors. Indeed the sign on the coefficient on
railways is positive when we leave out other forms of investment flows.

4.2.4 Endogeneity of Capital Flows

22

An extensive literature on the output effects of financial crises exists arguing that
it is difficult to sort out whether output shocks drive crises or crises drive output down. 28
Use of longer lags of GDP in unreported specifications of the regressions above reassures
us that endogeneity may not be a problem. This is all the more so given our extensive set
of control variables. If so, our results present a relatively unbiased estimate of the impact
of foreign capital flows on incomes. Moreover they support GMM results from
Schularick and Steger (forthcoming) which control for endogeneity. We turn now to a
closer analysis of the links between capital flows and crises. Still, we attempt an
instrumental variables specification of our baseline model as a robustness check.
The size of capital flows to any given country from Britain had many
determinants. If these flows were associated with unobservable characteristics of income
and growth, then there is a potential for inconsistent estimates of the parameters on the
inflows. An earlier literature that studied capital inflows for particular countries discussed
push (British) and pull (receiving country) factors that determined the size of capital
flows in any given year. Edelstein (1982) argued that British investors chose to invest in
countries where prospects for growth (and high, risk adjusted payoffs) were large.. Key
‘exogenous’ push factors were British saving or wealth accumulation and the rate of
return on domestic assets. Other studies of particular countries (Canada, the US and
Argentina) suggest that British gross investment was a key exogenous driver of the
amount of flows to particular markets.
These studies point to the possibility of using British variables as excluded
instrumental variables to deal with the endogeneity of capital flows. Indeed we tried such
a method in Table 4 using lagged British investment, its change, and the Bank of England
discount rate as instruments. In the first stage, we found that the lagged level inflows
were negatively correlated with British investment. These instruments were not
particularly strong however, especially in prediction of changes in inflows. We found that
the long-run coefficient on capital flows in column 1A of Table 4 is smaller but not
statistically significant than its statistically significant OLS estimate. A Hausmann test for

28

Jalil (2010) argues that endogeneity is an issue for bank crises in American economic history. Still when
bank crises can be traced to exogenous non-economic events they tend to depress output. See also Bordo et
al. (2001) for a long run analysis.

23

exogeneity suggests we cannot reject the exogeneity of capital inflows implying
endogeneity is not a key concern.

4.2.5 Types of Crisis
In the recent literature (e.g, IMF 2009) banking crises have been cited as the most
costly type of financial crisis in terms of output losses. Currency crises may be associated
with sharp drop events but their costs may depend heavily on how much foreign debt is
denominated in foreign currency, and how much of these liabilities exist (Bordo,
Meissner and Stuckler, forthcoming). The impact could in other words be highly
heterogeneous. Debt crises may be costly if countries rely on foreign capital inflows to
keep investment high although releasing a country of the burden of debt may actually
raise output in certain cases.
Table 5 breaks the crisis indicator out into these three different types of crisis to
see if there are differential impacts on output. Consistent with Figures 8a-8d, it appears
that banking crises and debt crises are driving the negative relationships in Table 2.
Currency crises are not significantly related to income either in the short or the long run.
Banking crises seem to have negative relationships with income in the short run but not
the long-run. In the larger sample of column (2) in Table 5, the coefficient on the second
lag of banking crises is only significant at the 83 percent level. In our smaller sample,
the debt crises in Argentina and Spain decrease income by a statistically significant nine
percent in the short run. It also appears that this type of shock is not overcome over the
long run since the cumulative debt crisis indicator in levels is significant and negative. In
the larger sample, which includes the two previous defaults and those of Portugal, Brazil
and Uruguay, the long run relationship is negative and statistically significant effectively
lowering income by 3.5 percent permanently. 29

4.3 Crises and Capital Flows

29

We checked for endogeneity between crises and shocks to income by using ‘treatment’ regressions which
allow for correlation between the unobservable factors driving crises and income shocks. We could not
reject the hypothesis of no correlation between the error terms in the separate equations.

24

As discussed above, exposure to foreign capital inflows is likely to heighten the
probability of financial crises. This implies that capital inflows could indirectly raise
income volatility and in the case of debt crises lower income permanently via a financial
crisis channel. There are many possible connections between crises and capital flows.
High inflows are often eventually associated with sudden stops of capital and sharp
depreciations of the exchange rate. Such dislocations can cause problems if debt is
denominated in foreign currency as it was for many countries and may in fact be a
function of such fundamentals. 30 Increased financial globalization can also be associated
with a deterioration in monitoring and greater likelihood of crisis and contagion (cf.
Calvo and Mendoza, 2000). The empirical links between capital flows and crises have
been examined in depth elsewhere in our research and that of others. 31 We briefly
illustrate the relationship between capital flows and an indicator for all crises and
separately the three forms of financial crisis (banking, currency and debt) in Table 6. We
also test for whether some kinds of capital flows have a stronger relationship with crises
than others. The probit models for crises use a parsimonious set of explanatory variables
including capital inflows. These include the ratio of foreign currency debt to total (public)
debt, whether a country was on the gold standard or not, the Bank of England discount
rate and the lagged value of banking and currency crises. In column 6 of Table 6 we
present an ‘instrumental’ variables probit model to allow for the possibility that
unobservable or omitted factors which were driving the probability of crisis could also
influence the level of capital inflows.
The results in Table 6 suggest that higher capital inflows were strongly related to
a higher probability of having any kind of crisis. In column 5 we find that the marginal
effects on railway inflows are statistically significant and positive but private or
government inflows are not statistically significant. This is another possible explanation
for the negative relationship between railway inflows and income found in Table 4. The
result is consistent with several hypotheses such as maturity mismatch problems or moral
hazard arising from interest guarantees which fell disproportionately onto such
30

Evidence and arguments can be found in Catão (2007), Bordo, Cavallo, and Meissner (forthcoming), and
Bordo and Meissner (2007). Ford (1962) examined the contractionary nature of depreciations associated
with capital flow reversals in Argentina in the nineteenth century.
31
Radelet and Sachs (1998) implicate capital flows with the East Asian financial crisis of 1997-98.

25

investment. Revenues arising from railways were not immediate since neither
construction nor development and settlement around the rail-lines were immediate, but
interest payments had to be covered in the short term. Any relatively short-term financing
for such projects could have been withdrawn or not renewed due to external shocks in the
capital market. To the extent that short-term funding was present in other sectors, this
might have been less of a problem. Governments could raise some tax revenue relatively
quickly and firms could use cash reserves or increase export earnings to avoid default.
In terms of endogeneity, in column 6 the instrumental variables probit suggests an
even stronger positive relationship between inflows and crises. 32 Here a one standard
deviation rise in inflows would raise the probability of a crisis by 0.52. This is a very
large impact considering the sample unconditional probability of having a crisis would
have been 0.1.
Overall, our finding is that capital inflows were an important determinant of
financial crises. This implies that foreign capital was associated with higher volatility of
income per capita via crises. Results from above showed that crises brought income
below trend temporarily and debt crises, but not currency and banking crises, had a longrun negative impact on income per capita. This view is consistent with the idea that crises
were short-run shocks to income and that in the medium term countries grew more
quickly than trend to re-gain their losses.

5. Discussion of the Direct and Indirect Impact of Capital Inflows

Our comparative exercise suggests a positive association between income and
foreign capital. This relationship worked over the medium term because of the nature of
nineteenth century investment. To achieve the higher incomes made possible by capital
inflows, growth accelerated typically by one half of a percentage point over five to seven
years after a shock to capital inflows. In unreported error correction models for the
growth rate, we found no relationship between the long-run growth rate and higher
capital flows.
32

The second lag of British investment and the second lag of the Bank of England discount rate are used as
instruments for inflows.

26

The model in Rancière et. al that capital flows raised growth through a leverage
effect while exposing countries to more frequent crises finds some superficial support in
the data. However, unlike Rancière et al., we are unable to replicate the finding that
countries experiencing crises experienced significantly higher average growth rates in
any decade prior to 1913.
One possibility is that borrowers took on less leverage which is the channel by
which growth rises in Rancière et. al. Imperfect enforceability and systemic bailouts drive
this result. In the nineteenth century, foreign loans often hypothecated revenues of
railways or the customs houses leading to more severe consequences of default. Imperial
relations and other interventions also could have helped enforce contracts (Mitchener and
Weidenmier, forthcoming). On the other hand, investors may have viewed these actions
as insurance which would have inefficiently increased supply. The record on bailouts is
also mixed. Large banks were frequently supported by governments in the nineteenth
century. In the midst of banking crises, governments gave implicit support to large banks
(e.g., on New South Wales, Australia in 1893 see Hickson and Turner, 2002 and in Italy
see Luzzato 1968). And yet only one bank survived the crisis of 1890 in Argentina (cf.
Eichengreen ***) and the banking system of Brazil crumbled in the Encilhamento
(Triner and Wandschenider, 2005). Still, in Argentina in the 1880s, Eichengreen
highlights how investments into railways were guaranteed by the Argentine government.
In the US, where no institutional lender of last resort existed, banking crises occurred
both due to panic and contagion among depositors but also for fundamental reasons (cf.
Ó’Gráda and White, 2003, Moen and Tallman, 1992 and Jalil, 2010). The historical
record is surely not as cut and dried as the assumptions in the theoretical model of
Ranciere et al. Finally, another obvious possibility is that countries in the nineteenth
century simply followed an ‘unlucky’ path like that in Figure 5. Even if all of the
assumptions in Rancière et. al. held, the examination of the realization of the dynamic
equilibrium is not sufficient to accept or reject such a theoretical model.
Beyond the assumptions of Rancière et. al., other recent historical work (Bordo,
Cavallo, Meissner, forthcoming) looks into the domestic risk factors that strengthen the
relationship between capital inflows, sudden stops and crises. Sudden stops accompanied
by currency crashes and debt crises were more likely in the nineteenth century in

27

countries with large foreign currency liabilities, low reserve positions and a low openness
to trade. 33 That research and the results presented here demonstrate clearly that capital
inflows very likely had a partially negative impact on income via financial crises.
Nevertheless this negative impact does not seem to have been permanent. On
average, countries that suffered the most from crises eventually regained their long-run
trend. Some countries did better than this and others did worse. The basic fact is Canada
for instance had 3 minor currency crises but was nearly always above the 90th percentile
in terms of capital inflows relative to GDP. Canada enjoyed strong economic growth on
the back of railway investment and other infrastructure development. On the other hand,
Argentina, with a severe debt crisis in 1890 and two other currency crises in 1885 and
1907 suffered from the long lasting impact of the 1890 debt crisis. Argentina’s debt crisis
led to a prolonged period of low growth and low capital inflows during the 1890s.
Canada’s capital flows fell somewhat too in the late 1890s but not nearly as much as in
Argentina relative to their pre-crisis averages. The reasons for the differences between
these two outcomes is hard to generalize. However we do know that Canada had the
ability to maintain the gold standard peg, a stable banking system, the political ability to
avoid excessive debt and to avoid debt default and the support and trust of capital
markets.
Countries also increased the volatility of their incomes (not necessarily
consumption) when they engaged with global financial markets. Whether consumption
suffered a dramatic turn would depend on the extent to which risk sharing occurred. Net
positions were likely somewhat more favourable than gross positions suggest so that
agents could draw on foreign assets in times of need, The general population had other
forms of covering wage and consumption risks including immigrant remittances to the
old world and migration to more favourable environments due to the low restrictions on
labor mobility. Still, the evidence on aggregate consumption smoothing and risk sharing
remains a black hole. Two recent studies, Chabot and Kurz (forthcoming) and Jacks and
Meissner (2007) are possibly the only studies on the issue. Chabot and Kurz show that
British investors were well diversified in their investments suggesting that financial
33

Although we found in Table 6 that hard currency debt was not associated with crises
(consistent with Bordo and Meissner, 2006) Bordo, Meissner and Stuckler show that
such debt does raise crisis probabilities when accompanied by a currency crash.
28

volatility was minimized. Jacks and Meissner show that for Britain and the US risk
sharing was surprisingly high, and that most consumption risks that could be covered
with trade in financial assets were covered.

6. The Net Benefits of Laissez Faire Financial Globalization: Some Tentative
Conclusions

We began by highlighting the basic features of the first era of globalization in
capital markets. Cross border capital flows were often large. Asset trade was
unencumbered by capital controls. British and European capital scoured the planet in
search of high returns going to where natural resources were abundant and capital and
labor were scarce. Capital combined with these factors of production to make for higher
incomes.
Nations relying on capital inflows faced enhanced risk when making international
capital market connections. Incomes fell substantially around the time of financial crises.
Many countries paid the price of losing several years or more worth of economic growth
in the face of multi-year crises. They appear to have rebounded in the long run; slightly
higher volatility of output or total income resulted. Whether these contours imply welfare
losses is a topic of further research.
Particular fundamentals exacerbated the likelihood capital flows and sudden stops
would turn into financial crises with large income drops. In other work, we have outlined
the role that foreign currency debt, currency mismatches, financial development and
other factors played in interacting with sudden stops of capital flows from the core
countries (Cavallo, Bordo and Meissner, forthcoming).
Contrary to these results, some exceptional countries accumulated their domestic
capital stock through the judicious application of foreign capital to productive investment
and also avoided crises. They had already become relatively financially developed and
had earned credibility in the eyes of international capital markets. Canada is one example
but Australia and the Scandinavian countries are also in this group of countries.
Finally, foreign financing may also have conferred other benefits such as
enhanced risk-sharing and consumption smoothing opportunities or improved policy.

29

These dimensions of the benefits of integration are beyond the scope of our study but
should be investigated since evidence from the last 30 years suggests the real benefits to
integration are to be found here (IMF, 2007). Also, further investigation into how
countries transition from being crisis prone to having credibility, along the lines of
Hoffman, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal (2007), will also be fruitful for understanding the
long run evolution of the benefits and costs of participating in a financial system with
global reach.

30

References

Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2000) “Optimal Currency Crises” Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 53 (2000). Pp. 177-230.
Bekaert, Geert Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad (2005) “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?,” Journal of Financial Economics vol 77 (1) pp. 3-55.
Beim, David O. & Calomiris, C.W. (2001) Emerging Financial Markets New York:
MacGraw-Hill.
Bordo, Michael D. (2006) “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Original Sin in Emerging
Countries: Déjà vu?” NBER working paper 12393
Bordo, Michael D. Alberto Cavallo and Christopher M. Meissner (forthcoming) “Sudden Stops:
Determinants and Output Effects in the First Era of Globalization, 1880-1913” Journal of
Development Economics
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel. Maria-Soledad MartinezPeria, (2001). “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 32, pp.
51--75.
Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner (2007) “Financial Crises, 1880-1913: The Role of
Foreign Currency Debt” in Sebastian Edwards, Gerardo Esquivel, and Graciela Márquez eds. The
Decline of Latin American Economies: Growth, Institutions, and Crises pp. 139-194. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner (2006) “The Role of Foreign Currency Debt in
Financial Crises: 1880-1913 vs. 1972-1997” Journal of Banking and Finance 60 pp. 3299-3329.
Bordo, Michael D., Christopher M. Meissner and David Stuckler (forthcoming) “Foreign
Currency Debt, Financial Crises and Economic Growth: A Long Run View” Journal of
International Money and Finance.
Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza (2000) “Rational contagion and the globalization
of securities markets,” Journal of International Economics 51 (1) pp. 79-113
Catão, Luis A.V. (2007) “Sudden Stops and Currency Drops: A Historical Look” in Sebastian
Edwards, Gerardo Esquivel, and Graciela Márquez eds. The Decline of Latin American Economies:
Growth, Institutions, and Crises pp. 243-289. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Chabot, Benjamin and Christopher J. Kurz (forthcoming) “That’s Where the Money Was:
Foreign Bias and English Investment Abroad, 1866-1907” Economic Journal.

31

Clemens, Michael A. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2004), "Wealth Bias in the First Global
Capital Market Boom, 1870-1913," Economic Journal, 114 (April): 304-337
Collins, William J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. (2001) "Capital-Goods Prices And
Investment, 1879-1950," Journal of Economic History, v61(1,Mar), 59-94
Cottrell, P. L. (1975) British overseas investment in the nineteenth century. London:
Macmillan.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert A. Huttenback Mammon and the pursuit of Empire: The
political economy of British imperialism, 1860-1912.
Edelstein, Michael. (1982). Overseas Investment in the Age of High Imperialism. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Edwards, Sebastian (2007) “Crises and Growth: A Latin American Perspective” NBER
working paper 13019.
Eichengreen, Barry (1995) “Financing Infrastructure in Developing Countries: Lessons
From the Railway Age” The World Bank Research Observer vol. 10 (10), pp. 75- 91
Eichengreen, Barry (***) “The Baring Crisis in a Mexican Mirror” ***/
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2003) “Currency Mismatches,
Debt Intolerance, and Original Sin: Why they are not the Same and Why it Matters.”
NBER working paper 10036.
Eichengreen, Barry and David Leblang (2003) "Capital Account Liberalization And
Growth: Was Mr. Mahathir Right?," International Journal of Finance and Economics, v8
(3, Jul), pp. 205-224.
Ferguson, N. and M. Schularick (2006). "The Empire Effect: The Determinants of
Country Risk in the First Age of Globalization." Journal of Economic History vol. 66 (2)
pp. 283-312.
Fishlow, Albert (1965). American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-bellum
Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fishlow, Albert (1986) “Lessons from the Past, Capital Markets and International
Lending in the 19th Century and the Interwar Years,” in Miles Kahler (ed.), The Politics
of International Debt, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Flandreau, Marc and Zúmer (2004) The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, OECD:
Paris.

32

Foreman-Peck, James (1994) A History of the World Economy: International Economic
Relations since 1850 London: Harvester, Barnes and Noble.
Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Olivier Jeanne (2006) “The Elusive Gains from
International Financial Integration” vol. 72 (3) Review of Economic Studies, pp. 715-741.
Hickson, Charles R. and Turner, John D (2002) “Free banking gone awry: the Australian
banking crisis of 1893” Financial History Review vol. 9 pp. 147-167.
Henry, Peter Blair. (2007) “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and
Speculation”, Journal of Economic Literature 45(4), pp. 887-935.
Hoffman, Philip T., Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal (2007) Surviving
Large Losses: Financial Crises, the Middle Class, and the Development of Capital
Markets. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Im, Kyung So, M. Hashem Pesaran, Yongcheol Shin, (2003) “Testing for Unit Roots in
Heterogeneous Panels.” Journal of Econometrics, 115, 53-74.
International Monetary Fund (2007) “Reaping the Benefits of Financial Globalization”
report prepared by the Research Department at the International Monetary Fund.
International Monetary Fund (2009) World Economic Outlook. October, 2009
Washington DC. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2009/02/index.htm
Issawi, Charles. (1982) An Economic History of the Middle East and North Africa.
Methuen and Co. Ltd: London.
Jalil, Andrew (2010) “A New History Of Banking Panics in The United States, 18251929: Construction And Implications” mimeo UC Berkeley Dept. of Economics.
Jones, Matthew T. and Maurice Obstfeld Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment
of Historical Current Account Data available at http://www.nber.org/databases/jonesobstfeld/
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff and Shang-Jin Wei (2006) “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal” IMF working paper WP/06/189.
Loayza, Norman and Romain Ranciere (2005) “Financial Development, Financial
Fragility and Growth” IMF working paper 05/170.
Luzzatto, G., 1968. L’economia italiana dal 1861 al 1894, Torino, Einaudi, 1991.
Mankiw, Greg, David Romer and David N. Weil (1992) “A Contribution to the Empirics
of Economic Growth” Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 107 (2) pp. 407- 437.

33

Marion, Nancy P. (2000) “Optimal Currency Crises: A Comment” Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 53 (2000). pp. 231-238.
Mitchener, Kris and Marc Weidenmier (forthcoming) “Supersanctions and Sovereign
Debt Repayment." Journal of International Money and Finance.
Moen, Joel and Tallman, Ellis W. (1992) “The Bank Panic of 1907: The Role of Trust
Companies” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 611-630.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2003. “Sovereign Risk, Credibility and the Gold
Standard: 1870-1913 versus 1925-31” The Economic Journal vol. 113 (487), pp. 241275.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration,
Crisis, and Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ó Gráda, Cormac and White, Eugene N. “The Panics of 1854 and 1857: A View from
the Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank” The Journal of Economic History, Volume 63,
Issue 01, March 2003, pp 213-240
Pesaran, M. Hashem and Ron P. Smith. “Estimating Long-Run Relationships from
Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels.” Journal of Econometrics 68 (no. 1, 1995): 79–113.
Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan and Arvind Subramanian (2007) “Foreign Capital and
Economic Growth” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity vol. 1 pp. 153.
Radelet, Steven and Jeffrey Sachs, (1998) “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis,
Remedies, Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-74.
Rancière, Romain, Aaron Tornell and Frank Westermann (2006) “Decomposing the
effects of financial liberalization: Crises vs. Growth” Journal of Banking and Finance vol
30 (12) pp. 3331-3348.
Rancière, Romain, Aaron Tornell and Frank Westermann (2008) “Systemic Crises and
Growth” Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 123(1) pp. 359-406.
Reinhart, C, Rogoff, K. Savastano, M., 2003. “Debt Intolerance”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1, pp. 1--74.
Roodman, David, (2007) “How to Do xtabond2: An Introduction to ‘Difference’ and
‘System’ GMM in Stata” working paper 103 Center for Global Development.
Sala-i-Martin, X., Gernot Doppelhofer and R.I. Miller (2004). “Determinants of LongTerm Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach”
American Economic Review, 94 (4), pp. 813-835.

34

Schularick, Moritz and Thomas M. Steger (2006) “Does Financial Integration Spur
Economic Growth? New Evidence from the First Era of Financial Globalization” mimeo
Free University of Berlin.
Stone, Irving (1999) The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914. New
York: St-Martin’s Press.
Summerhill, William (forthcoming) Inglorious Revolution: Political Institutions,
Sovereign Debt, and Financial Underdevelopment in Imperial Brazil. Yale University
Press.
Svedberg, P. (1978) “The portfolio direct composition of private foreign investment in
1914 revisited.” Economics Journal, 88, pp.763-777.
Taylor, Alan M. (2002) “A Century of Current Account Dynamics” Journal of
International Money and Finance vol 21 (6) pp. 725-748.
Triner, Gail and Wandschenider, Kirsten (2005) “The Baring crisis and the Brazilian
Encilhamento, 1889–1891: an early example of contagion among emerging capital
markets” Financial History Review vol 12(2) pp. 199-225.
Williamson, J (1964) American Growth and The Balance of Payments University of
North Carolina Press: Chapel Hill.

35

Data Appendix

Most of the data underlying this paper was used in previous work (Bordo and Meissner
2007 and Bordo and Meissner 2006) and is explained thoroughly in those sources. The
bulk of the macro historical data set is that used in Bordo et. al. (2001). Controls in the
growth regressions and incomes comes from data underlying Clemens and Williamson
(2004) and Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) More expansive data descriptions and sources are
listed in the working paper versions of our work on crises in NBER working papers
11173 and 11897.

Crisis Dating:
As in Bordo et. al ( 2001) we date currency and banking crises using both qualitative and
quantitative evidence. For all countries besides Austria-Hungary, Russia, New Zealand,
South Africa, Mexico, Turkey, Egypt, Uruguay and India we have relied on the dates of
Bordo et. al. in both periods. For these countries personal correspondence with Sevket
Pamuk (Turkey) Luis Bertola (Uruguay), and other published country sources were used
to date remaining crises.
We have dated currency crises for remaining countries, when possible, by using
an approach based on the exchange market pressure (EMP) methodology which looks at
changes in reserves, the exchange rate and the interest rate using data available from
Global Financial Data and data underlying Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) published on
eh.net (http://eh.net/databases/finance/)
Debt crisis dates are based on Beim and Calomiris (2001). Only private lending to
sovereign nations is considered when building those default dates. Not every instance of
technical default is included in the chronology, the authors identified periods (six months
or more) where all or part of interest/principal payments were suspended, reduced or
rescheduled. Some of those episodes are outright debt repudiations, while others were
reschedulings agreed upon mutually by lenders and borrowers. Additional data is taken
from a spreadsheet underlying Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003).

36

Ratio of Foreign Currency Debt to Total Debt
We collected data from various national sources on hard currency debt (cf.
Bordo and Meissner, 2007) and augmented and compared this with data made
available by Flandreau and Zúmer (2004). What we refer to as hard currency debt
is public debt that carried a gold clause or was made payable at a fixed rate in a
foreign currency. 34

34

The data appendices and the text in our previous work on crises has more to say about the structure of
this debt.

37

Figure 1 Average Levels of the Ratio of Capital Inflows to GDP for Different Types of

0

Unweighted Avg. Capital Inflows to GDP
.02
.04
.06
.08

.1

Capital Importers, 1880-1913

1880

1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

1910 1913

Year
Mean Capital Inflows/GDP--Core Ex. Offshoots

Mean Capital Inflows/GDP--Offshoots

Mean Capital Inflows/GDP--Periphery

Notes: See text for countries in each category. Capital flows data are from Stone (1999) and GDP come
from Clemens and Williamson (2004).

38

U
Ar SA
ge
nt
i
U na
ru
gu
a
Tu y
rk
C ey
an
ad
a
Sp
ai
n
Pe
M ru
ex
ic
o
Br
az
il
In
S w di a
ed
e
R n
us
si
a
C
hi
le
Ita
ly
Eg
yp
Ja t
N
ew pa
Ze n
al
a
G nd
re
e
Po ce
rtu
g
F r al
an
Au ce
st
ra
l
Au ia
s
D tria
en
m
G ark
er
m
a
N ny
or
wa
y

Percentage of total capital calls

Figure 2 The Average Share of British Capital for Three Categories of Investment, 1880-1913

100

90

80

Railways
Private Non-Railways
Government

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Country

39

8

10

Figure 3 Bond Spreads versus a Measure of Productive Investment, 1874

Bond Spread
4
6

turkey

peru

italy
japan
aus

egypt
hungary
portugal

arg

usa

brazil

rus

canada

nz
S. austla
sweden

safrica

0

2

chile

0

20
40
60
80
100
Listed Bond Issues for Productive Uses/Total Value of Bonds Listed

40

Percent Probability per year

Figure 4 Crisis Incidence, 1880-1913

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Banking Currency Twin
Crises Crises Crises

Debt
Crises

"Third
Gen."
Crises

Any
Crisis

Sudden Sudden
Stops
Stops
with a
Crisis

Type of Crisis

Notes: Crisis probability is the number of country years which witnessed the first year of a crisis divided by the number of country
years without a crisis. Twin crises involve a banking and a currency crisis in the same year. Debt crises involve a sovereign default.
Sudden stops are large swings in the current account or trade balance from deficit towards surplus. “Third generation” crises witnessed
a banking, debt and currency crisis.

41

Figure 5 Hypothetical Evolution of GDP per capita for Three Kinds of Countries.

4.95

4.9

Avg. growth rate = 1.0%
Std. dev. = 0

Avg. growth rate = 1.2%
Std. dev =0.95

ln(GDP per Capita)

4.85

4.8

Avg. growth rate = 1.0%,
Std dev. = 1.1

4.75

4.7

Safe Path Annual Growth Rate =
1.0%
Unlucky Path 6 Crises Annual
Non-Crisis Growth = 1.5%
Risky Path 4 Crises Annual nonCrisis Growth Rate = 1.5%

4.65

4.6

4.55

4.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28

years

Notes: See text for assumptions underlying creation of these time series plots.

42

Figure 6 Real GDP per capita and Capital Inflows to GDP, 1880-1913.
8

Annual average of
ln (GDP per capita) within groups

7.9
7.8
7.7
7.6
7.5
7.4

"Low" capital importers
"High" capital importers

7.3

Low importers avg. growth rate
High importers avg. growth rate

19
13

19
11

19
09

19
07

19
05

19
03

19
01

18
99

18
97

18
95

18
93

18
91

18
89

18
87

18
85

7.2

year

Notes: The countries in the “High” group are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, and Uruguay. The
“Low” group consists of Austria, Denmark, France Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden and the USA. Average capital inflows for
the “high” group are above 0.63 percent of GDP the median of the average ratio of inflows to GDP across countries.

43

.2

Figure 7 Kernel Density Plot of Growth of GDP per Capita for “High” and “Low” Capital Importers, 1885-1913

Density
.1

.15

"Low" Capital
Importers

0

.05

"High" Capital
Importers

-20

-10

0
10
Growth in Real per Capita GDP

44

20

Figure 8c Output per Capita, trend Output per capita and Debt
Crises

Figure 8a Output per Capita, trend Output per capita and
Banking Crises
Actual Output

Pre-crisis trend
Actual Output

Pre-crisis trend
105

104
102

100

100
95

98
90

96
94

85

92
80

90
75

88
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

-6

5

-5

-4

-3

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Years before/after crisis

Figure 8b Output per Capita, trend Output per capita and
Currency Crises
Actual Output

-2

Figure 8d Output per Capita, trend Output per capita and any
type of crisis

Pre-crisis trend

Actual Output

Pre-crisis trend

105

105
103

100

101
99

95

97
95
93

90

91
89

85

87
85

80
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Years before/after crisis

2

3

4

-6

5

45

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Years before/after crisis

2

3

4

5

Figure 9 Average Growth of GDP per Capita, 1885-1913 and the Cumulative number of Crisis Events, 1885-1913

Average growth rate of GDP per capita, 1880-1913

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0

1

2

3

4

Cumulative number of crises, 1880-1913

46

5

6

Table 1 Tests for Stationarity and Cointegration
Pre-Tests for Stationarity of Regressors
Variables
ln {GDP per capita}

Levels
W[t-bar] p-value
0.173 0.569

First Differences
W[t-bar] p-value
-12.478 0.000***

Gross Capital Inflows/GDP

-1.400

0.081

-12.285

0.000***

Cumulative Number of Crises
1880-1913

-0.518

0.302

-7.467

0.000***

Savings/GDP

-1.269

0.102

-11.024

0.000***

Percentage of the Population
Enrolled in School

2.636

0.996

1.781

Exports/GDP

-0.718

0.237

-16.057

0.000***

0.000***

-14.517

0.000***

Growth Rate of Population

Panel, residual based tests for
cointegration

Im, Pesaran and Shin W[t-bar] statistic
H 0: non-stationarity

-4.857

without trend,
with savings
-8.209 0.000***

0.963

with trend,
with savings
-7.511 0.000***

without trend,
no savings
-9.678 0.000***

Notes: The table present test-statistics for unit roots of the levels and differences of the given variables (as indicated)
for heterogeneous panels based on Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003). The series are non-stationary under the null-hypothesis.
Country level intercepts, country level time trends and a common time trend are allowed where indicated. The lower panel conducts
unit root tests on the residuals from a regression of GDP per capita on capital flows, cumulative crises, enrollement rates, savings rates, exports
to GDP, population growth rates and savings rates (where indicated). A rejection of the null hypothesis is consistent with cointegration
between GDP per capita and the other variables.

47

with trend,
no savings
-7.511 0.000***

Table 2 Income per Capita, Capital Market Integration and Financial Crises, 1880-1913

Short Run Coefficients
Change in Gross Capital Inflows/GDP t

(1)

(2)

(3)

Long Run--Coefficients on levels

0.277
0.187
0.193
Lagged Gross Capital Inflows/GDP
[0.129]*
[0.115]
[0.141]
Change in Cumulative number of Crises, 1880-1913 t
Cumulative Number of Crises
-0.013
-0.013
-0.004
1880-1913
[0.009]
[0.008]
[0.005]
Change in Cumulative number of Crises, 1880-1913 t -1
-0.032
-0.03
-0.015
Lagged Savings/GDP
[0.012]**
[0.010]**
[0.008]*
0.264
----Change in Savings/GDP
[0.153]
Lagged Percentage of the Population
Change in Percentage of the Population
0.604
0.482
0.024
Enrolled in School
Enrolled in School t
[1.458]
[1.401]
[1.577]
Change in Exports/GDP t
0.081
0.18
0.112
Lagged Exports/GDP
[0.292]
[0.252]
[0.069]
Change in Growth rate of Population t
0.817
0.886
-0.016
Lagged Growth Rate of Population
[0.527]
[0.524]
[0.352]
Change in ln {GDP per capita} t -1
-0.214
-0.222
-0.174
Lagged GDP per capita
[0.045]***
[0.054]***
[0.049]***
Number of observations
376
376
626
Number of Countries
12
12
20
R-squared
0.34
0.31
0.1
Notes: Dependent variable is the annual change in log{GDP per capita}. Year dummies included but not reported. Hetreoscedasticity robust standard errors clustered
at the country level are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables.
* p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

48

(1A)
0.376
[0.105]***
0.004
[0.003]

(2A)
0.272
[0.080]***
0.003
[0.004]

(3A)
0.124
[0.058]**
0.001
[0.002]

0.15
[0.060]**
0.05
[0.295]

---

---

0.086
[0.379]

0.215
[0.210]

0.054

0.071

0.035

[0.224]
0.605
[0.549]
-0.186
[0.057]***

[0.250]
0.849
[0.534]
-0.169
[0.055]**

[0.037]
-0.188
[0.554]
-0.125
[0.041]***

Table 3 Income per Capita and the Use of Foreign Capital, 1880-1913

(1)
(2)
Long Run--Coefficients on levels
(1A)
0.11
-0.065
Lagged Railway Capital Inflows/GDP
-0.404
[0.169]**
[0.099]
[0.315]
Change in Private non-Railway Capital Inflows/GDP t
0.574
0.971
Lagged Private non-Railway Capital
0.177
[0.194]**
[0.366]**
Inflows/GDP
[0.357]
Change in Government Capital Inflows/GDP t
0.618
Lagged Government
0.066
0.311
[0.285]*
[0.152]
[0.222]
Capital Inflows/GDP
Change in Cumulative number of Crises, 1880-1913 t
Cumulative Number of Crises
0.003
-0.006
-0.001
1880-1913
[0.003]
[0.009]
[0.005]
Change in Cumulative number of Crises, 1880-1913 t-1
-0.022
-0.014
0.168
Lagged Savings/GDP
[0.008]**
[0.007]*
[0.078]*
--Change in Savings/GDP
0.322
Lagged Percentage of the Population
0.097
[0.113]**
Enrolled in School
[0.291]
Change in Percentage of the Population
2.244
0.261
Enrolled in School t
[1.955]
[1.702]
Lagged Exports/GDP
0.023
Change in Exports/GDP t
-0.039
0.121
[0.200]
[0.241]
[0.073]
Lagged Growth Rate of Population
0.148
Change in Growth rate of Population t
0.743
-0.028
[0.510]
[0.567]
-0.152
[0.337]
Lagged GDP per capita
Change ln {GDP per capita} t -1
-0.228
-0.179
[0.056]**
[0.045]***
[0.045]***
Number of observations
376
626
Number of Countries
12
20
R-squared
0.39
0.2
Notes: Dependent variable is the annual change in log{GDP per capita}. Year dummies included but not reported. Hetreoscedasticity robust standard errors clustered
Short Run Coefficients
Change in Railway Capital Inflows/GDP t

at the country level are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables.
* p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

49

(2A)
-0.224
[0.168]
0.12
[0.262]
0.336
[0.154]**
0
[0.002]

--0.227
[0.212]

0.043
[0.036]
-0.221
[0.517]
-0.122
[0.040]***

Table 4 Endogeneity in the Relation between Output per Capita and Capital Market Integration, 1880-1913

Short Run Coefficients
Change in Capital Inflows/GDP t
Change in Cumulative number of Crises, 1880-1913 t
Change in Cumulative number of Crises, 1880-1913 t -1
Change in Savings/GDP
Change in Percentage of the Population
Enrolled in School t
Change in Exports/GDP t
Change in Growth rate of Population t
Change ln {GDP per capita} t -1

(1 OLS)
0.289
[0.106]***
-0.014
[0.007]**
-0.034
[0.006]***
0.273
[0.072]***
1.643
[1.511]
0.124
[0.136]
0.393
[0.586]
-0.05
[0.024]**

(1A IV)
-0.448
[1.005]
-0.021
[0.012]*
-0.035
[0.008]***
0.188
[0.140]
1.749
[1.716]
0.191
[0.172]
0.732
[0.802]
-0.034
[0.050]

(2 OLS)
0.179
[0.068]***
-0.003
[0.005]
-0.017
[0.005]***
---

(2A IV)
-0.274
[0.854]
-0.003
[0.006]
-0.019
[0.008]**
---

1.208
[1.127]
0.112
[0.059]*
-0.171
[0.299]
-0.045
[0.016]***

1.718
[1.403]
0.154
[0.101]
-0.08
[0.346]
-0.038
[0.020]*

Long Run--Coefficients on levels
Lagged Capital Inflows/GDP

Cumulative Number of Crises
1880-1913
Lagged Savings/GDP
Lagged Percentage of the Population
Enrolled in School
Lagged Exports/GDP
Lagged Growth Rate of Population
Lagged GDP per capita

(1 OLS)
0.331
[0.099]***
0.005
[0.003]*

(1A IV)
0.162
[0.436]
0.003
[0.006]

0.158
[0.069]**
0.221
[0.209]

0.1
[0.152]
0.176
[0.295]

0.172
[0.105]
-0.335
[0.577]
-0.05
[0.024]**

0.196
[0.122]
0.385
[1.144]
-0.034
[0.050]

Number of observations
376
376
626
626
Number of Countries
12
12
20
20
R-Squared
0.22
--0.12
--Notes: Dependent variable is annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Estimation in cols. 1A and 2A is by two stage least squares. Excluded instruments for capital flows are the lagged
level and change in Investment/GDP in the UK and Bank of England's discount rate. Hetreoscedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses.
See the text for precise definitions of variables. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

50

Table 5 Output Effects by Type of Crisis, 1880-1913
Short Run Coefficients
Change in Capital Inflows/GDP t
Change in Cumulative number of Currency Crises t
Change in Cumulative number of Currency Crises t-1
Change in Cumulative number of Banking Crises t
Change in Cumulative number of Banking Crises t-1
Change in Cumulative number of Debt Crises, 1880-1913 t
Change in Cumulative number of Debt Crises, 1880-1913 t -1

Change in Savings/GDP
Change in Percentage of the Population
Enrolled in School t
Change in Exports/GDP t
Change in Growth rate of Population t
Change ln {GDP per capita} t -1

(1)
0.036
[0.075]
0
[0.011]
-0.019
[0.015]
-0.013
[0.013]
-0.033
[0.016]*
-0.111
[0.024]***
-0.09
[0.067]
0.365
[0.135]**
0.421
[1.479]
0.024
[0.298]
0.868

(2)
0.14
[0.130]
0.001
[0.009]
-0.01
[0.010]
-0.005
[0.009]
-0.015
[0.011]
-0.026
[0.022]
-0.026
[0.024]
---

[0.406]*

[0.351]
-0.166
[0.048]***

Long Run--Coefficients on levels
Lagged Capital Inflows/GDP

Lagged Cumulative Currency Crises
Lagged Cumulative Banking Crises
Lagged Cumulative Debt Crises
Lagged Savings/GDP
Lagged Percentage of the Population
Enrolled in School
Lagged Exports/GDP
Lagged Growth Rate of Population

-0.399
[1.382]
0.091
[0.074]

Lagged GDP per capita

(1A)
0.177
[0.105]
0.008
[0.006]
0.005
[0.007]
-0.086
[0.017]***
0.194
[0.065]**
0.004
[0.251]

(2A)
0.064
[0.042]
0.005
[0.006]
0.002
[0.005]
-0.035
[0.010]***

0.039
[0.207]
0.718
[0.626]
-0.176
[0.047]***

0.003
[0.036]
-0.061

0.025

-0.23
[0.042]***

Number of observations
376
626
Number of Countries
12
20
R-squared
0.37
0.2
Notes: Dependent variable is the annual change in log {GDP per capita}. Year dummies included but not reported. Hetreoscedasticity robust standard errors clustered
at the country level are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables.

51

--0.165
[0.217]

[0.575]
-0.159
[0.036]***

Table 6 The Determinants of Financial Crises, 1880-1913
Regressors
Capital Inflows/GDP t -1
Railway Capital Inflows/GDP t -1
Private non-Railway
Capital Inflows/GDP t-1
Government Capital Inflows/GDP t -1
Foreign Currency Debt/Total Debt
On the Gold Standard t - 1
Bank of England discount rate t - 1
Banking Crisis t - 1
Currency Crisis t - 1

(1)
All Crises
0.004
[0.002]**
---

(2)
Currency Crises
0.003
[0.001]***
---

(3)
Banking Crises
0.003
[0.001]**
---

(4)
Debt Crisis
0.0003
[0.0002]***
---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

-0.002
[0.036]
-0.032
[0.054]
0.028
[0.025]
0.213
[0.138]**
0.141
[0.098]*

-0.019
[0.019]
0.002
[0.016]
0.022
[0.009]**
0.088
[0.075]
---

-0.001
[0.024]
0
[0.028]
0.022
[0.013]*
0.066
[0.084]
0.084
[0.064]

0.002
[0.004]
-0.005
[0.002]**
0
[0.002]
0.045
[0.041]
0.001
[0.006]

(5)
All Crises--Type of Flow
---

Number of obs
541
541
541
541
Pseudo-R-squared
0.07
0.08
0.06
0.35
Notes: Probit estimations are by maximum likelihood. Dependent variables are as listed at the top of each column. See text for further information.
Standard errors are clustered at the country level are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables.
* p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

52

0.011
[0.003]***
0.012
[0.007]
-0.006
[0.005]
-0.008
[0.037]
-0.03
[0.054]
0.024
[0.024]
0.205
[0.141]**
0.12
[0.100]
541
0.07

(6)
All Crises (Probit IV)
0.136
[0.068]**
-------0.5
[0.272]*
-0.123
[0.269]
0.149
[0.131]
0.732
[0.429]*
0.336
[0.344]
541

