                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WHO GETS WHAT FROM EMPLOYER PAY OR PLAY MANDATES?

                                      Richard V. Burkhauser
                                         Kosali I. Simon

                                       Working Paper 13578
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




Presented at the Cornell University Symposium on Health Care Reform: The Economics of 'Pay or
Play' Employer Mandates, September 14, 2007, Washington DC, funded by a grant from the Employment
Policies Institute to Cornell University. We thank Linda Blumberg, Sherry Glied, Emily Owens and
Will White for their comments on previous drafts of this paper and Jessica O'Day for her editing help.
The views expressed here do not necessary reflect the views of Cornell University, the Employment
Policies Institute, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Richard V. Burkhauser and Kosali I. Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Gets What from Employer Pay or Play Mandates?
Richard V. Burkhauser and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 13578
November 2007
JEL No. I18,I32

                                           ABSTRACT

Critics of pay or play mandates, borrowing from the large empirical minimum wage literature, provide
evidence that they reduce employment. Borrowing from a smaller empirical minimum wage literature,
we provide evidence that they also are a blunt instrument for funding health insurance for the working
poor. The vast majority of those who benefit from pay or play mandates which require employers to
either provide appropriate health insurance for their workers or pay a flat per hour tax to offset the
cost of health care live in families with incomes twice the poverty line or more and, depending on
how coverage is determined, the mandate will leave a significant share of the working poor ineligible
for such benefits either because their hourly wage rate is too high or they work for smaller exempt
firms.


Richard V. Burkhauser
Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis & Management
125 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and NBER
rvb1@cornell.edu

Kosali I. Simon
Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis & Management
137 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and NBER
kis6@cornell.edu
       President Clinton spoke for the vast majority of Americans when he said “those who

work hard and play by the rules should not live in poverty.” (Clinton, 1995) The same can be

said with respect to access to health insurance. What is more controversial is whether socially

motivated legislation to increase the minimum wage or to mandate employer provided health

insurance coverage will achieve their stated goals of reducing poverty or increasing health

insurance coverage and second, are there more effective means of doing so? These two

fundamental policy questions were asked by Stigler (1946) in the first modern evaluation of

minimum wage policies. After 60 years, the preponderance of evidence, confirms Stigler’s

original responses of no and yes to these questions. The great majority of the empirical minimum

wage literature has focused on how much minimum wage increases reduce employment. Until

1995, the consensus was that minimum wage increases significantly reduced the employment of

teenagers and other low skilled workers. Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen (1982) and Brown (1988)

summarize this literature and find that a 10 percent minimum wage increase led to a reduction in

teenage employment in the range of 1 to 3 percent (a wage elasticity of -0.1 to -0.3). Card and

Krueger (1995) in their iconoclastic book, Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the

Minimum Wage, demonstrate the weakness of this earlier empirical literature and present

evidence that led them to conclude that minimum wage increases have no significant negative

effect on the employment of teenagers and other low skilled workers and might even increase

their employment.

       As a result of these findings, a major new literature has attempted to estimate the wage

elasticity of minimum wage increases. A decade after Card and Krueger (1995) the

preponderance of this new evidence supports the consensus view held prior to 1995 that

minimum wage increases have a small but significant negative (in the range of -0.1 to -0.3)




                                                                                                  2
employment effect on teenagers and other low skilled workers. For examples see: Currie and

Fallick (1996), Abowd et al. (2000), Burkhauser, Couch and Wittenburg (2000a, 2000b),

Neumark and Wascher (2004), and Campolieti, Fang, and Gunderson (2005). For a recent review

of this new literature see Neumark and Wascher (2007).

       Based on this new minimum wage literature Baicker and Levy (2007) and Yelowitz

(2004, 2006) argue that pay or play mandates, which require employers to either provide

appropriate health insurance for their workers or pay a flat per hour tax to offset the cost of

health care, effectively increase the minimum wage for those workers whose hourly wage rate is

below the prevailing minimum wage plus the tax. Baicker and Levy (2007) assuming a wage

elasticity of -0.1 and using multiple years of Current Population Survey (CPS) data, estimate the

employment effect of a nationwide pay or play mandate with an average $3.00 per hour tax on

full time private sector workers (more than 20 hours per week), aged 22-65. They find that it

would reduce the employment of those workers, whose hourly wage was below the size of the

tax plus the prevailing state minimum wage by around 225,000.

       Baicker and Levy (2007) provide an important first step in evaluating the relative merits

of pay or play legislation and demonstrate that, like minimum wage increases, pay or play

mandates will reduce the employment of the least skilled workers in the work force. But they do

not focus on how the benefits of this legislation would be distributed across the income

distribution or more specifically on how it would affect the working poor.

       Stigler (1946) also argued that “the connection between hourly wages and the standard of

living of a family is remote and fuzzy. Unless the minimum wage varies with the amount of

employment, numbers of earners, non-wage income, family size, and many other factors, it will be

an inept device for combating poverty even for those who succeed in retaining employment. (p. 363)”




                                                                                                   3
A smaller empirical literature has focused on who gains from minimum wage increases

as well as how effective minimum wage increases have been in reducing poverty. Here the

evidence is overwhelming that, even assuming no negative employment effects of minimum

wage increases, the vast majority of those who gain do not live in or even near officially

measured poverty income levels. The reason for this finding, as suggested by Stigler, is that the

majority of workers who gain from minimum wage increases are second or third earners in

higher income households or single earners without families. Furthermore, the majority of the

working poor are not helped by such minimum wage increases because their wages are already

above the proposed minimum. They are poor because they work too few hours. For examples of

this literature, see: Burkhauser and Finegan (1989), Burkhauser, Couch, Wittenburg (1996),

Burkhauser, Couch, and Glenn (1996), and Neumark and Wascher (2001).

        A more recent literature has shown that there is no relationship between state minimum

wage increases and declines in state poverty rates. This empirical finding was first report by Card

and Krueger (1995). Burkhauser and Sabia (2007) update and extend Card and Krueger (1995)

and find that state minimum wage increases between 1998 and 2003 also had no significant

affect on state poverty rates: overall; among the working poor; or even among single mothers.

Neumark, Schweitzer, and Wascher (2004, 2005) provide an explanation for these findings by

showing that reductions in the employment and hours worked of low-wage workers in families

just above the poverty line or the near poverty line (150 percent of the poverty line) result in their

falling into poverty, or near poverty just enough to offset movements out of poverty or near

poverty by the employment and wage gains in families just below these lines.




                                                                                                    4
           Here we use methods developed in this smaller distributional literature on the minimum

wage to show how pay or play mandates would increase employer health insurance coverage

across the income distribution.

2. Background

           Over the last two decades, the extent of privately provided health insurance coverage in

the United States has fallen from 70 to 63 percent of the non-aged population.2 The latest

numbers released by the Census Bureau shows among Americans of all ages, the percent with

employment based coverage fell from 60.2 percent to 59.7 percent from 2005 to 2006 (Figure 7,

DeNavas-Walt et al, 2007). Researchers advance several reasons for this decline, including the

rising cost of health care and the increasing generosity of public coverage (e.g. Cutler and

Gruber 1996, Cutler and Madrian 1998. Kronick and Gilmer 1999, Cutler 2003, Baicker and

Chandra 2006). This decline in privately provided health insurance is one reason for the call for

government to require employers to either pay a tax to reimburse government for providing their

workers with health insurance or play by providing health insurance for their workers that offset

their tax payments.

           Another reason is the major success of grassroots efforts in increasing the minimum wage

at the state level—in early 2007 before the passage of federal legislation to increase the

minimum wage from $5.15 to $7.25 per hour by 2009, the majority of state minimum wage rates

were higher than the federal minimum (Employment Services Administration, 2006)—which has

encouraged social progressives and others to push for similar wage based mandates to increase

employer provided health insurance for low wage workers.




2
    Author calculations using data in Fronstin (1986, 2005)


                                                                                                      5
         Employer health insurance mandates have been or are currently being considered by 31

states.3 Most of these laws are aimed at large firms (often over 10,000 employees) but some of

the more comprehensive reform attempts considered or enacted by states such as Massachusetts,

New York, Pennsylvania and California exempt only smaller firms. Legislation introduced in

New York State (New York State Legislature, 2006) in 2006 would have mandated health

insurance coverage by requiring firms to pay a tax of $3.00 per hour for all covered workers

which could be offset by expenditures on health insurance for these workers. But coverage was

limited to workers with wage earnings of less than $600 per week ($15 per hour or less for those

working 40 hours per week) in non-administrative or managerial jobs in firms with 100 or more

employees, not involved in manufacturing or agriculture.

         Like legislation passed in the State of New York in 2004 which raised its minimum wage

from $5.15 to $7.25 per hour, this pay or play mandate is premised on the notion that low wage

workers are low income workers and hence need the help of the state to both raise their wages

and increase their access to employer provide health insurance. But as we have discussed above,

this view is controversial. It ignores negative employment effects of this type of wage based

regulation as well as the fact that the vast majority of those helped by the 2004 New York

minimum wage legislation did not live in or even near poverty. (See Burkhauser and Sabia

2004.)

         Rather than focus on the potential consequences of New York’s specific pay or play

mandate, we estimate the distributional and employment effects of more generic pay or play



3
  These 31 states listed by the National Conference of State Legislatures are Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota,
Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. See
http://www.ncsl.org/programs/health/payorplay2006.htm for details of states and laws covering the period 2005-
present.


                                                                                                                  6
mandates for the entire United States to demonstrate the mixed blessing such plans provide to the

working poor and to show how critical coverage criteria—wage rate and firm size—are to the

share of the working poor they will cover.

3. Data and Methods4

         The Current Population Survey (CPS) conducted by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of

Labor Statistics consists of a series of monthly surveys that annually capture among other things

the income, wage earnings, hours of work and health insurance coverage of a random sample of

approximately 150,000 non-institutionalized civilians. It is the main source of official

employment, income and health insurance coverage statistics in the United States. The CPS is a

nationally representative sample of the United States population.

         We use data from several months of the 2005 CPS. We use the February 2005 CPS data

to obtain information about the source of health insurance for each person in our sample. We

then use March 2005 CPS data to obtain information on their family income and firm size, which

is reported for the previous year—2004.5 For those who report working in the February 2005

CPS survey, we also obtain labor earnings data (to calculate hourly wages) from the March,

April and May CPS surveys if they are part of the outgoing rotation in those months.6

         Because pay or play mandates focus on the private sector, our sample consists of private

sector, non-self employed workers. We include both part time workers (those working 20 hours

or less per week) as well as full time workers. But we limit our sample to such workers aged 17-

64 to avoid the complications associated with high school students at younger ages and Medicare

4
  Replication programs are available upon request.
5
  Family income is reported relative to the federal poverty level applicable to family size, thus it does not need to be
adjusted for inflation from 2004 to 2005. But it must still be kept in mind that it applies to the previous year (2004).
6
  Those in the February survey during their 4th or 8th rotation month are not asked the supplemental questions on
health insurance. Those in February during their 3rd or 7th rotation month go on to answer March questions, and their
earnings data will be asked in the March outgoing rotation group survey too. But those of the 2nd and 6th groups (in
February) will not answer earnings questions until April, and those of the 1st and 5th groups in February answer
earnings questions in May.


                                                                                                                      7
coverage at older ages. Because we want to focus on whether or not our population of workers

has health insurance and if so where it comes from, we exclude workers who do not report this

information. But we re-weight our remaining workers to account for these missing workers. (See

electronic data appendix accompanying this paper). All dollar values are reported as of February

2005. The family income variables available in the March CPS are already converted into

income-to-needs values that represent multiples of the applicable family size poverty level. The

use of income-to-needs ratios is standard practice in the income distribution literature in general

and especially with respect to the minimum wage literature, since it allows comparisons across

the available family income of persons in different size families. See Burkhauser and Sabia

(2007) for a recent example.

        We describe the demographic characteristics of workers by insurance status in Appendix

Table 1 and note that these statistics are similar to those in the literature (e.g. Fronstin, 2005).

For a recent review of the literature on the uninsured, see Blumberg and Nichols (2002). We are

not the first to match across multiple months of the CPS to assemble a data set for health

insurance analysis (e.g. see Farber and Levy, 2000). But the details of this data set are

sufficiently complex to relegate full explanation to the electronic data appendix accompanying

this paper.

4. Results

        Table 1 subdivides our sample of all currently working non-self-employed private sector

workers aged 17-64 (column 1) by whether they are without health insurance (column 2) or have

coverage via their employer (column 3), as a dependent of a family member’s employer

coverage (column 4), via purchase in the private market (column 5), or from government—

Medicare or Medicaid—(column 6). As can be seen in row 1, the vast majority of private sector




                                                                                                       8
workers have some form of health insurance. One’s own employer is the major source of

coverage (62.44 percent), followed by coverage as a dependent of a family member with

employer insurance (16.43 percent). The rest of the covered population purchases insurance in

the private market (2.36 percent) or receives it from government (1.24 percent). This leaves

17.54 percent of the population without health insurance.

       But health insurance coverage is not randomly distributed across this working population.

As can be seen across the 4th row of numbers, while only 24.90 percent of our entire sample

works for small firms (firm size of 24 or fewer), these firms employ 43.19 percent of uninsured

workers and only 16.60 percent of those workers with employer insurance. Those who receive

health insurance from the other three sources are also more likely to work for small firms. When

we add the 43.19 percent of uninsured workers employed by small firms to the 16.16 percent

who work for firms of 25 to 99 (row 5) we see that about 60 percent of uninsured workers would

not be covered by the proposed New York pay or play mandate discussed above simply because

it exempted firms of less than 100 workers from its mandate.

       Health insurance coverage is also not randomly distributed across income categories. As

rows 9 and 10 show, while only 4.42 percent of our sample of workers live in and 9.88 percent

(4.42 plus 5.46) live in or near poverty (up to 150 percent of the poverty line), 13.33 (27.97)

percent of those without health insurance live in (in or near) poverty. In contrast, only 1.71 (5.20)

percent of those with employer health insurance live in (in or near) poverty. Those with health

insurance as dependants or via the private market are also very unlikely to live in or near

poverty. Those who receive health insurance from government are the most likely to live in

(36.54 percent) or in and near poverty (58.51 percent). While this distribution shows that




                                                                                                   9
workers without any form of health insurance disproportionately live in poor or near poor

families, pay or play mandates do not directly target the working poor for coverage.

        Row 16 shows that health insurance is also correlated with hourly wage rate. While only

8.58 percent of our sample has hourly wage rates of $5.00-$7.24, that is, workers whose wages

will rise as the federal minimum wage rate increases from $5.15 in 2007 to $7.25 in 2009, 19.62

percent of those without health insurance are in this hourly wage range. Only 3.19 percent of

those with employer health insurance are in this range. Workers in the other three health

insurance groups are also more likely to be in this hourly wage range than are the uninsured. As

row 17 shows, those without health insurance are also more likely to be in the $7.25-$10.24 hour

wage range than are those with employer health insurance, as are the other three groups.

(Appendix Table 2 reports the population sizes for values found in Table 1.)

        As we will discuss in more detail below, in a world where increases in wages have no

negative effect on employment, the $3.00 per hour tax mandated by the New York pay or play

proposal would provide its greatest individual benefit to those workers earning the minimum

wage since the employer would bear the full burden of the tax.7 In our simulations we assume

that workers in the $5.00-$7.24 per hour range receive both an increase in their hourly wages to

the new federal minimum of $7.25 and health insurance coverage costing $3.00 per hour that

they do not pay for in reduced wages. Individual workers who would next best benefit in a world

without negative employment effects, are those earning between $7.25-$10.24 since they will

also receive health insurance costing $3.00 per hour but because the minimum wage is $7.25,

their wage can not fall below $7.25, so their employer must pay the difference between the $3.00

per hour cost of the insurance and the drop in their hourly wage rate. Those individuals earning

7
 When the minimum wage increases to 7.25 in 2009, there will be fewer workers in this category (and more
workers in higher wage categories) than implied in our simulations based on 2005 numbers because of wage growth
between 2005 and 2009. We thank Linda Blumberg for pointing this out.


                                                                                                            10
over $10.25 per hour and covered by the mandate will gain health insurance but will also see

their hourly wages fall by $3.00 to pay for it, so at best they will be no better off. As can be seen

in row 18, 24.04 percent of those without health insurance (wages of $10.25-$14.99) would fall

into this category under the New York pay or play mandate. Since the New York mandate

exempts workers who earn $15.00 per hour or more from coverage, as row 19 shows, 15.70

percent of workers without health insurance would continue not to receive health insurance.

       The correlations found in Table 1 show that those without health insurance are more

likely to live in or near poverty, have lower hourly wages, and work for small firms than those

with employer health insurance. But they also suggest that pay or play mandates may be a rather

blunt way of ensuring that the working poor will gain health insurance. It is to this question that

we now turn.

4.1 Mandates without Employment Effects.

       While pay or play mandates will have some effect on the 17.54 percent of workers in our

sample who are uninsured, it will also have an important effect on the 20.03 percent of workers

in our sample who have health insurance coverage but not from their employer. Because these

two sub-populations without their own employer health insurance are different, we talk about the

impact of federal pay or play mandates on them in turn.

       Our simulations below will not consider all proposed pay or play mandate designs which

as discussed in footnote 3 vary substantially by state. Rather, we will focus on how the class of

mandates which require employers to either provide appropriate health insurance for their

workers or pay a flat per hour tax to offset the cost of health care impact on the employment and

economic well being of workers in general and most especially on the working poor.




                                                                                                    11
         We first simulate the impact of a pay or play mandate which requires all large firms

(those with 25 or more employees) to pay a $3.00 per hour tax on all their workers earning

$15.00 per hour or less from which they can deduct the cost of providing their own health

insurance.8,9 In this simulation, we come close to the exclusion rules of the New York State pay

or play mandate by including both a $15.00 per hour maximum and a firm size minimum

limitation on coverage. However, rather then choosing the 99 or fewer worker firm size

exclusion in the New York State mandate we choose the less restrictive 24 or fewer worker firm

size exclusion. Nonetheless we show that this exclusion will substantially reduce the share of

uninsured workers who gain own employer provided health insurance under this mandate. This is

especially so among the working poor and near poor since, as seen in Table 1, disproportional

shares of them work for small firms.

         We conduct our simulation using our sample of CPS workers in 2005. We assume here

that this mandate will have no behavioral effect on the employment or hours worked of all

workers in our sample (i.e. we assume no unemployment effects). We also assume that workers

receiving employer health insurance from their firm are unaffected by this legislation. (That is,

the cost of providing their health insurance to the firm exceeds the level mandated in this

legislation.) We further assume that all firms not providing health care prior to the mandate will

choose to “pay” rather than “play”, i.e. purchase coverage for their employees themselves. And

8
  Because there is some positive correlation between a worker’s hourly wage rate and his or her family income, pay
or play legislation that increased coverage to higher hourly wage workers (e.g. in the extreme, covering all workers
regardless of their hourly wage rate), would of course on the margin increase the share of the working poor
population that was covered but would disproportionately do so for the non-poor population. And, as we will
discuss, it would do so in a way that effectively required all these higher wage workers to pay for this coverage via
reductions in their hourly wage rates.
9
  At $3 per hour, assuming a 40 hour work week of 50 weeks a year will yield $6,000. In 2007, the average cost of a
single policy is $4,479 and the cost of a family policy is $12,106 (KFF/HRET, 2007), thus $6,000 is more than the
cost of a single health insurance policy but less than half the cost of a family policy when a mandate is implemented.
To the extent that some of the policies paid for by the $3 tax will be family policies, we are not counting the
additional dependents who might gain health insurance through this mandate. We thank Linda Blumberg for
pointing this out.


                                                                                                                   12
that the government will use the resulting tax revenues from the mandate to provide health

insurance to these same workers, resulting in a one to one correspondence between those who

receive the coverage and those on behalf of whom the employer pays the fee.10 We then assume

that wages above the minimum wage are flexible and that the incidence of the pay or play tax on

firms who do not provide health insurance will be borne entirely by the workers. Hence for

workers whose hourly wage rate is $3.00 above the prevailing minimum wage, the net effect of

the mandate will be that employers will reduce their hourly wage by $3.00. But we also assume

that the government will provide these covered workers with access to a government provided

health care plan costing $3.00 per hour.11

         Workers who earn hourly wages above the prevailing minimum wage but by less than

$3.00 per hour will have their wages reduced to the prevailing minimum wage but will also

receive government provided health insurance costing $3.00 per hour. Because in this example

we are assuming no behavioral changes, each of these workers will be a beneficiary of this

mandate since their total compensation—the prevailing minimum wage plus the value to them of

their individual health insurance—is greater than their previous hourly wage.12

         Finally, because our data is for 2005 it does not take into consideration the impact of the

increase in the federal minimum wage from $5.15 to $7.25 per hour that was enacted in 2007 and

that will be fully implement in 2009. Here we assume that all workers earning below $5.00 per
10
   Because firms must provide health insurance to all their workers if they provide it to some of their workers it is
less costly for firms to pay the $3.00 tax.
11
   We assume throughout that pay or play legislation is structured in a way that makes employers and workers
indifferent between paying or playing. If this is not the case and employer payments to the government are used to
provide health insurance to the general uninsured population instead of to the workers on whose behalf employers
paid the taxes, employers are likely to ‘play’ than ‘pay’ even if it requires them to provide health care to all their
workers since at least in this way they and their workers recover part of the tax.
12
   This will only hold if they value the health insurance provided them at least at its effective cost to them which will
vary from zero to $2.99 per hour. And as we will discuss below for those already covered by health insurance, if the
value of the new insurance to them minus what they pay for it is at least as great as their value of their previous
health insurance minus the cost of that insurance to them. We assume throughout that the employer does not have
other means of requiring health insurance payments (such as co-premiums that are usually charged for health
insurance, which would imply further out of pocket costs for the workers).


                                                                                                                      13
hour are not covered by the minimum wage—this assumption is common in the minimum wage

literature and was made in Burkhauser and Sabia, 2007—and that they would not be covered

under our federal pay or play mandate but that all other workers are covered by the federal

minimum wage. Hence those earning $5.00-$7.24 per hour will have their wages increase to

$7.25 under the new minimum wage increase, and they and all other workers earning $7.25-

$14.99 will also be covered by the $3.00 per hour pay or play mandate. Thus the effective

minimum wage for all workers in our population will be $10.25, the sum of the new federal

minimum wage plus the $3.00 per hour pay or play mandated tax on low wage laborers.



Workers without Health Insurance. Table 2 contains the 17.54 percent of our sample who

have no health insurance. The hourly wage of all these workers is shown across income-to-needs

categories. The 2.10 percent of these workers who currently earn less than $5.00 per hour (third

column of numbers, second to last row) are assumed not to be covered by the minimum wage

and would not be covered by our pay or play mandate even though they work in large firms. But

all the workers in the next three wage categories who are in large firms will receive $3.00 per

hour worth of health insurance coverage. Workers in large firms earning between $5.00 and

$7.24 (11.38 percent) will not only receive health insurance coverage but will see their hourly

wages go up to $7.25 based on increases in the federal minimum wage. Workers in large firms

earning between $7.25 and $10.25 (22.13 percent) will see their wages fall to $7.25 but will now

receive $3.00 per hour worth of health insurance coverage. If these workers value their health

insurance costing $3.00 per hour by more than the cost to them of a reduction in their hourly

wage to $7.25, they will be better off. Workers in large firms earning between $10.25 and

$14.99 (12.71 percent), will receive health insurance but will also see their wages fall by $3.00




                                                                                                    14
per hour to pay for it. The 15.70 percent of workers earning $15.00 per hour or more will not be

affected by these mandates.

        Hence, overall only a minority (46.22 percent) of uninsured workers will be receiving

employer health insurance coverage under this mandate. While the working poor, those with

income-to-needs values equal to 1 or less (row 1) are disproportionately represented in the hourly

wage range where net compensation costs increase ($5.00-$10.25) as seen in column 14, they

nevertheless make up a small share (18.74 percent) of all workers whose health insurance is

subsidized by their employer. Only 35.36 percent of newly covered worker in this subsidized

category are either living in poor or near poor families, while 45.35 percent live in families that

are twice the poverty rate or more.

        When we include workers in the $10.25-$14.99 who pay for their new health insurance

coverage themselves, we find that the working poor make up 15.56 percent and the poor and near

poor make up 31.12 percent of the total population of uninsured workers covered while those

twice the poverty line or more make up 51.47 percent of this population (column 15). While the

vast majority (53.95 percent, column 16) of the working poor without health insurance would

now be covered under this mandate, 46.05 would not, primarily because they work in small

firms. In addition, another 6.84 percent of the working poor would effectively be required to

fully pay for this health insurance since they earn more than $10.25 per hour.

Other Insured Workers. Table 3 contains the 20.03 percent of our sample whose health

insurance comes from sources other than their employer. The vast majority of these workers

(16.43 percent) are covered on the employer provided insurance of another family member.13 As

we saw in Table 1 this is a very different population than the population without health


13
 Of those with dependent coverage, 75 percent are insured through a spouse and 25 percent through another family
member (almost all of whom appear to be a parent because 94 percent of this population is under 25 years of age).


                                                                                                              15
insurance. The overwhelming majority do not live in or even near poverty. This should not be

surprising since, as we also saw in Table 1, the vast majority of workers who have employer

provided health insurance are neither poor or near poor. And by definition these workers live in a

family that includes a worker with employer health insurance in addition to this worker.

Another 2.36 percent of this population of workers with health insurance from another source

purchases their health insurance in the private market and as we also saw in Table 1 an even

smaller share of this population live in a poor or near poor family. It is only the remaining 1.24

percent of this population that receive their health insurance from Medicare or Medicaid that are

much more likely to live in or near poverty.

       Thus overall, only 5.04 percent of these workers whose health insurance comes from

another source live in poor families and only 8.58 percent live in families in or near poverty.

While a substantial share of these workers have hourly wage earnings of between $5.00 and

$10.25 per hour very few of this low wage group are either poor or near poor. The weak

relationship between the level of the hour wage rate and the level of the income-to-needs ratio in

this population is the starkest example of Stigler’s argument that hourly wage rates are a poor

proxy for economic well being. Only 15.83 percent of the workers who will gain subsidized own

employer coverage in this population live in poor or near poor families while 41.30 percent live

in families four times or more the poverty line and 77.71 percent live in families two times or

more the poverty line. The percentages are even starker for the entire population of workers who

move into pay or play mandated health insurance plans—6.77 percent are poor and 5.38 percent

are near poor while 47.74 percent have income four times the poverty line and 82.35 percent

have income two times the poverty line.




                                                                                                     16
         But even among this broader group of workers it is far from clear how many will gain

from this mandate. The vast majority were already covered by the employer provided health

insurance of another family member. Because in this simulation we are assuming no

disemployment effects, those earning $5.00-$7.24 will be no worse off since their wages will not

fall. But unless the value to them of their new health insurance plus their family savings from no

longer being a dependent on their other family member’s employer provided health insurance

plan is greater than the value of that plan, they will be no better off.14 Those earning $7.25-

$10.24 are even less likely to gain from this coverage since they will have to pay for part of it via

the reduction of their hourly wage rate to $7.25 per hour. And those earning $10.25-$14.99 are

the least likely to gain from this coverage since they will have to pay $3.00 per hour, the full cost

of the coverage via reduced wages.

         It is more likely that those newly covered workers who formerly purchased their health

insurance in the private market will benefit assuming no behavioral effects since their private

market insurance costs were relatively high. But once again, the value of the employer based

health insurance coverage to the worker plus the cost of his/her private market health insurance

would have to be greater than the value to him/her of the private market health insurance.

         For the 1.24 percent of workers who were receiving their health insurance from Medicare

or Medicaid and are now mandated to receive it from their employer, the share who will gain is

likely to be very small, even when we assume they experience no loss of employment. The

reason is that they already are receiving government provided health insurance. This will


14
  As a general equilibrium analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, our study does not capture several second
order effects that might occur as a result of pay or play mandates. For example, our partial equilibrium analysis does
not take into account increased employment in other sectors that might result from a change in the relative prices of
goods and services due to the change in the cost of labor in firms affected by the pay or play mandates. We also do
not speculate on how pay or play legislation would mandate which firm would be responsible for covering children
in the case of dual worker families, or the coverage of non-worker spouses. These all represent areas for future
research.


                                                                                                                   17
especially be the case for the 16.94 percent who must now pay the full cost of their health

insurance since they earn $10.25-$14.99 per hour.

4.2 Mandates including Employment Effects.

           Based on the new minimum wage literature discussed above, Baicker and Levy (2007)

and Yelowitz (2006) argue that pay or play mandates increase the minimum wage for workers

whose hourly wage rate is below the prevailing minimum wage plus the tax. In this section we

assume the elasticity of demand for covered workers with respect to an increase in their wages

caused by, in the case of workers earning less than $7.25 per hour, a combination of a federal

minimum wage increase to $7.25 per hour together with a pay or play mandate of an additional

$3.00 per hour for health insurance coverage, is -0.2.15 For such workers the combined increase

can vary from $3.01 to $5.25 per hour depending on their initial wage rate.

           We assume the same elasticity of demand for all workers earning $7.25-$10.24 per hour.

Since they are already at or above the new minimum wage per hour at the time of the simulation,

this group will experience pay or play mandated increases of between $0.01 and $3.00 per hour.

Because we assume that wages are flexible downward to the new federal minimum wage, there

is no employment effect on workers who were earning $10.25-$14.99 at the time of the

simulation. Those earning $15.00 or more are not eligible for our simulated pay or play

mandated benefits nor are those in firms of less than 25 workers.

           Our simulate results below are consistent with all the assumptions discussed in Table 2

except that now we are accounting for the negative employment effects of a combined increase

in the federal minimum wage to $7.25 and a $3.00 per hour pay or play mandate on our working

population. This simulation like the one in Table 2 comes closest to the exclusion rules of the

New York State pay or play mandate by including both a maximum hourly wage rate and a
15
     We later show estimates that assume a range of elasticities from -0.1 to -0.3


                                                                                                     18
minimum firm size limitation on coverage. But again rather then choosing the 99 or fewer

worker firm size exclusion in the New York State mandate we choose the less restrictive 24 or

fewer worker firm size exclusion.

       The first panel of Table 4 focuses on workers without any form of health insurance who

earn $5.00-$10.24 per hour in firms who employ 25 workers or more and provide no health

insurance. We focus on this population, since those workers earning less than $5.00 or more than

$15.00 per hour are not covered by the policy, and those earning $10.25-$14.99 do not

experience a decrease in employment because of the policy since their hourly wages are flexible

downward. As discussed above, this is the population who will receive employer subsidized

health insurance under this pay or play mandate.

       Within the $5.00-$10.24 per hour wage category, we distinguish between those who will

be effected by both the increase in the federal minimum wage to $7.25 (those earning $5.00-

$7.24) and the pay or play mandate and those who will only be effected by the pay or play

mandate (those earning $7.25-$10.25). The distribution of workers in these hourly wage

categories are shown across income-to-needs categories. In each hourly wage earning/income-to-

needs cell of Table 4 we individually show the number of workers in that cell who will lose their

job and the number who will keep their job and gain subsidized health insurance coverage

because of the policy.

       We estimate the number of workers who will lose their jobs in each cell by summing the

probability of each member of that cell losing their job (the difference between $10.25 per hour

and their current wage divided by their current wage multiplied by -0.2) using population

weights to display results in terms of the U.S. labor force affected within our population—

currently working non-self employed private sector workers aged 17-64. The number of workers




                                                                                                19
who will be covered by the policy is the difference between the total population subject to the

policy and the number unemployed in that cell.

       While the percent increase in wages can vary from 41 to 125 percent in the $5.00-$7.24

cells because of the joint impact of the federal minimum wage and the pay or play mandate, our

conservative assumption about demand elasticity yields individual risks of unemployment from

8.2 to 25 percent and hence relatively modest disemployment effects in each of the income-to-

needs cells in Table 4. The number of unemployed workers in the $7.25-$10.24 cells is more

modest since the percentage change in hourly wage levels is smaller. Yet as can be seen in the

last column of Table 4 the percentage of poor (9.01 percent) and near poor (7.45 percent)

workers who lose their jobs because of the policy is not trivial and is greater than for other

workers since they have lower initial wage rates. Overall 153,865 poor or near poor workers

without health insurance coverage will lose their jobs because of this policy (column 5). The

total number of workers without health insurance who will lose their jobs because of this policy

is 386,734.

    The second panel of Table 4 focuses on the rest of the population of effected workers—those

workers with some form of health insurance who earn $5.00-$10.24 per hour in firms who

employ 25 workers or more and provide no health insurance. The results for this population are

similar to those above. As can be seen in the last column, the poor (8.71 percent) and near poor

(8.50 percent) experience a greater negative employment effect than the rest of the covered

population in this panel since they have lower initial hourly wage rates. Overall, 63,555 poor or

near poor workers who are mandated to switch to their employer’s health insurance plan from

another source of health insurance will lose their jobs because of this policy. The total number

of workers in this category who will lose their job is 363,443.




                                                                                                   20
    The third panel of Table 4 sums the employment and coverage effects of these policies

across the combined populations of the top two panels. The bottom line is that this policy will

increase the subsidized own employer coverage of 10,007,413 workers earning $5.00 and $10.25

who did not have this type of coverage before. However, it will do so at the expense of 750,178

workers who will lose their jobs because of this policy coming into effect along with an increase

in the minimum wage to $7.25 per hour. Furthermore, another 4,696,615 of these “newly

ensured” workers would effectively be mandated to give up their previous health insurance

coverage for this new own employer provided health insurance coverage.

4.3 The Net Result of the Policy on Health Insurance Coverage and Its Sources

    In this section we show the sensitivity of our results to our demand elasticity assumptions.

Table 5 shows the net effect of an increase of the federal minimum wage to $7.25 together with a

pay or play mandate of the type discussed in Table 4 on total health insurance coverage and the

sources of that coverage assuming elasticities of demand of: -0.1, -0.2, and -0.3.

    Our sample represents 96,940,624 non-self employed private sector workers aged 17-64 in

2005. As can be seen in row 1, the vast majority of these workers (60,528,322) have employer

health insurance. The rest do not. But of those without employer health insurance coverage, the

majority are covered in some other way—15,924,349 as a dependent on another family

member’s employer health care plan, 2,283,490 purchase their health insurance in the private

market, and 1,200,405 receive it from government. The remaining 17,004,056 workers have no

health insurance.

    Row 2 shows how the distribution of health insurance changes when we introduce the play

or pay mandate discussed in Table 4 assuming a demand elasticity of -0.2. Such a mandate will




                                                                                                   21
increase own employer health care coverage by 14,932,865 (to 75,461,187 in Row 3).16 While

part of the increase in own employer coverage comes from a decline in workers with no health

insurance coverage, the majority comes from shifts of workers from other forms of health

insurance coverage to mandated own employer health insurance coverage. This increase in

health insurance coverage, as discussed in Table 4 comes at the cost of 750,178 lost jobs.

Furthermore, as can be seen in row 3, while this policy will reduce the number of workers

without any form of health insurance, 9,145,034 workers will continue not to be covered by any

form of health insurance because of the wage maximum and firm size minimum exclusions in

the policy.

     Rows 4 and 5 repeat the simulation but assume elasticities of -0.1 and -0.3 respectively. As

can be seen, the change in own employer provided health insurance and in those who lose their

jobs due to the mandate are sensitive to the demand elasticity used in the simulation. Assuming

a demand elasticity of -0.1 halves the number of workers who lose their jobs to 325,089.

Assuming a demand elasticity of -0.3 doubles the number to 1,125,267.

     To summarize the tradeoff posed by the mandate policy, we calculate two ratios. One is the

number of workers who lose their jobs for every 100 workers made newly insured by this policy.

For this calculation, we only consider those workers who switch from no insurance to employer

insurance as those who switch between insurance categories are not part of the newly insured.

We find that in this population 10.03 workers lose their jobs (at an elasticity of -0.2) for every

100 newly covered workers. But many of these newly covered workers fully pay for their health

insurance via reductions in their hourly wage of $3.00. Hence we repeat this exercise but focus

only on these newly covered workers whose health insurance is subsidized under this mandate


16
  Note that in our assumption this increase is actually in government provided health insurance that is purchased
from the tax on these newly covered workers whose final incidence will depend on their initial hourly wage rate.


                                                                                                                    22
(those in the wage range $5.00-$10.25 per hour). We find that for every 100 workers newly

eligible for subsidized health insurance, 14.12 workers lose their jobs.

       The first 5 rows of data in Table 5 show the sensitivity of our results in our entire sample to

different elasticity assumptions. In the remaining rows we focus on how this policy impacts the

working poor. We do so assuming a demand elasticity of -0.2. The sixth to eighth row of

numbers in Table 5 show respectively for the working poor: the initial number of workers in

each of the health insurance categories before the policy; the net change in each of the health

insurance categories after the policy; and the number of workers who remain in those categories

after the policy. While a pay or play mandate will increase the number of the working poor with

employer health care coverage by 1,627,551, approximately 493,26017 of these newly covered

workers were already receiving health insurance from some other source. So the total number of

newly covered working poor amounts to 1,134,291. But providing these new covered workers

with health insurance comes at the cost of 124,745 of the working poor losing their job---a ratio

of 11 jobs lost by poor workers for every 100 newly covered poor workers. Furthermore, after

the policy, 27.3 percent of the working poor (1,168,075) still do not have health insurance.18

5. Summary and Conclusion

           We provide evidence that pay or play mandates, which require employers to either

provide appropriate health insurance for their workers or pay a flat per hour tax to offset the cost

of health care, are a very blunt instrument for providing health insurance for the working poor.

Like minimum wage increases meant to help the working poor, pay or play mandates attempt to

identify the targeted low income group via their wage rate rather directly via their family’s




17
     This calculation takes into account those who are made uninsured and unemployed.
18
     ((1,043,300+124,745)/4,281,308))


                                                                                                     23
income. But even more so, by limiting their coverage to larger firms, these pay or play mandates

disproportionately exclude the working poor from this coverage.

       Furthermore, like the minimum wage, these pay or play mandates force employers to

provide compensation above the competitive market price for low skilled workers and hence will

reduce the employment of precisely the group of low income workers least able to compete in

the market that the program was intended to help. For this group of 124,745 poor workers

identified in our simulation, pay or play mandates not only fail to bring them employer provided

health insurance but also take away their job. Our results are of course sensitive to our

assumptions. So for instance, to the extent that revenues from pay or play mandates on

employers are not required to fully pay the cost of these mandated health insurance policies for

their workers, the negative employment impacts of these mandates would be smaller. But doing

so would require additional funding from someplace. And, it would not change the general

conclusions about the distributional effects of these pay or play mandates.

       Finally, pay or play mandates are blunt instruments for increasing the overall health

insurance coverage of workers because they impact both those who have no health insurance and

those whose health insurance comes from other sources. Thus a large share of the increase in

own employer health insurance coverage produced by pay or play mandates comes at the

expense of workers (including the working poor) who are already covered by other sources of

health insurance and are not likely to be better off because of this shift. This is the case not only

because some of these workers will lose their jobs but also because others will now be forced

into a health insurance plan that is less advantageous to them than their previous situation.

       An analysis of alternative policy options to increase employment based coverage is

beyond the scope of our paper, but one possible tool to consider is a health insurance version of




                                                                                                   24
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). This may have distributional advantages relative to

minimum wage increases as a mechanism for subsidizing the wage earnings of the working poor

along many dimensions. (See: Burkhauser, Couch, and Andrew J. Glenn, 1996; Neumark and

Wascher, 2001). For example, the minimum wage is likely to reduce employment because it

raises the cost to firms of hiring low skilled laborers, but the EITC provides a government

subsidy through the tax system to low income workers hence increasing their labor supply,

increasing employment, and reducing their dependence on welfare (Hotz and Sholz, 2003; Hotz,

Mullin, and Sholz, 2006). In addition, because it targets beneficiaries based on family income

rather than an individual’s hourly wage, a greater share of its benefits go to the working poor.

Thus an earned health insurance tax credit that would cover the cost of a health insurance policy

modeled on the EITC should be studied in greater detail to compare its merits relative to

employer paid mandates.




                                                                                                   25
References

Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, Thomas Lemieux, and David Margolis. 2000. “Minimum Wage and
      Youth Employment in France and the United States.” In David G. Blanchflower and Richard
      Freeman, eds. Youth Employment and Unemployment in Advanced Countries. Chicago:
      University Chicago Press, pp. 427-472.

Baicker, Katherine and Helen Levy. 2007. “Employer Health Insurance Mandates and the Risk of
       Unemployment.” Paper presented at the Cornell University Symposium on Economics of
       Employer Pay or Play Mandates, September 14th, Washington DC.

Baicker, K., and A. Chandra. 2006 "The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health Insurance
       Premiums." Journal of Labor Economics, 24: 609–634

Blumberg, L. and L. Nichols. 2002. “Why Are So Many Americans Uninsured? A Conceptual
       Framework, Summary of the Evidence, and Delineation of the Gaps in Our Knowledge.”
       ERIU Working Paper, published in Health Policy and the Uninsured, Urban Institute Press.
Brown, Charles. 1988. “Minimum Wage Laws: Are They Overrated?” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 2: 133-47.

Brown, Charles, and Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
       Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Economic Literature, 20:487-528.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and Andrew J. Glenn. 1996. “Public Policies for the
      Working Poor: The Earned Income Tax Credit versus Minimum Wage Legislation.” In Sol
      W. Polachek (ed.), Research in Labor Economics, 15: 65-109.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 1996. “Who Gets What’ from
      Minimum Wage Hikes: A Re-Estimation of Card and Krueger’s Distributional Analysis in
      Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor
      Relations Review 49(3): 547-552.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Couch, Kenneth A., and Wittenburg, David C. 2000a. “A Reassessment
      of the New Economics of the Minimum Wage.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(4): 653-
      681.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000b. “Who Minimum
      Wage Increases Bite: An Analysis Using Monthly Data from the SIPP and CPS.” Southern
      Economic Journal, 67 (1): 16-40.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and T. Aldrich Finegan. 1989. “The Minimum Wage and the Poor: The End
      of a Relationship.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 8: 53-71.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Joseph J. Sabia. 2004. “Why Raising the Minimum Wage is a Poor
      Way to Help the Working Poor.” Employment Policies Institute. (July) Washington, DC.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Joseph J. Sabia. 2007. “Effectiveness of Minimum Wage Increases
       in Reducing Poverty.” Contemporary Economic Policy 25 (2): 262-281.


                                                                                                26
Campolieti, Michelle, Tony Fang, Morley Gunderson. 2005. “Minimum Wage Impacts on Youth
      Employment Transitions, 1993-1999.” The Canadian Journal of Economics 38(1): 81-
      104.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
       Minimum Wage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press

Clinton, William J. 1995. State of the Union Address, January 24, 1995.

Currie, Janet and Bruce C. Fallick. 1996. “The Minimum Wage and the Employment of Youth:
        Evidence from the NLSY.” Journal of Human Resources 31: 404-428.

Cutler, D.M. (2003) "Employee Costs and the Decline in Health Insurance Coverage." Forum for
        Health Economics & Policy: Vol. 6: (Frontiers in Health Policy Research), Article 3.
        http://www.bepress.com/fhep/6/3

Cutler, D.M. and J. Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private Insurance?”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111(2):391-430.

Cutler, D.M. and B. Madrian. 1998. “Labor Market Responses to Rising Health Insurance Costs:
        Evidence on Hours Worked.” RAND Journal of Economics. 29(3): 509-530

DeNavas-Walt, C., B. Proctor, and J. Smith. 2007. “Income, Poverty and Health Insurance
      Coverage in the United States: 2006.”. Current Population Reports, P60-233. U.S. Census
      Bureau. Available at http://www.census.gov/prod/2007pubs/p60-233.pdf

Farber, Henry and Helen Levy. 2000. “Recent Trends in Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance
        Coverage: Are Bad Jobs Getting Worse?” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 19: 93-119

Frontin, Paul. 2005. “Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics of the Uninsured: Analysis
        of the March 2005 Current Population Survey.” Employee Benefits Research Institute Issue
        Brief No. 287

Frontin, Paul. 1986. “Employer Sponsored Health Insurance Coverage.” Employee Benefits
        Research Institute Issue Brief No. 58

Gruber, J. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits.” American Economic Review
       1994; 84(3): 622-41.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin, and John Karl Scholz. 2006. “Examining the Effect of the
       Earned Income Tax Credit on the Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare.”
       NBER Working Paper No. 11968.

Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Robert Moffitt
       (ed.) Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago, IL: University of
       Chicago Press for the NBER.




                                                                                                27
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust (KFF/HRET), 2007.
“Employer Health Benefits 2007” Available at http://www.kff.org/insurance/7672/upload/EHBS-
2007-Full-Report-PDF.pdf

Kronick R, and T. Gilmer. 1999."Explaining the Decline in Health Insurance Coverage, 1979-
       1995." Health Affairs, 18(2) : 30-47.

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Lars John Lefgren. 2000. "An Approach To Longitudinally Matching
      Population Survey (CPS) Respondents." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement,
      26(1): 31-62.

Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. "Minimum Wage Effects
      throughout the Wage Distribution." Journal of Human Resources 39(2): 425-450.

Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2005. "The Effects of Minimum Wages
      on the Distribution of Family Incomes: A Non-Parametric Analysis." Journal of Human
      Resources, 40 (4): 867-894.

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2001. “Using the EITC to Help Poor Families: New
      Evidence and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage.” National Tax Journal 54 (3): 281-
      317.

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wage, Labor Market Institutions, and
      Youth Employment: A Cross-Sectional Analysis.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57
      (2):223-248.

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2007. “Minimum Wages and Employment.”
      Foundations of Microeconomics Volume 3 Issue 1–2.

New York State Legislature. 2006. (A 10583), Obtained from
      http://assembly.state.ny.us/leg/?bn=A10583&sh=t, Summer and Fall 2006.

Stigler, George J. 1946. “The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation.” American Economic
         Review 36 (3): 358-365.

Yelowitz, Aaron. 2006. “The “Fair Share for Health Care Act” and New York’s Labor Market.”
       Employment Policies Institute, Washington, D.C.

Yelowitz, Aaron. 2004. “The Economic Impact of Proposition 72 on California Employers.”
       Employment Policies Institute. (September) Washington. DC.




                                                                                              28
Table 1. Firm size, Income and Wage Characteristics by Insurance Status


                                                   All    Uninsured Own employer   Dependent Non group Publicly insured
                                                     (1)      (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)
Weighted Percent                                   100.00    17.54       62.44        16.43     2.36          1.24
Number of observations                             23,594    3,781      14,808        4,141      560           304
Population count (Millions)                         96.94    17.00       60.53        15.92     2.28          1.20
Column Percentages
Firm size                   24 or fewer workers     24.90   43.19         16.60       32.94      49.01        31.82
                            25 to 99 workers        14.94   16.16         14.46       14.95      15.88        19.43
                            100 to 499 workers      15.36   11.84         17.09       13.80      7.74         12.90
                           More than 500 workers   44.81    28.81         51.85      38.31      27.37         35.84
Total (all firm size)                              100.00   100.00        100.00     100.00     100.00        100.00
Income-to-Needs Ratio      Less than 100            4.42    13.33          1.71       2.77       4.34         36.54
                           100-149                  5.46    14.65          3.49       1.88       5.43         21.97
                           150-199                  7.28    15.15          5.86       3.26      10.91         13.89
                           200-299                 16.97    23.62         16.37      12.63      16.32         11.75
                           300-399                 16.74    13.56         17.78      16.32      21.62          5.66
                           400 or more             49.14    19.70         54.79      63.14      41.39         10.20
Total (all incomes)                                100.00   100.00        100.00     100.00     100.00        100.00
Wage category              $0-$4.99                 1.86     4.15          0.66       3.08       4.21          8.94
                           $5.00-$7.24              8.58    19.62          3.19      15.79       6.01         32.86
                           $7.25-$10.24            19.61    36.49         13.42      23.04      26.86         33.57
                           $10.25-$14.99           25.50    24.04         26.61      23.78      23.69         16.94
                           $15.00 and above        44.45    15.70         56.12      34.30      39.23          7.70
Total (all wages)                                  100.00   100.00        100.00     100.00     100.00        100.00
Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                                                                                          29
        Table 2. Firm Size and Wage Distribution of Uninsured Workers by the Income-to-Needs Ratio of Their Family (2005)


                                            Small (less than 25) vs. Large (greater than or equal to 25) Firm, by
                                                                       Wage category
                                                                                                                                  All       All       Insured in
                                                                                                                               subsidized insured       income
Wage                                                                                                                            insured                category
category                Share       $0-$4.99       $5.00-$7.24      $7.25-$10.24 $10.25-$14.99 $15.00 and above Total
Firm
Size
category                        Small Large Small Large Small Large Small Large Small Large
Income
-to-
Needs
Ratio    N
Less
         2,265,837     13.33    4.03*    1.34*   14.38    21.46    14.60   25.65    6.87     6.84    2.72*       2.11*   100 18.7        15.56      53.95
than 100
100-150 2,490,723      14.65    2.24*    2.09*   12.16    12.63    17.96   25.39    10.37    11.07   3.15*       2.94*   100   16.6      15.56      49.09
150-200 2,575,926      15.15    2.47*    1.11*   7.68     10.16    15.67   32.51    9.68     10.50   4.55*       5.67    100   19.3      17.42      53.16
200-300 4,015,531      23.62    1.52*    3.31*   6.80     10.98    13.96   21.16    15.30    13.09   7.34        6.54    100   22.7      23.11      45.23
300-400 2,306,138      13.56    1.25*    2.89*   5.63     8.64     13.02   17.44    12.03    18.18   8.96        11.96   100   10.6      12.99      44.26
400 or
         3,349,902     19.70    1.43*    1.40*   5.12     6.93     11.95   13.72    11.05    15.39   13.96       19.04   100 12.1        15.37      36.05
more
Whole
Category 17,004,057    100.00 2.05       2.10    8.24     11.38    14.37   22.13    11.32    12.71   7.21        8.49    100 100         100        46.22
Share
Median wage                     3.10     3.05    6.45     6.45     8.87    8.63     12.33    12.08   19.73       20.03
Note: A star denotes a cell size of less than 25. Shading shows those who would be made insured by the policy.
Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                                                                                                                            30
         Table 3. Firm Size and Wage Distribution of Other Insured Workers by the Income-to-Needs Ratio of Their Family (2005)



                                                     Small (less than 25) vs. Large (greater than or equal to 25) Firm,
                                                                              by Wage category
                                                                                                                                                  All         All       Insured in
Wage                                                                                                                                           subsidized   insured       income
category              Share         $0-$4.99          $5.00-$7.24         $7.25-$10.24 $10.25-$14.99 $15.00 and above Total                     insured                  category
Firm
Size
category                         Small Large Small Large Small Large Small Large Small Large
Income
-to-Needs
Ratio     N
Less than
          978,034 5.04           6.23*     5.11* 16.14         19.75     9.75      26.87     5.66*     7.55*    0.79* 2.15*             100   9.01          6.77      54.17
100
100-150 686,881 3.54             1.77*     4.16*     10.00*    21.98     9.72      28.25     6.67*     11.00*   3.05*   3.41*           100   6.82          5.38      61.22
150-200 934,860 4.82             1.59*     4.66*     6.48*     12.01     15.11     22.95     8.57      11.08    7.22    10.34           100   6.46          5.50      46.04
200-300 2,524,975 13.01          1.77*     2.17      6.15      13.22     10.95     24.50     10.51     13.75    7.95    9.03            100   18.82         16.61     51.47
300-400 3,160,630 16.28          1.03*     2.83*     5.63      11.13     9.61      17.04     11.46     16.39    10.04   14.84           100   17.59         18.00     44.56
400 or
          11,122,865 57.31       0.85*     1.52      3.92      7.63      6.59      11.16     8.61      14.79    12.90 32.04             100   41.30         47.74     33.58
more
Whole
Category 19,408,246 100.00       1.34      2.24      5.44      10.26     8.33      15.81     9.10      14.24    10.56 22.68             100   100.00        100       40.31
Share
Median wage                         3.27      2.85      6.41      6.41      8.87      8.87     12.40     12.81 20.78            22.35
Note:   A star denotes a cell size of less than 25. Shading shows those who would be made insured by the policy.
Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                                                                                                                                         31
        Table 4, Panel A. Firm Size and Wage Distribution of Unemployment Effect for Uninsured
        Workers by the Income-to-Needs Ratio of Their Family (2005)
Assuming -0.2 elasticity         $5.00-$7.24           $7.25-$10.24
                                                                     Total    Total      %
In Large firms              Unemployed Covered Unemployed Covered Unemployed covered unemployed
Income-to-Needs Ratio
Less than 100              -61,846      424,353 -26,369       554,914 -88,216       979,267 -9.01
100-149                    -39,201      275,468 -26,448       605,933 -65,649       881,401 -7.45
150-199                    -30,861      230,835 -32,715       804,605 -63,576       1,035,440 -6.14
200-299                    -54,445      386,608 -33,110       816,491 -87,555       1,203,099 -7.28
300-399                    -25,130      174,063 -12,880       389,312 -38,010       563,375 -6.75
400 or more                -27,093      205,161 -16,636       443,055 -43,729       648,216 -6.75
Total                      -238,576     1,696,488-148,158     3,614,310-386,734     5,310,798 -7.28
        Panel B. Firm Size and Wage Distribution of Unemployment Effect for Workers with
        either dependent, individual or public coverage, by the Income-to-Needs Ratio of Their
        Family (2005)
Assuming -0.2 elasticity         $5.00-$7.24           $7.25-$10.24
                                                                          Total    Total      %
In Large firms         Unemployed Covered Unemployed           Covered Unemployed covered unemployed
Income-to-Needs Ratio
Less than 100         -25,879     167,234 -10,650             252,154 -36,529       419,388 -8.71
100-149               -18,751     132,240 -8,275              185,742 -27,026       317,982 -8.50
150-199               -15,045     97,253 -8,579               205,992 -23,624       303,245 -7.79
200-299               -41,959     291,789 -24,177             594,480 -66,135       886,269 -7.46
300-399               -44,147     307,552 -18,828             519,651 -62,976       827,203 -7.61
400 or more           -104,669    744,213 -42,484             1,198,315-147,153     1,942,528 -7.58
Total                 -250,450    1,740,281-112,993           2,956,334-363,443     4,696,615 -7.74
        Panel C. Firm Size and Wage Distribution of Unemployment Effect for Workers with
        either no insurance, dependent, individual or public coverage, by Income-to-Needs Ratio of
        Their Family (2005)
Assuming -0.2 elasticity         $5.00-$7.24           $7.25-$10.24
                                                                        Total          Total        %
In Large firms         Unemployed Covered         Unemployed Covered Unemployed       covered   unemployed
Income-to-Needs Ratio
Less than 100         -87,725     591,587         -37,020      807,068   -124,745   1,398,655   -8.92
100-149               -57,952     407,708         -34,722      791,675   -92,675    1,199,383   -7.73
150-199               -45,906     328,088         -41,294      1,010,596 -87,200    1,338,684   -6.51
200-299               -96,404     678,397         -57,287      1,410,971 -153,690   2,089,368   -7.36
300-399               -69,277     481,616         -31,709      908,963   -100,986   1,390,579   -7.26
400 or more                -131,762     949,374   -59,120      1,641,370 -190,882   2,590,744   -7.37
Total                      -489,027     3,436,769 -261,151     6,570,644 -750,178   10,007,413 -7.50
        Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                                                                        32
Table 5. Summary of Pay or Play Mandate Outcomes across Insurance Groups
Results with Alternative Elasticities Overall and on the Working Poor (2005)

                           Total       Own Working Depende Nongro Publicl Unemploye
                                     employer Uninsure nt    up      y      d (and
                                                 d                insured uninsured)
                                   60,528,32   17,004,05 15,924,34           1,200,40
                        96,940,623                                 2,283,490          0
Initial distribution               2           6         9                   5
Change due to policy               14,932,86
                        0                      -7,859,022 -6,450,671 -694,709 -678,641 750,178
(elasticity -0.2)                  5
Final distribution                 75,461,18
                        96,940,623             9,145,034 9,473,678 1,588,782521,764 750,178
(elasticity -0.2)                  7
Final distribution                 75,836,27
                        96,940,623             9,145,034 9,473,678 1,588,782521,764 375,089
(elasticity -0.1)                  6
Final distribution                 75,086,09
                        96,940,623             9,145,034 9,473,678 1,588,782521,764 1,125,267
(elasticity -0.3)                  8




By Income-to-Needs
Ratio
Less than 100% FPL
Initial distribution    4,281,308 1,037,438 2,265,837 440,454 99,005         438,574 0
Change due to policy
                        0            1,627,551 -1,222,507 -224,429 -55,675   -249,685 124,745
(elasticity -0.2)
Final distribution      4,281,308 2,664,989 1,043,330 216,025 43,330         188,890 124,745
For every worker made newly insured, 0.11 workers loose
employment




Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                     1
Appendix Table 1. Characteristics by Insurance Category

                                                           All     Uninsured Own employer Dependent Nongroup Publi
                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)
Weighted Percent                                           100       17.54      62.44       16.43    2.36
Age (years)                                                39.13     34.91      41.02       36.66    39.86
Female                                                     0.46      0.42       0.42        0.64     0.49
Number of kids in the family                                0.88      0.94       0.81        1.07    0.73
Female head with children                                   0.06      0.09       0.06        0.01     0.06
Hours worked                                               39.51     37.06      42.03       33.21    36.52
Part time                                                  0.07      0.10       0.01        0.24     0.18
Full time                                                   0.93      0.90      0.99        0.76     0.82
Weeks worked last year                                     49.18     46.83      50.68       46.56    48.02
Whether employer offered                                    0.81      0.36       1.00        0.66     0.35
Whether was eligible                                        0.75      0.22       1.00        0.50     0.18
Race           White                                        0.83      0.80       0.83        0.88     0.89
               Black                                        0.10      0.13       0.10        0.06     0.06
               Other                                        0.07      0.07       0.06       0.06      0.05
Education      HSDO                                         0.11      0.27       0.06        0.12     0.05
               HS                                          0.31      0.38       0.30        0.27     0.31
               More than HS but less than college (4 yr)    0.31      0.26       0.31        0.37     0.32
               College or more                              0.27      0.09       0.33        0.24     0.31
Marital status Married                                      0.59      0.44       0.61        0.73     0.50
               Widowed, divorced or separated               0.14      0.17       0.16        0.02     0.19
               Never married                                0.27      0.40       0.23        0.25     0.31

Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                     2
Appendix Table 2. Firm size, Income and Wage Characteristics by Insurance Status
                                         All      Uninsure Own     Depende Nongrou              Publicly
                                                     d    employer   nt       p                 insured
                                         (1)        (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)                  (6)
                                      96,940,62 17,004,05            15,924,35
                                              4         7 60,528,322         0 2,283,490          1,200,405
Totals
Firm size         24 or fewer      24,136,35
                  workers                  3 7,344,122 10,045,628 5,245,560 1,119,063               381,980
                  25 to 99 workers 14,478,22
                                              4   2,747,627   8,753,518 2,381,098     362,720       233,261
                  100 to 499          14,887,73
                  workers                     0   2,012,671 10,346,361 2,197,041      176,757       154,900
                  More than 500       43,438,31
                  workers                     7   4,899,636 31,382,816 6,100,651 624,950            430,264
                                      96,940,62   17,004,05            15,924,35
                                              4           7 60,528,322         0 2,283,490        1,200,405
Income-to-Needs Less than 100
Ratio                                 4,281,308 2,265,837     1,037,438    440,454     99,005       438,574
                  100-149             5,288,444 2,490,723     2,110,840    299,222    123,973       263,686
                  150-199             7,055,895 2,575,926 3,545,108 518,936           249,176       166,748
                  200-299             16,449,44
                                              0 4,015,531 9,908,934 2,011,404         372,573       140,999
                  300-399             16,228,54
                                              4 2,306,138 10,761,775 2,599,071        493,624        67,935
                  400 or more
                                      47,636,99                      10,055,26
                                              4 3,349,902 33,164,227         2        945,139       122,464
                                      1,801,194    705,939      400,814    490,936     96,184       107,322
Wage category     $0-$4.99              8,312,821 3,336,110 1,930,206 2,514,862 137,245              394,398
                  $5.00-$7.24           19,012,99
                                                8 6,205,574 8,121,699 3,669,526 613,252              402,948
                    $7.25-$10.24        24,722,32
                                                0 4,087,051 16,104,758 3,786,229 540,969             203,313
                    $10.25-$14.99       43,091,29
                                                1 2,669,383 33,970,846 5,462,797 895,840              92,424
                    $15.00 and          43,091,29
                    above                       1 2,669,383 33,970,846 5,462,797 895,840              92,424
Notes: The population numbers are obtained by summing the supplemental weights in each category, after re-
weighting to adjust for missing data.
The weights in the CPS are created to symbolize roughly the number of people represented by that observation
Source: CPS data estimated by the authors.




                                                       3
