                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ENDOGENOUS DISCOUNTING, THE WORLD SAVING GLUT AND THE U.S.
                         CURRENT ACCOUNT

                                           Horag Choi
                                          Nelson C. Mark
                                           Donggyu Sul

                                       Working Paper 13571
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We have benefitted from the comments by seminar participants at Brandeis University, City University
of Hong Kong, the Dallas Fed, the University of Kentucky, the Philadelphia Fed and the St. Louis
Fed. The comments of two anonymous referees and Charles Engel (the editor) led to a substantially
revised and improved paper. Mark thanks the NSF for support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Horag Choi, Nelson C. Mark, and Donggyu Sul. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Discounting, the World Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account
Horag Choi, Nelson C. Mark, and Donggyu Sul
NBER Working Paper No. 13571
November 2007
JEL No. F32,F41

                                             ABSTRACT



We study the evolution of the U.S. current account in a two-country dynamic stochastic endowment
model in which a single non-state contingent bond is the only internationally traded asset. The paper
focuses on the world ‘saving glut’ as the primary cause of continual deterioration in the current account
and departs from the standard framework by introducing a three-parameter model of the subjective
discount factor that depends on societal (per capita) variables that are external to household choices.
When agents in the model are presented with U.S. and rest-of-world endowment data as the realization
of the exogenous state vector, endogenously driven short-run international differences in subjective
discounting that display increasing relative U.S. impatience create saving and current account imbalances
that matches patterns observed in the data.


Horag Choi                                          Donggyu Sul
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Auckland                              University of Auckland
h.choi@auckland.ac.nz                               d.sul@auckland.ac.nz

Nelson C. Mark
Department of Economics and Econometrics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
nmark@nd.edu
1       Introduction
Over the past 30 years, the U.S. current account has more or less been on a trajectory of a
sustained deterioration A substantial and protracted decline since 1991 has drawn attention
and concern from policy makers and researchers alike.1 The objective of this paper is to model
and to understand the primary determinants of the U.S. current account since 1975. While
there are at least as many explanations of the current account as there are components in its
construction, S − I + (T − G) , this paper focuses on the saving channel S.
    We work with a two-country dynamic stochastic endowment model in which a single non-
state contingent bond is the only internationally traded asset. By allowing incomplete asset
markets, temporary international reallocations of wealth and associated current account im-
balances can occur. Our point of departure from the standard framework is a three-parameter
model of the subjective discount factor that depends on societal (per capita) variables that
are external to household choices. This allows short-run equilibrium diﬀerences in U.S. and
rest-of-world (ROW) impatience to arise endogenously while requiring that those diﬀerences
vanish in the steady state so a permanently patient country does not end up owning the world’s
wealth. As in Engel and Rogers (2006), our paper seeks to quantitatively assess the ability of a
simple but rational model to explain the time-path of the data in the following sense: If agents
in the model are presented with the data as realizations of the exogenous state vector, how
well do equilibrium consumption choices of people in the model explain the realized path of the
current account data? We find that the choices generated by this exercise produce relatively
high U.S. consumption, a ROW saving glut and an associated U.S. current account deficit that
explains the historical experience better than the standard model with fixed discount factors
(FDF). While we are not arguing that the saving imbalance tells the whole story about the
current account, a compelling case can be made for concentrating on the saving imbalance if
one wants to focus on what is quantitatively the most important factor driving the deficit. Our
strategy is to take this approach and to push as hard as we can on this channel to see what it
does explain.
    Looking over a three-decade period of data, the very obvious negative trend in the current
account has been accompanied by U.S. GDP growth that has outstripped growth in the ROW,
and a relatively low U.S. saving rate. The discrepancy between ROW and U.S. saving rates
    1
    Recent research includes Nason and Rogers (2006) who attempt to identify the source of deviations between
the data and a standard small-open economy real business cycle model, Bergin (2006) who attempts to fit a
new-open economy macro model to the data, Bergin and Sheﬀrin (2000) and Gourinchas and Rey (2005) who
examine present value implications for the current account, Blanchard et al. (2005) who model the exchange
rate and current account in a portfolio balance framework, Edwards (2005) and Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2004),
estimate the exchange rate impact of unwinding the current account deficit.



                                                     1
has been reported by Dooley et al. (2005) to be as large as 10 percent and the gap between
U.S. and ROW saving rates has increased over time with ROW saving rates rising slightly and
U.S. rates falling over time.
     We take as our benchmark, the standard model with FDF. This is a slight generalization
of the Engel—Rogers (2006) ‘shares’ model.2 The diﬃculty confronting the FDF model is,
conditional on the history of a rising relative U.S. endowment, it predicts that the current
account should have steadily improved over the sample period being studied which is the
opposite of what is observed in the data. This is because in the FDF model, a positive
endowment shock induces consumption smoothing agents to increase their lending to foreigners
which improves the current account. To the extent that an evolving saving rate plays a role
in current account determination, the FDF model will struggle since it implies a stationary
saving rate.
     Thus, in working with an endogenous discount factor (EDF), we join an international eco-
nomics literature in which EDFs have figured prominently at least since Obstfeld (1982) applied
the Uzawa specification to analyze a small-open economy’s response to terms of trade shocks.
In our setup, people become increasingly impatient when societal (per capita) consumption
rises above its natural or steady-state value. As relative impatience rises, net foreign assets
fall and the current account deteriorates. Conversely, when societal consumption falls below
the steady state value, impatience declines, net foreign assets rise and the current account
improves. Qualitatively, consumption/saving decisions of agents in our model resemble buﬀer-
stock saving studied by Carroll (1997, 2001, 2004). However, instead of adjusting saving to
achieve a target value of wealth, our agents adjust to achieve a target level of consumption
which is given by the steady state value.
     Other research in international economics that has incorporated EDFs include Mendoza
(1991) and Schmitt-Grohe (1998) who study small-open economy real business cycle models.
These papers were primarily concerned with the ability of the models to match selected mo-
ments of the data and were not geared towards understanding their actual time-paths. The
primary role of endogenous discounting in those papers is to induce stationary steady state
levels of debt when markets are incomplete and those authors chose parameterizations that
created only small departures from the standard model. In contrast, our motivation for incor-
porating endogenous discounting is to model a changing saving rate and we are particularly
interested in exploring more substantial departures from the standard model precisely because
the FDF model generates counterfactual implications with respect to the U.S. current account
experience.3
  2
      The Engel—Rogers model is the perfect foresight version of the standard model under log utility.
  3
      Ghironi et al. (2005) studies the current account in an overlapping generations model with exogenously



                                                      2
    Our paper does not investigate whether the present current account deficit is sustainable.4
Because the EDF model has a stationary steady state, the only sustainable current account is
the imbalance given by the initial conditions. Starting from a position of zero net indebtedness,
the model predicts that a turnaround in a current account deficit must eventually occur.
However, we can ask the model to give us a projected time frame for unwinding the deficit.
Starting from a deficit of 5.7% of GDP (the 2004 value), we project the current account forward
assuming that future innovations to the exogenous state vector are zero. Without help from
relatively higher growth in the ROW endowment, the current account is not projected to be
balanced until 2030.
    The remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section presents the external balance
data that we seek to understand and surveys some popular explanations of the current account.
It then conducts a coarse examination of the aggregate data which motivates and supports our
strategy of emphasizing the role of the saving imbalance at the expense of alternative channels
of influence. Section 3 presents the two-country endowment model that is the workhorse
for our quantitative work. Section 4 reports our main assessment of the model through an
examination of the model’s current account predictions implied by agent choices when they
are presented with the historical data as the exogenous state vector. It also generates current
account projections arising from an unwinding of the deficit. Section 5 concludes. The appendix
describes the data and contains some details about the model.



2     The U.S. current account deficit and primary causes
The annual U.S. current account data that we seek to understand (along with the trade ac-
count) are shown in Figure 1. Two conspicuous features of the current account command our
attention. The first is the steady and sustained downward trend spanning over the entire 30
year sample. Evidently, the recent worsening of the current account is a continuation of a
longer run phenomenon. The second feature are cyclical fluctuations or short-run trend rever-
sals. The current account, which was roughly in balance through the late 1970s, underwent
a large and sustained deterioration in the first half of the 1980s which was reversed in 1986
and reversed again in 1991. Since 1991, the current account has trended downwards reaching
a deficit of 6.4% of GDP in 2005.
    Next, we review some popular explanations of the current account that have been discussed
given international diﬀerences in subjective discount factors. The absense of intergenerational bequests prevents
the patient country from owning the world’s wealth in the steady state.
   4
     Consequently, we do not ask whether a particular current account deficit is sustainable. Mann (1999),
Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2004), and Faruqee et al. (2005) ask whether the current account is sustainable.


                                                       3
in the literature. We argue that a rough assessment of the explanatory power of these alter-
native explanations suggests that placing primary importance on relative saving imbalances is
not a silly thing to do.

2.1    Potential channels of influence
The twin deficits hypothesis. This idea starts with the national income account identity that
equates the current account with the excess of saving over investment plus the fiscal surplus.
If agents are non Ricardian, then an increase in the fiscal deficit that is incompletely oﬀset by
an increase in private saving will worsen the current account. Despite the simplicity of the
argument, empirical studies have uncovered little evidence that budget deficits are a quantita-
tively important source of current account movements. Papers that do find the fiscal balance
to be somewhat important are Chinn and Prasad (2003) who obtain an estimated coeﬃcient of
0.375, meaning that a 1 percent increase in the fiscal deficit is associated with a 0.375 percent
increase in the current account deficit, and Chinn and Ito (2005) who obtain a coeﬃcient of
0.21.5 On the other hand, Corsetti and Müller (2006) find no evidence that a reduction in the
U.S. fiscal deficit will have any eﬀect on the current account, Bussière et al. (2005) obtain an
estimated fiscal balance coeﬃcient of 0.07 for G-7 current accounts while Gruber and Kamin
(2005) estimate the fiscal balance coeﬃcient to be only 0.09.

Investment imbalance. A second explanation is that the current account deficit has been driven
by a U.S. investment boom combined with a shortage of attractive investment opportunities
in the ROW. An example that comes to mind is how Japan’s zero-interest rate policy failed to
stimulate meaningful investment in Japan at the same time that Japanese automobile manufac-
turers undertook direct investment projects in the U.S. Potential factors that may contribute
to the creation of relatively attractive U.S. investment opportunities include (1) high relative
U.S. productivity growth and the associated increase in the U.S. share of world income, (2)
the high relatively quality of U.S. institutions, (3) the superior depth and development of U.S.
financial markets.

Rising U.S. share of world income. Engel and Rogers (2006) identify the rising U.S. share of
world income as a critical factor in the saving context. They develop a model where the current
account can be represented approximately as the expected present value of the future share of
U.S. to ROW income. The permanent income consumers who populate their model increase
current consumption in response to an increase in the expected future U.S. share. They argue
  5
    These refer to slope coeﬃcients on the fiscal balance divided by GDP in regressions where the dependent
variable is the current account divided by GDP.



                                                    4
that if the surge in the U.S. share was anticipated, then the current account would deteriorate
as people increase current spending out of higher future income. However, it is diﬃcult to
parametrically model the relative income process in such a way that a sustained increase is
anticipated years in advance so they were unable to generate such behavior in their model.

Saving rate imbalance. This explanation says that the current account is the result of a ROW
saving glut combined with a low U.S. saving rate. The discrepancy in saving is especially
noticeable when comparing to east-Asian households where saving rates have long exceeded
those in the U.S. Recently, these already high foreign saving rates surged upwards in the after-
math of the 1997 Asian financial crisis. Bernanke (2005) attributes this to the precautionary
saving motive arising primarily from East Asian countries such as Korea, Thailand, and China,
who have built up foreign exchange reserves to guard against instability in capital flows and
exchange rates. On the U.S. side, the low saving rate is well known. The U.S. saving rate
has trended downwards since at least the 1970s. For example, Bosworth et al. (1991) report
that household discretionary saving in the U.S. declined from 5.1 percent in the 1970s to 2.2
percent in the 1980s.

2.2        Explanatory power of alternative channels
Presumably, each of the factors mentioned above play some role in determining the current
account. However, we are interested in building a small dynamic stochastic general equilib-
rium model that focuses on the primary channels of influence. The empirical analysis in this
subsection attempts to narrow down the list of primary channels.



                       Table 1: Determinants of the current account deficit


                              No trend                                   With trend
      a0    -15.77   -8.857    -8.034    4.789    -8.887     -15.34    -11.16   -5.162    -5.003
      a1                                                      -0.005    0.045   -0.064   -0.182
    ỹ      -28.02                                           -27.30
    c̃               -20.74                       -20.17               -25.65
    x̃                         -7.110              -0.253                       -4.872
    g̃                                   11.367                                          -10.03
   R̄2       0.749   0.799     0.609      0.118    0.791     0.740     0.805    0.658    0.561
   Note: Bold face indicates significance at the 5 percent level



                                                   5
    We begin with a regression analysis of the current account to GDP ratio, ca. To capture
aspects government policies, we include g̃, the log ratio of U.S. to ROW of government spending
on final goods. To assess the role of an investment imbalance, we include x̃, the log ratio of
U.S. to ROW investment. To address the role of the U.S. income ratio we include ỹ, the log
ratio of U.S. to ROW GDP, and to investigate the role of the world saving glut, we include c̃,
the log ratio of U.S. to ROW consumption. The ROW is comprised of 23 high income OECD
countries whose 2005 per capita gross national income exceeded $10,726. The data are more
fully described in the appendix.
    Table 1 reports results of estimating variants of the regression

                         ca = a0 + a1 t + b1 ỹ + b2 c̃ + b3 x̃ + b4 g̃ + error,

where t is a time trend. Government spending ratios are insignificant in simple regressions
that include a constant but no trend. Although we don’t have tax data in the analysis, the
insignificance of g̃ is consistent with more careful empirical work from the literature that finds
the fiscal balance to be a quantitatively unimportant determinant of the current account.
     In separate regressions, the GDP ratio ỹ, the consumption ratio c̃, and the investment ratio
x̃, are individually significant. The signs on the estimated coeﬃcients are negative suggesting
that an increase in the relative U.S. value of any of these variables is associated with a worsening
of the current account. Support for the investment imbalance hypothesis is fragile, however.
When c̃ and x̃ are both included in the regression, the coeﬃcient on the investment variable is
insignificant and the R̄2 is lower than it is in the regression of ca on c̃ only.
     The observations are highly persistent and probably contain a unit root. This raises the
possibility that the significance reported above is an artifact of the spurious regression prob-
lem (Granger and Newbold (1974)). To address this issue, we employ Park’s (1990) variable
addition test for cointegration. The variable that we add is a time trend. If the preceding
regressions are spurious, then adding a time trend to the regression will yield significant esti-
mates of the time-trend coeﬃcient a1 . If, on the other hand, the observations are co-integrated
unit-root processes, then the time-trend coeﬃcient will be insignificant.
     When we add the trend, evidence continues to mount against fiscal and investment factors
as the time-trend coeﬃcients are significant in these regressions. The evidence continues to
support the saving imbalance as the primary determinant of the current account as the time-
trend coeﬃcients are insignificant in the c̃ and ỹ regressions while the slope coeﬃcients on c̃
and on ỹ remain significant.
     To summarize, the regression analysis consistently points to consumption/saving behavior
as the primary driver of the current account. Since we have not employed tax data, we
cannot claim to have done a careful analysis of the twin-deficits hypothesis. However, given


                                                   6
the unimportance of government spending in conjunction with the literature’s underwhelming
empirical support we are comfortable in abstracting away from the fiscal balance.6


2.3    A closer look at the saving imbalance
There is no unique definition of the saving rate. Two definitions that have been employed
are the net national saving rate (Y − C − G)/Y, and the private sector saving rate (Y − C −
G)/(Y − G). A third is a crude measure of household saving S/Y = 1 − (C/Y ) . Since we are
primarily interested in household saving behavior and because the broad trends in all of these
series are quite similar, it will suﬃce for our purposes to examine the behavior of 1 − (C/Y ).
    Figure 2 displays the HP trends of U.S. and ROW saving rates.7 The ROW saving rate
appears to surge in the late 1990s, perhaps due to the increased precautionary saving stressed
by Bernanke. Over the full sample, ROW saving is observed to have trended up modestly
while the U.S. rate has more noticeably trended down. Our crude measure of the ROW saving
rate measured 41 percent in 1975 and increased to 42.5 percent in 2001. The U.S. saving rate
went as high as 34.9 percent in 1981 fell to 28.7 percent in 2003. The diﬀerence between the
0.02 percent per year increase in the ROW rate and the -0.12 percent per year decline in the
U.S. rate is statistically significant (t = −8.0).
    Figure 3 plots the current account, the log ratio of ROW to U.S. GDP and the log ratio
of U.S. to ROW saving rates. These observations have been standardized to promote visual
comparison among the series. Here, it can be see that U.S. GDP growth has outstripped GDP
growth in ROW. The value of ROW to U.S. GDP which stood at 1.75 in 1975 declined to 1.49
by 2003. The relative income series, the relative saving rate series and the current account all
display an overall downward trend with similar cyclical fluctuations around that trend.
    The model that we develop below is driven by the evolution of country endowment, which
we construct as Y − I − G. Since an increase in investment or government consumption im-
pact negatively on the endowment, a question thus arises about how heavily these variables
influence the endowment. Figure 4 plots the ratio of ROW to U.S. GDP and the ratio of U.S.
to ROW endowment. As can be seen, the relative endowment series displays more cyclical
variability in the 1970s whereas relative GDP appears more cyclical from the 1980s onward.
   6
     We note that there are many other potential explanations for current account raised in the literature that we
have not addressed. Among these include the exorbitant privilege–the higher returns earned by U.S. investors
on foreign assets than returns earned by foreign holders of U.S. assets (Gourinchas and Rey [2005])–that has
helped the U.S. to finance the deficits, demographic factors (Domeij and Floden [2006]), and the U.S provision
of collateral to poor countries that enables capital formation to be financed through U.S. financial markets
(Dooley et al. [2004]). Analyses of these ideas are beyond the scope of the present paper.
   7
     The parameter value of 6.25 is used in the HP filtering.



                                                        7
While the cyclical aspects are altered somewhat by movements in investment and government
consumption, the overall trend of the two series are quite similar. The similarity between the
relative endowment and GDP trends is consistent with the regression analysis presented earlier
which found investment and government consumption to have had limited impact in driving
the current account.
    The downward trend in the income-consumption ratios is a problem for the standard model
since it implies that the consumption-income ratio is stationary. But it would be wrong to say
that the puzzle is due entirely to the restrictiveness of the representative agent framework. A
look at empirical micro studies on saving behavior of heterogeneous agents finds no consensus
on the underlying source of the decline in the U.S. saving rate. While Attanasio (1998) argues
that those born between 1925 and 1939 are responsible for the decline, Summers et al. (1987)
and Boswoth et al. (1991) reject the hypothesis that the decline can be traced to specific
age cohorts (e.g., the baby boom generation) or the changing composition of traditionally
high savers (married couples) and low savers (the young and retirees). Gokhale et al. (1996)
argue that the decline can be partially attributed to the expansion of medicare and medicaid,
although the timing of the changes do not match up.8 Bernheim et al. (2001) model diﬀerences
in retirement wealth among U.S. households find little evidence for the life-cycle saving theory.
    In short, the literature agrees that the private saving rate in the U.S. has been on a long
decline but there is no consensus on the cause. There is no consistent evidence that the decline
can be traced to changes in tax and transfer polices, to federal deficits, or to demographic
trends. Because saving is evidently important for understanding the current account, we want
to be able to model the evolving saving rate in the context of an open economy macro model.
We do this in the next section by endogenizing the subjective discount factors.



3       A two-country endogenous discount endowment model
This section presents the two-country one-good endowment model that underlies our quantita-
tive analysis. Each country, j = 1, 2, is inhabited by identical infinitely lived households that
consists of Nj,t members. The number of household members in each country grows at the
constant rate n = ln Nj,t+1 − ln Nj,t . Each household member owns a nonstorable endowment
stream yielding yj,t units each period.

Budget constraints. Households in each country can exchange goods and a non-state contingent
    8
     In Bosworth’s discussion of the paper he notes that introduction of medicare and medicaid and the expansion
of social security benefits were largely completed by the early 1970s but the national saving rate did not decline
until the 1980s.


                                                        8
bond that is in zero net supply. The real price of the bond is vt and a bond issued at t − 1 pays
one unit of the consumption good at t. At t, income for a member of a household in country
j is the payoﬀ from bonds purchased last period bj,t−1 and the endowment yj,t which is spent
on consumption and new bond holdings vt bj,t .9 If cj,t is household consumption in country j,
the aggregate budget constraints for country j = 1, 2 is

                                Nj,t cj,t + vt Nj,t bj,t ≤ Nj,t yj,t + Nj,t−1 bj,t−1 .                            (1)




Preferences. Engel and Rogers (2006) show that the FDF representative agent macro model
does not give a satisfactory explanation for the U.S. current account. One salient feature of
the data that it will have trouble explaining is the trending saving rate. To account for the
evolution of saving behavior, which appears to be a key factor behind the current account
deterioration, we assume that consumers discount factors θj,t , depend on societal or per capita
consumption which varies over time. Thus, a country j household seeks to maximize
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                              E0          θj,t−1 u (cj,t ) Nj,t ,
                                                   t=0

subject to the budget constraint (1) where period utility for a member of the household is the
constant relative risk aversion function

                                                                     c1−γ
                                                                      j,t
                                                       u (cj,t ) =          ,
                                                                     1−γ
where γ ≥ 0 is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion.
    Let cj,t be societal consumption at t and c∗j,t be the steady-state value of societal consump-
tion along a balanced growth path. In the symmetrical equilibrium, consumption is identical
across individuals within the country so there will be no diﬀerence between societal and indi-
vidual consumption. At this point, however, it is useful as an expositional device to maintain
   9
    When we evaluate the FDF model, we will impose a small cost upon the household to participate in the
bond market ξ (vt b1,t )2 /(2y1,t ), which ensures that a stationary steady state exists. If the cost parameter
ξ = 0, the steady state level of bond holdings will be dependent on initial conditions. Similarly, a member of
a foreign household will bear a cost of ξ (vt b2,t )2 / (2y2,t ) to participate in the bond market. In the simulations
and empirical work, we set ξ to a very small number so as to be largely inconsequential in characterizing the
short-run dynamics. In this case, the budget constraints become for j = 1, 2,

                                                       ξ Nj,t (vt bj,t )2
                          Nj,t cj,t + vt Nj,t bj,t +                      ≤ Nj,t yj,t + Nj,t−1 bj,t−1 .
                                                       2      yj,t




                                                                9
the distinction because the household views societal consumption as external to its maximiza-
tion problem and does not take into account how its consumption choice aﬀects the discount
factor.
    Temporary divergences between cj,t and c∗j,t cause the subjective discount factor θj,t to vary
over time according to the three (β, η, ψ) parameter model
                                                                   t
                                                                   Y
                                   θj,t = θj,t−1 β j,t = θj,−1           β 1,t−i ,                             (2)
                                                                   i=0
                                                      ⎡Ã      !−ψ ⎤(1−η)
                                                        c̄j,t
                                   β j,t   = β ηj,t−1 ⎣ ∗        β⎦      ,                                     (3)
                                                        cj,t

where η ∈ [0, 1] , β ∈ [0, 1] , ψ ∈ [0, ψ̄), ψ̄ < ∞, with initial conditions bj,−1 , θj,−1 and β j,−1
given.10 The subjective discount factor is such that people become increasingly impatient
when societal consumption exceeds its steady-state value. Current impatience is also partly
inherited from the past where the parameter η directly regulates the persistence in the period
discount factor β j,t . The FDF specification, which is a modest generalization of the Engel and
Rogers (2006) ‘shares’ model, is nested within the EDF model and can be obtained by setting
η = 1 and ψ = 0.
    Other researchers, such as Mendoza (1991), Schmidt-Grohe (1998), Schmidt-Grohe and
Uribe (2003), and Kim and Kose (2003) have employed EDF specifications. These authors
construct models of small open economies with incomplete markets and an exogenous real
interest rate and introduce EDFs as a device to induce a stationary steady state. The main
diﬀerence between our EDF and theirs is that we allow persistence in β j,t . The common feature
of the alternative specifications is that impatience is increasing with consumption.11 This may
seem counterintuitive but the eﬀect is temporary. The heightened impatience lasts only as
long as consumption lies above the steady-state level. Bian and Meng (2004) and Meng (2006)
study how indeteterminancies can arise in models with socially determined discount factors.
Such indeterminacies do not occur in our specification.

Aggregate equilibrium conditions. We rewrite the household’s problem in terms of aggregates.
Let upper case letters denote the aggregate of the lower case variables, Xj,t = Nj,t xj,t , where
  10
k Let c̃t = lnlc1,t − ln c2,t . Ignoring constant terms, log-linearizing the risk-sharing condition gives h ct+1 =
 η + 1 − ψ(1−η)
             γ
                  h
                  ct − ηh
                        ct−1 +  vt −  ηvt−1 where v is an expectation  error. For η ∈ [0, 1], relative consumption
                                                                            k               l
will be a stationary process if ψ is chosen such that the solutions to z 2 − η + 1 − ψ(1−η)
                                                                                        γ
                                                                                              z + η = 0 lie outside
the unit circle. ψ̄ is the upper bound of ψ such that this is condition holds.
  11
     Abstracting away from a labor decision, the period discount factor employed by those authors β t =
(1 + ct−1 )−ψ . They choose ψ to match the average trade-balance to GDP ratio.


                                                        10
xj,t a variable for a household member. Then household lifetime discounted expected utility
can be rewritten as
                                      X∞          1−γ γ
                                                 Cj,t Nj,t
                                   E0     θj,t−1           ,
                                      t=0
                                                  1−γ
where the subjective discount factor θj,t , evolves as in (2), with
                                              ⎡Ã       !−ψ ⎤(1−η)
                                                 C j,t
                             β j,t = β ηj,t−1 ⎣    ∗      β⎦       .
                                                 C j,t

In equilibrium, a household member’s consumption coincides with societal consumption cj,t =
cj,t . For j = 1, 2, the budget constraints can be rewritten in terms of aggregates as

                                   Cj,t + vt Bj,t ≤ Yj,t + Bj,t−1 .

From the household’s problem, we obtain for j = 1, 2, the bond Euler equations
                                         µ       ¶ µ        ¶
                                           Cj,t+1 −γ Nj,t+1 γ
                           vt = β j,t Et                       .                                 (4)
                                            Cj,t       Nj,t
The model is closed by the zero-net supply constraint on bonds

                                          B1,t + B2,t = 0,

the resource constraint
                                     Y1,t + Y2,t = C1,t + C2,t ,
and a first-order vector autoregression (VAR(1)) that governs the endowments
      Ã                     ! Ã            !Ã                               ! Ã      !
         ln Y1,t − δ 1 − gt       a11 a12       ln Y1,t−1 − δ 1 − g (t − 1)     ε1,t
                             =                                               +         ,         (5)
         ln Y2,t − δ 2 − gt       a21 a22       ln Y2,t−1 − δ 2 − g (t − 1)     ε2,t
                                               iid
where δ 1 , δ 2 are constant terms, (ε1,t , ε2,t )0 ∼ N (0, Σε ) , and g is the common growth rate of
the endowments. Note that δ 1 − δ 2 determines the relative size of the country 1 endowment in
the steady state. We impose a common growth rate to be consistent with a balanced-growth
requirement. The quantitative analysis that follows below works with aggregate observations
detrended at this rate g. The appendix describes the model in terms of detrended aggregates.
    Two other variables of interest are the trade balance to GDP ratio
                                                 Y1,t − C1,t
                                         tbt =               ,
                                                     Y1,t
and the current account balance to GDP ratio
                                                 (1 − vt−1 )B1,t−1
                                   cat = tbt +                     .
                                                        Y1,t

                                                     11
    We note that our model is related to Yi’s (1993) two-country endowment model where
households value government purchases, G. In his model, the period utility function is constant
relative risk aversion in a Cobb-Douglas index of consumption goods and government purchases.
The counterpart of the bond Euler equation (4) in his paper is
                                 µ       ¶          µ       ¶
                                   Gj,t+1 (1−α)(1−γ) Cj,t+1 α(1−γ)−1
                            vt =                                     ,
                                    Gj,t               Cj,t
where α is the share of government spending in the consumption index and γ is the coeﬃcient
of relative risk aversion. For values of γ > 1 (so that (1 − α) (1 − γ) < 0) the growth of
government purchases in his model works in the same way as increasing impatience but he is
unable to explain the trade balance data by setting γ = 2,. To get close to the data, he requires
γ = 0.2 and that agents anticipate in 1981 that G will decline by 10 percent by 1988. The
                                                                              ³       ´
                                                                                Gj,t+1 (1−α)(1−γ)
sudden recognition of persistently falling government consumption causes         Gj,t
to be decreasing over time which simulates increasing impatience.

3.1   Assigning parameter values
We take the U.S. to be country 1 and the ROW to be country 2. For the period utility function,
we set the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion γ = 2 in accordance with commonly used values
in the literature. Parameters for the process (5) governing the endowment (Y − I − G) are
obtained by estimating a bivariate VAR with a common trend coeﬃcient g for both countries.
The estimates, shown in Table 2, exhibit relatively low persistence for the ROW and negative
spill-over eﬀects (a12, a21 < 0).


                                 Table 2: VAR coeﬃcients


                               Parameter     Estimate     (s.e.)
                                    g         0.029     (0.0004)
                                   δ1        28.710      (0.008)
                                   δ2        29.063      (0.008)
                                   a11        0.754      (0.105)
                                   a12       −0.117      (0.094)
                                   a21       −0.319      (0.243)
                                   a22        0.198      (0.218)
                                   σ 11      0.0112
                                   σ 12      0.00752
                                   σ 22      0.0272

                                               12
     We set the steady-state discount factor β = 0.96. We are unable to draw upon the literature
to set η and ψ since existing work with EDF models do not allow for persistence. Thus, to
obtain these values we estimate η and ψ by generalized method of moments (GMM). The GMM
problem seeks to match moments for relative consumption implied by the model to sample
moments computed from in the data. We use the first moment of relative consumption, the
variance and first-order autocorrelation of relative consumption levels and the variance and
first-order autocorrelation of the deviation of relative consumption from a trend.12


                                   Table 3: GMM estimates


                                   Parameter     Estimate     (s.e.)
                                       η           0.952      (0.001)
                                       ψ           0.543      (0.007)
                                   J-statistic     6.157
                                    p-value        0.104


    The parameter estimates are shown in Table 3. η and ψ are precisely estimated as seen
by the small standard errors relative to the estimated values. The relatively large value of
the estimated η says that the discount factors exhibit a high degree of persistence. The data
supports the EDF specification in that the test of three overidentifying restrictions has a p-
value of 0.104 which does not reject the model at standard significance levels.


3.2    Properties of the model
This section examines the dynamic properties of the model through impulse response analysis.
To fix ideas, we begin with the properties of the standard FDF model. Figures 5 and 6 show
the impulse-response from a one standard deviation shock to U.S. endowment. Home and
foreign consumption are seen to be highly positively correlated. A positive U.S. endowment
shock initially raises home consumption but by less than the increase in the endowment giving
rise to a current account surplus. The desire to smooth consumption intertemporally causes
U.S. residents to want to share some of the extra endowment with the ROW. Due to the
  12
    Schmidt-Grohe and Uribe (2003) and Kim and Kose (2003) set their counterpart to ψ to match the average
trade-balance to GDP ratio.



                                                   13
negative spillover eﬀect, ROW’s endowment falls in the following period. As in Baxter and
Crucini (1995), the internationally traded bond provides a substantial amount of risk sharing
across countries. The U.S. shares some of its endowment gain with ROW and consumption
increases at home and abroad. The ROW pays for the additional consumption by issuing
debt to the U.S. thereby improving the U.S. current account. Over the longer run, foreign
debt service allows the U.S. to run a trade deficit and to enjoy higher relative consumption.
The apparently procyclical current account and the high comovements of consumption are
counterfactual implications of the FDF model.13
    The impulse responses under EDF are strikingly diﬀerent and appear to be more consistent
with the stylized facts. In Figure 7, an innovation to the U.S. endowment leads to a more than a
proportionate increase in consumption which lowers the saving ratio. In the initial period, high
relative U.S. consumption lowers the equilibrium discount factor to make the U.S. relatively
impatient. The U.S. trade and current accounts worsen immediately since the relatively high
U.S. endowment is not suﬃcient to cover the even higher consumption. Domestic dissaving is
observed for the first several periods as U.S. consumption lies above the home endowment. The
short-run worsening of the current account and its apparent countercyclical nature under the
EDF specification contrasts sharply with the response in the FDF model. Instead of triggering
increased saving due to the consumption smoothing motive, the endowment shock creates a
surge in consumption financed by borrowing from foreigners.
    A qualitative feature of the EDF model is that agents engage in buﬀer stock saving. Buﬀer
stock saving has been studied in a series of papers by Carroll (1997, 2001, 2004). He shows
for finitely lived consumers with no bequest motive, impatience and the precautionary saving
motive work in opposite directions when consumers are moderately impatient. Because very
poor agents are less able to buﬀer consumption against adverse shocks, the precautionary
saving motive becomes stronger as wealth declines. The point at which impatience and the
precautionary motive oﬀset each other defines a target level of wealth. When wealth rises above
this target, impatience dominates and wealth begins to fall and when wealth falls below the
target, the precautionary motive dominates and wealth begins to rise. In the EDF model, when
domestic societal consumption rises above steady—state consumption, home agents become
impatient and net foreign assets decline.14
    Figure 8 shows the reallocations of relative wealth that are transmitted through the current
account. The positive innovation to the U.S. endowment temporarily raises the present value
  13
     Backus et al. (1992) document the countercyclicality of the trade balance and the low (relative to output)
correlation of national consumption.
  14
     In Carroll (1997), prudence is characterized by the existence of precautionary saving and impatience by
consumption in excess of income in a world of certainty. The utility function that we employ exhibits both of
these properties.


                                                      14
of U.S. endowment income. Impatience and consumption rises, the net foreign asset position
declines and the U.S. current account deteriorates immediately. The negative spill-over eﬀects
causes the present value of ROW endowment to fall. ROW consumption falls which makes
them more patient. The ROW desires to run a current account surplus beginning immediately.
This contrasts with the FDF specification where the positive innovation to U.S. endowment
results in a permanent increase in U.S. wealth relative to ROW.
    Looking beyond the impact eﬀects, the transition back to the steady state is oscillatory
rather than monotonic as in the FDF model. The positive endowment shock that initially
raised U.S. consumption makes domestic agents relatively impatient and generates domestic
dissaving. Over time, as the ROW becomes relatively wealthier and the U.S. becomes relatively
poorer, the ROW becomes impatient relative to the U.S. During this time, ROW consumption
rises, U.S. consumption falls and the current account improves. The model exhibits a rich set
of transition dynamics during which home and foreign consumption are negatively correlated.

Sensitivity to variations in η and ψ. Here, we examine the sensitivity of the impulse responses
to variations in the discount factor parameters η and ψ. Recall that the EDF approaches the
FDF β as ψ (1 − η) → 0.
    We begin by examining variations in η. Figure 9 shows the response of the relative U.S. to
ROW discount factor for η = (0.97, 0.9, 0.8, 0.6) with all other parameters set at their baseline
values. The persistence in the discount factor is seen to be increasing in η and the volatility
decreasing in η. The persistence and volatility of the discount factor plays a pivotal role in
determining the persistence and volatility of consumption and the current account. Figure 10
shows the response in U.S. consumption and Figure 11, the response in ROW consumption for
alternative values of η. Higher values increase the persistence of the consumption responses.
The excess U.S. consumption and associated current account deterioration that follows the
endowment shock is robust to the range of η values considered.
    Next, we examine the eﬀect of variations in the elasticity of the EDF to consumption ψ.
Figure 12 shows the response of the relative discount factors for ψ = (0.8, 0.6, 0.3, 0.2) with all
other parameters set at their baseline values. While the most noticeable eﬀect of variations
in ψ on the discount factor is on volatility, which is increasing in ψ, persistence is seen to be
decreasing in ψ. Figures 13 and 14 show the U.S. and ROW consumption responses that follow
an innovation to the U.S. endowment. For ψ = 0.8 and 0.6, ROW consumption declines upon
impact and U.S. consumption lies above the endowment. The immediate worsening of the
current account, shown in Figure 15, is robust to these values of ψ. Smaller values of ψ brings
the model closer to the FDF dynamics, however, as it attenuates U.S. impatience following the
shock. For ψ = 0.3 and 0.2, there is an initial span of time where the U.S. current account is
in surplus before turning into a deficit.

                                                15
    To summarize, the parameters η and ψ control both the volatility and the persistence in
the discount factors, consumption, and current account responses. The impulse responses look
more like those from the FDF specification for small values of ψ, which is expected since it is
nested within the EDF model and obtains when ψ (1 − η) = 0.



4    Understanding the U.S. current account
We now turn to our main objective and ask to what extent the model can explain the modern
U.S. current account experience. We bypass the exercise of looking at the model’s ability to
match various moments of the data and seek to understand the entire time-path of the data.
We present agents in the model with the endowment data as a realization of the state vector
and compare the external balances implied by their consumption choices to the current account
data.

Fixed discount factor model. To form a basis of comparison, we again start with the predictions
from the model under FDF. Figure 16 displays the exact choices by agents in the model
along with the data. Here, we see that from 1983 onwards, the standard model predicts
a sustained improvement in the current account which goes in the wrong direction. The
correlation between the predicted and actual current account is -0.67. The implied current
account improves because the increase in relative U.S. endowment induces U.S. residents to
carry the endowment gains into the future by increased saving. Owing to the steady rise in
the U.S. share of world endowment, the model predicts a counterfactual ongoing improvement
in the current account. The predicted current account path that we obtain is qualitatively
similar to the predictions of Engel and Rogers’ (2006) ‘shares’ model.
    Engel and Rogers argue that one way for their model to generate a worsening of the current
account is if agents continually underpredict the U.S. share of GDP. They report evidence to
support such underprediction using survey data from Consensus Forecasts. However, they are
not successful in generating revisions of rational expectations of the size necessary to account
for the data using reasonable parametric specifications the income shares process.

Endogenous discount factor model. The data and the predicted current account under EDF
are shown in Figure 17. As can be seen, the model explains quite well the negative trend of the
current account. The correlation between the predicted and actual current account is 0.566.
The model also generates fluctuations around the trend that are of the correct magnitude, but
does less well in timing the cyclical fluctuations. The model misses the data from 1981 to
1991. From 1981 to 1985, the model predicts an improvement while the actual current account


                                              16
deteriorates. From 1987 to 1991, the model predicts a worsening while the current account
improved.
    The worsening current account predicted by the model is driven by the persistent and
increasing impatience of the U.S. vis-a-vis the ROW. Figure 18 shows the percentage deviation
from the steady state of the relative U.S. discount factor. Over the sample period, the relative
U.S. annual rate of time preference decreased by 0.148 basis points per annum on average.

Projections for unwinding the current account deficit. Here, we use the model to predict the
time-paths for achieving current account balance from a position of a 5.7% deficit relative to
GDP. We report the model’s estimate on the length of the transition and upon the dynamics
of the current and trade account adjustment. The estimates are formed from choices made
by model agents where given the year 2004 state of the world, all future U.S. and ROW
endowments shocks are set to zero.15
    The model’s projections are shown in Figure 19. The trade balance is projected to remain
in deficit until 2020 and the current account deficit is projected to improve through 2030 when
it goes into surplus. Given the minimalist setup of the model and the absence of any rigidities,
the model projects only soft-landings although the transition phase can last a long time. The
projected path of the U.S. net foreign asset position is shown in Figure 20 which declines to a
whopping 81 percent of GDP three years after the trade deficit is erased.
    The model seems to predict that the ongoing worsening of the U.S. current account deficit
may soon be resolved in the absence of future endowment shocks. Naturally, the transition
to a balanced current account will be hastened if the rest-of-world experiences relatively more
rapid endowment growth.



5        Conclusions
To rephrase a statement from Nason and Rogers (2006), current account trends resist easy
explanations. In this paper, we attempt to provide a quantitative explanation of the sustained
negative trend in the U.S. current account using the simplest possible framework; a two-country
endowment model that is standard in all respects except that subjective discount factors are
endogenous. In allowing societal consumption levels to influence the subjective discount factor,
we are able to account for the sustained worsening of the current account and the evolving and
saving rates at home and abroad. The resulting model improves over the standard model with
fixed subjective discounting.
    15
   Since the rest-of-world endowments from 2004 are not available, we use forecasted values from the estimated
VAR process.


                                                     17
    While we have limited our investigation to an endowment model we view the eﬀort as an
intermediate step towards a complete understanding of the U.S. current account. The model
struggles to explain the cyclical fluctuations during the period from 1981 to 1991. While in-
vestment flows do not appear to be important for understanding the long-term current account
trend, they may be important for understanding cyclical aspects. Alternatively, the unusual
cyclical behavior of the data during this period coincided with the Volker stabilization of U.S.
inflation suggesting that a full understanding may require a model with money. Extending the
model to a production economy and the introduction of money are two directions for future
work.




                                              18
References
 [1] Attanasio, Orazio P.(1998). “Cohort Analysis of Saving Behavior by U.S. Households,”
        The Journal of Human Resources, 33(3), Summer, 575-609.
 [2] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland, (1992). “International Real
        Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 4, 745-777
 [3] Baxter, Marianne and Mario J. Crucini, (1995). “Business Cycles and the Asset Structure
        of Foreign Trade,” International Economic Review, 36, 821—854
 [4] Bergin, Paul R. (2006). “How Well Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics Explain
        the Exchange Rate and the Current Account?” Journal of International Money and
        Finance, 25(5), August, 675-701.
 [5] Bergin, Paul R. and Steven M. Sheﬀrin, (2000). “Interest Rates, Exchange Rates, Present
        Value Models of the Current Account,” Economic Journal, 110(463), April, 535—558.
 [6] Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). “Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke at the
        Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia.”
        http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/default.htm.
 [7] Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner and Steven Weinberg, (2001). “What Accounts
        for the Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. households?” American Economic
        Review, 91(4), September, 832-857.
 [8] Bian, Yong and Qinglai Meng, (2004). “Preferences, Endogenous Discount Rate, and In-
        determinacy in a Small Open Economy Model,’ Economics Letters, 84(3), September,
        315—322
 [9] Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi and Filipa Sa, (2005). “The U.S. Current Account
        and the Dollar,” NBER working paper No. 11137.
[10] Bosworth, Barry, Gary Burtless and John Sabelhaus, (1991). “The Decline in Saving:
        Evidence from Household Surveys,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991(1),
        183—256.
[11] Bussière, Matthieu, Marcel Fratzscher and Gernot J. Müller, (2005). “Productivity
        Shocks, Budget Deficits and the Current Account,” European Central Bank Work-
        ing Paper No. 509.
[12] Carroll, Christopher D., (1997). “Buﬀer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent In-
        come Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92, 1—55.
[13] Carroll, Chrisopher D., (2001). “A Theory of the Consumption Function With and With-
        out Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 23—45.

                                            19
[14] Carroll, Christopher D., (2004). “Theoretical Foundations of Buﬀer-Stock Saving,” mimeo,
        Johns Hopkins University.
[15] Chinn, Menzie D. and Eswar S. Prasad (2003). “Medium-term Determinants of Current
        Accounts in Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration,” Journal
        of International Economics, 59(1), January, 47-76.
[16] Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2005). “Current Account Balances, Financial Development
        and Institutions: Assaying the World ‘Savings Glut’,” NBER working paper No. 11761.
[17] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Gernot J. Müller, (2006). ‘Twin Deficits: Squaring Theory, Evi-
        dence and Common Sense,’ Economic Policy, 21(48), October, 597-638.
[18] Domeij, David and Martin Floden, (2006). “Population Aging and International Capital
       Flows,” International Economic Review, 47, 1013—1032.
[19] Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau and Peter M. Garber, (2004). “The U.S. Cur-
       rent Account Deficit and Economic Development: Collateral for a Total Return Swap,”
       NBER working paper No. 10727.
[20] Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau and Peter M. Garber, (2005). “Savings Gluts
       and Interest: The Missing Link to Europe,” NBER working paper No. 11520.
[21] Edwards, Sebastian, (2005). “Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And If Not,
       How Costly Is Adjustment Likely To Be?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
       2005(1), 211-288.
[22] Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, (2006). “The U.S. Current Account Deficit and
        the Expected Share of World Output,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(5), July,
        1063-1093.
[23] Faruqee, Hamid, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir and Paolo Pesenti, (2005). “Smooth Landing
        or Crash? Model-Based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing,” NBER
        Working Paper No. 11583.
[24] Ghironi, Fabio, Talan B. İşcan, and Alessandro Rebucci, (2005). “Net Foreign Asset Posi-
        tions and Consumption Dynamics in the International Economy,” International Mon-
        etary Fund Working Paper WP/05/82.
[25] Gokhale, Jagadeesh, laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ and John Sabelhaus, (1996). “Understanding the
       Post-War Decline in U.S. Saving: A Cohort Analysis,” Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity, 1996(1), 315-390.
[26] Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier, and Helene Rey, (2005). “From World Banker to World Ven-
       ture Capitalist: The U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” NBER
       working paper No. 11563.

                                              20
[27] Granger, C.W.J., and P. Newbold, (1974). “Spurious Regressions in Economics,” Journal
        of Econometrics. July, 2(2): 111-120.
[28] Gruber, Joseph W. and Steven B. Kamin, (2005). “Explaining the Global Pattern of
        Current Account Imbalances,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
        International Finance Discussion Paper No. 846.
[29] Kim, Sunghyun and M. Ayhan Kose, (2003). “Dynamics of Open-Economy Business-Cycle
        Models: Role of the Discount Factor,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 7(2), April, 263—290.
[30] Mann, Catherine L., (1999). Is the U.S. Trade Deficit Sustainable? Washington D.C.:
       Institute for International Economics.
[31] Mendoza, Enrique, (1991). “Real Business Cycles in a Small-Open Economy,” American
       Economic Review 81(4), September, 797-818.
[32] Meng, Qinglai, (2006). “Impatience and Equilibrium Indeterminacy,” Journal of Economic
       Dynamics & Control, 30(12), December, 2671—2692
[33] Nason, James, and John H. Rogers, (2006). “The Present-Value Model of the Current
        Account Has Been Rejected: Round Up the Usual Suspects,” Journal of International
        Economics, 86(1), January, 159-187.
[34] Obstfeld, Maurice, (1982). “Aggregate spending and the terms of trade: Is there a Laursen-
       Metzler eﬀect?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97(2), May, 251-270.
[35] Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (2004), “The Unsustainable US Current Account
       Position Revisited,” NBER working paper No. 10869.
[36] Park, Joon Y. (1990). “Testing for Unit Roots and Cointegration by Variable Addition,” in
        Fomby, Thomas B.; Rhodes, George F., Jr., eds., Co-integration, spurious regressions,
        and unit roots. Advances in Econometrics series, vol. 8, Greenwich, Conn. and London:
        JAI Press, 107-133.
[37] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, (1998). “The International Transmission of Economic Fluctu-
        ations: Eﬀects of U.S. Business Cycles on the Canadian Economy,” Journal of Inter-
        national Economics, 44(2), April, 257-287.
[38] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2003). “Closing Small Open Economy Mod-
        els,” Journal of International Economics, 61, 163-185.
[39] Summers, Lawrence, Chris Carroll and Alan S. Blinder, (1987). “Why is U.S. National
       Saving So Low?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987(2), 607—642.
[40] Yi, Kei-Mu, (1993). “Can Government Purchases Explain the Recent U.S. Net Export
        Deficits?” Journal of International Economics 35, 201—225.


                                              21
                        2

                        1

                        0
                        1975                 1980                1985            1990               1995             2000                2005
CA and TB (% of GDP)




                       -1

                       -2

                       -3             Trade account
                                                                                       Current account
                       -4

                       -5

                       -6

                       -7


                                                                   Figure 1. The data
                                                                                                                                       0.34


                 0.424               U.S. Saving Rate                                                                                  0.335



                                                                                                                                       0.33


                 0.422
                                                                                                                                       0.325



                                                                                                                                       0.32
ROW (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                               U.S. (% of GDP)

                       0.42
                                                                                                                                       0.315



                                                                                                                                       0.31
                 0.418
                                               ROW Saving Rate                                                                         0.305



                                                                                                                                       0.3
                 0.416


                                                                                                                                       0.295



                 0.414                                                                                                                 0.29
                              1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003



                                                           Figure 2. Saving rate trends



                                                                                 22
 2.5

                                                                          Relative US to ROW
               2                                                          saving rate

 1.5                                                                              ROW GDP relative to US GDP

               1


 0.5


               0
               1974                        1979              1984              1989                 1994             1999                   2004

-0.5


         -1


-1.5


         -2
                                           Current account to GDP ratio
-2.5


         -3



                                Figure 3. Standardized current account to GDP ratio, relative
                                          household saving rates and income shares.
                                                                                                                                          1.8


                      1.55

                                                                                             Relative ROW to US GDP                       1.75



                       1.5
                                                                                                                                          1.7
Relative Endowments




                      1.45
                                                                                                                                          1.65
                                                                                                                                                 Relative GDPs




                       1.4
                                                                                                                                          1.6




                      1.35
                                                                                                                                          1.55



                                                           Relative ROW to US endowment
                       1.3                                                                                                                1.5




                      1.25                                                                                                                1.45
                             1975   1977    1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993    1995   1997   1999     2001   2003



                                            Figure 4. Relative GDP and relative endowments


                                                                                 23
1.4



1.2        USA endowment

  1



0.8



0.6



0.4
                                         USA consumption

0.2



  0
                            ROW consumption
       0   1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

-0.2



-0.4
                                     ROW endowment

-0.6



                            Figure 5. Consumption in standard (FDF) model
0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4
                                         Current account
0.3



0.2



0.1
            Trade balance

  0
       0   1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30


-0.1



-0.2



                       Figure 6. External balances in standard (FDF) model



                                                               24
  2




1.5
               U.S. endowment

  1                               U.S. consumption


0.5




  0
       0   2   4    6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22    24    26   28   30   32    34   36   38   40   42   44   46   48   50




-0.5
                                       ROW endowment

       ROW consumption
 -1



                     Figure 7: Consumption in endogenous discount model
0.6




0.4




0.2
           Trade balance


  0
       0   2   4     6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22    24    26   28   30   32    34   36   38   40   42   44   46   48   50



-0.2                                                                                       Relative discount factor


-0.4
                                                                Current account

-0.6




-0.8



                   Figure 8: External balances in endogenous discount model



                                                                      25
 0.2



 0.1



   0
        0   2   4   6   8   10   12    14   16    18    20   22   24   26    28   30    32    34    36    38    40    42    44    46    48    50


 -0.1



 -0.2


                                                                    0. 97
 -0.3



 -0.4                                              0. 90

 -0.5                                              0. 85

 -0.6                                              0. 80
                                                                                                                         0. 543
 -0.7



             Figure 9. Sensitivity of relative discount factor with respect to η
   2




 1.5


                                    0. 97

   1                                    0. 90
                                         0. 85
 0.5
                                           0. 80



   0
        0   2   4   6   8   10   12    14   16     18   20   22   24    26   28    30    32    34    36    38    40    42    44    46    48    50




 -0.5       Endowment



  -1



Figure 10: Sensitivity of USA consumption with respect to η variations.



                                                                       26
 0.4




 0.2

            Endowment

   0
        0       2       4   6   8   10   12   14    16   18   20   22   24   26   28   30   32   34   36   38   40   42   44   46   48   50




 -0.2
                                                                 0. 97

                                                         0. 90
 -0.4                                                0. 85
                                            0. 80
 -0.6




 -0.8



        Figure 11: Sensitivity of ROW consumption with respect to η variations
  0.4



  0.3



  0.2



  0.1



   0
        0   2       4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70

 -0.1
                                                                0. 20
 -0.2


                                                                0. 30
 -0.3



 -0.4
                                                                0. 60

 -0.5
                                                                0. 80
                                                                                                                             0. 952
 -0.6




Figure 12. Relative discount factor sensitivity with respect to ψ



                                                                             27
   2.5




    2
                 Endowment

   1.5                            0. 80
                                     0. 60
    1




   0.5




    0
         1   3   5   7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71


                       0. 30
  -0.5
                   0. 20
           0. 0
    -1



Figure 13: Sensitivity of U.S. consumption to variations in ψ
 0.8



 0.6



 0.4
                           0. 0

 0.2                       0. 30

                           0. 20
   0
         0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70


 -0.2
                                     Endowment
 -0.4



 -0.6                                 0. 60

 -0.8                                 0. 80

  -1



                 Figure 14: Sensitivity of ROW consumption to variations in ψ



                                                                 28
  1



0.8



0.6
                     0. 0
0.4
                           0. 20

0.2



  0
       0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70

-0.2



-0.4
                 0. 30

-0.6


                             0. 60
-0.8

                                 0. 80
 -1



                   Figure 15. Sensitivity of current account to variations in ψ.




                                                              29
6


                                                              FDF implied current account

4




2




0
1974                 1979             1984                 1989            1994             1999                 2004




-2




-4
                                                                   Data


-6




            Figure 16: Predicted current account balances in the FDF model
6




4



                                              EDF implied current account
2




0




-2




-4
                             Data

-6




-8
     1975   1977     1979   1981   1983      1985   1987    1989    1991   1993   1995   1997      1999   2001    2003



                   Figure 17: Predicted current account balances in the EDF



                                                             30
0.025



 0.02



0.015



 0.01



0.005



    0
         1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003

-0.005



 -0.01



-0.015



 -0.02



-0.025



                          Figure 18: Predicted relative discount factor




                                                          31
                                        6



                                                                                         Trade account
                                        4




                                        2
CA and TB (% of GDP)




                                        0
                                        2000                 2020           2040             2060           2080          2100


                                        -2




                                        -4                            Current account


                                        -6




                                        -8


                                                              Figure 19: Projected external balances
                                             40




                                             20
Net foregin asset position (% of GDP)




                                             0
                                             2000   2010      2020   2030    2040   2050      2060   2070   2080   2090   2100


                                         -20




                                         -40




                                         -60




                                         -80




                                        -100


                                                           Figure 20: Projected net foreign asset position



                                                                                    32
Appendix
A.1    The Data
The current account and trade account are from the U.S. national income and product accounts
and are measured as the ratio of its nominal value to nominal GDP. The remaining data are
all in real terms and obtained from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators data
set. The ROW is comprised of 23 high income OECD countries whose 2005 per capita gross
national income exceeded $10,726. The economies included are: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom.
    GDP is measured at purchaser’s prices, which is the sum of gross value added by all resident
producers in the economy plus any product taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the
value of the products. It is calculated without making deductions for depreciation of fabricated
assets or for depletion and degradation of natural resources. As in Engel and Rogers (2006),
ROW data are in constant 2000 U.S. dollars. Dollar figures for GDP are converted from
domestic currencies using 2000 oﬃcial exchange rates.


A.2    The Model in Detrended Aggregates
Here, we show how the model can be written down in terms of detrended aggregate variables.
The exposition here includes the small bond market participation cost ξ that is required to get
international indebtedness to be stationary in the FDF.
    Let variables detrended by the endowment trend with normalizations be Xej,t = Xj,t e−gt−δj .
Then, the endowment follows
                          Ã           !    Ã            ! Ã      !
                             ln Ye1,t        ln Ye1,t−1     ε1,t
                                        =A               +         .
                             ln Ye2,t        ln Ye2,t−1     ε2,t

The bond Euler equation can be rewritten as
                           Ã               !          Ã        !−γ
                                 ξvt Bej,t              ej,t+1
                                                        C
                         vt 1 +               ej,t Et
                                             =β                    ,
                                   Yej,t                 ej,t
                                                         C

      ej,t = β j,t eγ(n−g) . The modified subjective discount factor e
where β                                                              θj,t = θj,t eγ(n−g)t , evolves




                                                33
over time according to
                                                                      t
                                                                      Y
                                e
                                θj,t = e      ej,t = e
                                       θj,t−1 β      θj,−1                  e1,t−i ,
                                                                            β
                                                                      i=0
                                                     ⎡Ã   !−ψ ⎤(1−η)
                                                     e
                                e
                                β j,t
                                           eη
                                         = β j,t−1
                                                   ⎣ Cj,t    e⎦
                                                             β       ,
                                                     Cej

      e = βeγ(n−g) . The zero-net supply constraint on bonds is given as,
where β
                                             e1,t + M B
                                             B        e2,t = 0,

where M = eδ2 −δ1 is the relative size of the ROW to the U.S. The resource constraint is,
                                                    ³        ´2       ³          ´2
                                                     vt
                                                        e1,t
                                                        B           M  v  t
                                                                            e2,t
                                                                            B
               Ye1,t + M Ye2,t = C
                                 e1,t + M Ce2,t + ξ             +
                                                                  ξ
                                                                                    .
                                                  2     e
                                                       Y1,t       2     Ye2,t
The trade balance to GDP ratio and and the current account balance to GDP ratio can be
rewritten as
                                          Ye1,t − C  e1,t
                                    tbt =                 ,
                                               Ye1,t
                                        e−g (1 − vt−1 )B    e1,t−1
                            cat = tbt +                            .
                                                   Ye1,t


   Reduced Equations. We collect the set of equations that characterize the model as

                      Ã                 !                Ã            !−γ
                         ξvt Bej,t                           ej,t+1
                                                             C
                 vt   1+                      e Et
                                            = β                              ,
                                                j,t
                           Yej,t                              ej,t
                                                              C
                                                      ⎡Ã     !−ψ ⎤(1−η)
                                                         e
                                   ej,t
                                   β          eη
                                            = β j,t−1
                                                      ⎣ Cj,t    e⎦
                                                                β       ,
                                                         ej
                                                         C
                                                                         ³        ´2             ³ h ´2
                                                                             e1,t                   B
                                                                       ξ  vt B               ξ M  vt M1,t
                          Ye1,t + M Ye2,t = C
                                            e1,t + M C
                                                     e2,t +                              +                  ,
                                                                       2         Ye1,t       2    Ye2,t
                            ³        ´2
                             vt
                                e1,t
                                B
                 e1,t +
       e1,t + vt B        ξ
       C                                    ≤ Ye1,t + e−g B
                                                          e1,t−1 ,
                          2    Ye1,t
                                                Ye1,t − C  e1,t
                                        tbt =                   ,
                                                     Ye1,t
                                                                       e1,t−1
                                                        e−g (1 − vt−1 )B
                                       cat = tbt +                            .
                                                                Ye1,t

                                                       34
   Steady State. In the steady state, we have

                                Ye1 = Ye2 = 1, B
                                               e1 = 0,      e =β
                                                            β   e = β.
                                                                    e
                                                              1  2


It follows that
                                     C    e2 = 1,
                                     e1 = C             tb = ca = 0.



    Log Linearization. Let x                                                                      e 1,t =
                                 bt = xhtxh−hx , deviation from its steady state level. Also, let H
e1,t /Ye1 , country 1 bond holdings to GDP ratio. The linearizations give
B
                                                           h ³         ´          i
                                     e 1,t = β
                            vbt + ξv H             b1,t − γ Et C b1,t+1 − C   b1,t ,
                                  ξv e                     h ³         ´          i
                          vbt −      H1,t = β      b2,t − γ Et C b2,t+1 − C   b2,t ,
                                  M
                                     b
                                     β              b                  b
                                       1,t = η β 1,t−1 − ψ (1 − η) C1,t ,
                                     b2,t = η β
                                     β              b2,t−1 − ψ (1 − η) C
                                                                       b2,t ,

                           Yb1,t + M Yb2,t = C
                                             b1,t + M Cb2,t ,

                            C        e1,t ≤ Yb1,t + e−g H
                             b1,t + vB                  e 1,t−1 ,

                                     tbt = Yb1,t − C
                                                   b1,t
                                                            e 1,t−1 .
                                     cat = tbt + e−g (1 − v)H

   We can combine first 4 equations as

          (M + 1) ξv e              h ³          ´         i     h ³        ´       i
                           b∗ − γ Et C
                    H1,t = β              b1,t+1   −  b
                                                      C1,t   + γ  Et
                                                                     b
                                                                     C2,t+1   − b
                                                                                C2,t ,
                             t
             M                                    ³             ´
                      b∗ = ηβ
                      β     b∗                      b        b
                        t      1,t−1 − ψ (1 − η) C1,t − C2,t ,


      b∗ = β
where β    b1,t − β
                  b2,t .
        t




                                                   35
