                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS

                                         Robert N. Stavins

                                        Working Paper 13574
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13574


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




This article draws, in part, on Revesz and Stavins (2005). Helpful comments on a previous version
were provided by Lori Bennear and Nathaniel Keohane. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Robert N. Stavins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Environmental Economics
Robert N. Stavins
NBER Working Paper No. 13574
November 2007
JEL No. K32,Q28,Q38,Q48

                                           ABSTRACT

This article provides an overview of the economics of environmental policy, including the setting of
goals and targets, notably the Kaldor-Hicks criterion and the related method of assessment known
as benefit-cost analysis. Also reviewed are the means of environmental policy, that is, the choice of
specific policy instruments, featuring an examination of potential criteria for assessing alternative
instruments, with focus on cost-effectiveness. The theoretical foundations and experiential highlights
of individual instruments are reviewed, including conventional command-and-control mechanisms
and market-based instruments.


Robert N. Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@harvard.edu
                       ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS
                              (5,799 words; 7,812 words with bibliography)
                                           Robert N. Stavins*


         The fundamental theoretical argument for government activity in the environmental realm
is that pollution is an externality — an unintended consequence of market decisions, which affects
individuals other than the decision maker. Providing incentives for private actors to internalize the
full costs of their actions was long thought to be the theoretical solution to the externality problem.
The primary advocate of this view was Arthur Pigou, who in The Economics of Welfare (1920)
proposed that the government should impose a tax on emissions equal to the cost of the related
damages at the efficient level of control.

        A response to the Pigovian perspective was provided by Ronald Coase in The Problem of
Social Cost (1960). Coase demonstrated that in a bilateral bargaining environment with no
transaction costs, wealth or income effects, or third-party impacts, two negotiating parties will reach
socially desirable agreements, and the overall amount of pollution will be independent of the
assignment of property rights. At least some of the specified conditions are unlikely to hold for most
environmental problems. Hence, private negotiation will not — in general — fully internalize
environmental externalities.

Criteria for Environmental Policy Evaluation

       More than 100 years ago, Vilfredo Pareto enunciated the well-known normative criterion for
judging whether a social change makes the world better off: a change is Pareto efficient if at least
one person is made better off, and no one is made worse off (1896). This criterion has considerable
normative appeal, but virtually no public policies meet the test. Nearly fifty years later, Nicholas
Kaldor (1939) and John Hicks (1939) postulated a more pragmatic criterion that seeks to identify
“potential Pareto improvements:” a change is welfare-improving if those who gain from the change
could — in principle — fully compensate the losers, with (at least) one gainer still being better off.

        The Kaldor-Hicks criterion — a test of whether total social benefits exceed total social costs
— is the theoretical foundation for the use of the analytical device known as benefit-cost (or net
present value) analysis. If the objective is to maximize the difference between benefits and costs
(net benefits), then the related level of environmental protection (pollution abatement) is defined as
the efficient level of protection:

                                             N
                                   max
                                    { qi }
                                             ∑ [ B (q ) − C (q )]
                                             i =1
                                                    i   i       i   i   → qi*                                   (1)




*
 Albert Pratt Professor of Business and Government at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Director of the
Environmental Economics Program at Harvard University, and University Fellow, Resources for the Future. This article
draws, in part, on Revesz and Stavins (2005). Helpful comments on a previous version were provided by Lori Bennear
and Nathaniel Keohane.

                                                            1
where qi is abatement by source i (i = 1 to N), Bi(·) is the benefit function for source i, Ci(·) is the cost
function for the source, and qi* is the efficient level of protection (pollution abatement). The key
necessary condition that emerges from the maximization problem of equation (1) is that marginal
benefits be equated with marginal costs (assuming convexity of the respective functions).

        The Kaldor-Hicks criterion is clearly more practical than the strict Pareto criterion, but its
normative standing is less solid, Some have argued that other factors should be considered in a
measure of social well-being, and that criteria such as distributional equity should trump efficiency
considerations in some collective decisions (Sagoff, 1993). Many economists would agree with this
assertion, and some have noted that the Kaldor-Hicks criterion should be considered neither a
necessary nor sufficient condition for public policy (Arrow et al., 1996).

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Environmental Regulations

       The soundness of empirical benefit-cost analysis rests upon the availability of reliable
estimates of social benefits and costs, including estimates of the social discount rate. The present
value of net benefits (PVNB) is defined as:

                                            T

                              PVNB =       ∑                            −t
                                                 {( B t − C t ) ⋅ (1 + r ) }                              (2)
                                           t=0



where Bt are benefits at time t, Ct are costs at time t, r is the discount rate, and T is the terminal year
of the analysis. A positive PVNB means that the policy or project has the potential to yield a Pareto
improvement (meets the Kaldor-Hicks criterion). Thus, carrying out benefit-cost or “net present
value” (NPV) analysis requires discounting to translate future impacts into equivalent values that
can be compared. In essence, the Kaldor-Hicks criterion provides the rationale both for benefit-cost
analysis and for discounting (Goulder and Stavins, 2002).

         Choosing the discount rate to be employed in an analysis can be difficult, particularly where
impacts are spread across a large number of years involving more than a single generation. In
theory, the social discount rate could be derived by aggregating the individual time preference rates
of all parties affected by a policy. Evidence from market behavior and from experimental economics
indicates that individuals may employ lower discount rates for impacts of larger magnitude, higher
discount rates for gains than for losses, and rates that decline with the time span being considered
(Cropper, Aydede, and Portney, 1994; Cropper and Laibson, 1999). In particular, there has been
support for the use of hyperbolic discounting and similar approaches with declining discount rates
over time (Ainslie, 1991; Weitzman, 1994, 1998), but most of these approaches are subject to time
inconsistency.

The Costs of Environmental Regulations

         In the environment context, the economist's notion of cost, or more precisely, opportunity
cost, is a measure of the value of whatever must be sacrificed to prevent or reduce the risk of an
environmental impact. A full taxonomy of environmental costs ranges from the most obvious to the
least direct (Jaffe et al., 1995).

                                                      2
        Methods of direct compliance cost estimation, which measure the costs to firms of
purchasing and maintaining pollution-abatement equipment plus costs to government of
administering a policy, are acceptable when behavioral responses, transitional costs, and indirect
costs are small. Partial and general equilibrium analysis allow for the incorporation of behavioral
responses to changes in public policy. Partial equilibrium analysis of compliance costs incorporates
behavioral responses by modeling supply and/or demand in major affected markets, but assumes that
the effects of a regulation are confined to one or a few markets. This may be satisfactory if the
markets affected by the policy are small in relation to the overall economy, but if an environmental
policy is expected to have large consequences for the economy, general equilibrium analysis is
required, such as through the use of computable general equilibrium models (Hazilla and Kopp,
1990; Conrad, 2002). The potential interaction of abatement costs with pre-existing taxes indicates
the importance of employing general equilibrium models for comprehensive cost analysis. Revenue
recycling (using emission tax or auctioned permit revenues to reduce distortionary taxes) can
significantly lower the costs of pollution control, relative to what costs would otherwise be (Goulder,
1995).

       In a retrospective examination of 28 environmental and occupational safety regulations,
Harrington, Morgenstern, and Nelson (2000) found that fourteen cost estimation analyses had
produced ex ante cost estimates that exceeded actual ex post costs, apparently due to technological
innovation stimulated by market-based instruments (see below).

The Benefits of Environmental Regulations

        Protecting the environment usually involves active employment of capital, labor, and other
scarce resources. The benefits of an environmental policy are defined as the collection of
individuals’ willingness to pay (WTP) for the reduction or prevention of environmental damages or
individuals’ willingness to accept (WTA) compensation to tolerate such environmental damages.
In theory, which measure of value is appropriate for assessing a particular policy depends upon the
related assignment of property rights, the nature of the status quo, and whether the change being
measured is a gain or a loss, but under a variety of conditions, the difference between the two
measures may be expected to be relatively small (Willig, 1976). Empirical evidence suggests larger
than expected differences between willingness to pay and willingness to accept (Fisher, McClelland
and Schulze, 1988). Theoretical explanations include psychological aversion to loss and poor
substitutes for environmental amenities (Hanemann, 1991).

        The benefits people derive from environmental protection can be categorized as being related
to human health (mortality and morbidity), ecological impacts (both market and non-market), or
materials damage. A critical distinction is between use value and non-use value. In addition to the
direct benefits (use value) people receive through protection of their health or through use of a
natural resource, people also derive passive or non-use value from environmental quality,
particularly in the ecological domain. For example, an individual may value a change in an
environmental good because she wants to preserve the good for her heirs (bequest value). Still other
people may envision no current or future use by themselves or their heirs, but still wish to protect
the good because they believe it should be protected or because they derive satisfaction from simply
knowing it exists (existence value).



                                                  3
       How much would individuals sacrifice to achieve a small reduction in the probability of
death during a given period of time? How much compensation would individuals require to accept
a small increase in that probability? These are reasonable economic questions, because most
environmental regulations result in very small changes in individuals’ mortality risks. Hedonic
wage studies, averted behavior, and contingent valuation (all discussed below) can provide estimates
of marginal willingness to pay or willingness to accept for small changes in mortality risk, and such
estimates can be normalized as the “value of a statistical life” (VSL).

      The VSL is not the value of an individual life — neither in ethical terms, nor in technical,
economic terms. Rather it is simply a convention:

                            MWTP or MWTA ( from hedonic wage or CV )
                    VSL =                                                                        (3)
                                          Small Risk Change

where MWTP and MWTA, respectively, refer to marginal willingness to pay and marginal
willingness to accept. For example, if people are willing, on average, to pay $12 for a risk reduction
from 5 in 500,000 to 4 in 500,000, equation (3) would yield:

                                          $12
                               VSL =               = $6, 000, 000                                 (4)
                                       0.000002

        Thus, VSL quantifies the aggregate amount that a group of individuals are willing to pay for
small reductions in risk, standardized (extrapolated) for a risk change of 1.0. It is not the economic
value of an individual life, because the VSL calculation does not signify that an individual would
pay $6 million to avoid (certain) death this year, or accept (certain) death this year in exchange for
$6 million.

Revealed Preference Methods of Environmental Benefit Estimation

        The averting behavior method, in which values of willingness to pay are inferred from
observations of people’s behavioral responses to changes in environmental quality, is grounded in
the household production function framework (Bockstael and McConnell, 1983). People sometimes
take actions to reduce the risk (averting behavior) or lessen the impacts (mitigating behavior) of
environmental damages, for example, by purchasing water filters or bottled water. In theory,
people’s perceptions of the cost of averting behavior and its effectiveness should be measured
(Cropper and Freeman, 1991), but in practice actual expenditures on averting and mitigating
behaviors are typically employed. An additional challenge is posed by the necessity of
disentangling attributes of the market good or service.

        Recreational activities represent a potentially large class of benefits that are important in
assessing policies affecting the use of public lands. The models used to estimate recreation demand
fall within the class of household production models. Travel cost models (or Hotelling-Clawson-
Knetsch models) use information about time and money spent visiting a site to infer the value of that
recreational resource (Bockstael 1996). The simplest version of the method involves one site and
uses data from surveys of users from various geographic origins, together with estimates of the cost

                                                  4
of travel and opportunity cost of time to infer a demand function relating the number of trips to the
site as a function of people’s willingness to pay for the experience. Random utility models explicitly
model the consumer’s decision to choose a particular site from among recreation locations, assessing
the probability of visiting each location. Such models can be used to value changes in
environmental quality by comparing decisions to visit alternative sites (Phaneuf and Smith 2004).

        All recreation demand models share limitations. First, the valuation of costs depends on
estimates of the opportunity cost of (leisure) time, which is notoriously difficult to estimate. Also,
most trips to a recreation site are part of a multi-purpose experience. In addition, random utility
models rely on people’s perceptions of environmental quality changes. Finally, like all revealed-
preference approaches, recreation demand models can be used to estimate use value only; non-use
value cannot be examined.

         An alternative approach to assessing people’s willingness to pay for recreational experiences
is to draw on evidence from private options to use public goods. This approach also fits within the
household production framework, and is based upon the notion of estimating the derived demand
for a privately traded option to utilize a freely-available public good. In particular, the demand for
state fishing licenses has been used to infer the benefits of recreational fishing (Bennear, Stavins,
and Wagner, 2003). Using panel data on fishing license sales and prices, combined with data on
substitute prices and demographic variables, a license demand function was estimated, from which
the expected benefits of a recreational fishing day were derived.

        Hedonic pricing methods are founded on the proposition that people value goods in terms
of the bundles of attributes that constitute those goods. Hedonic property value methods employ
data on residential property values and home characteristics, including structural, neighborhood, and
environmental quality attributes (Palmquist, 2003). By regressing the property value on key
attributes, the hedonic price function is estimated:

                                       P = f ( x, z, e)                                            (5)
                                                
where P = housing price (includes land);
      x = vector of structural attributes;
      z = vector of neighborhood attributes; and
      e = environmental attribute of concern.

        From the estimated hedonic price function of equation (5), the marginal implicit price of any
attribute, including environmental quality, can be calculated as the partial derivative of the housing
price with respect to the given attribute:

                                    ∂P         ∂ f (⋅)
                                           =             = Pe                                     (6)
                                     ∂e         ∂e

        This marginal implicit price, Pe, measures the aggregate marginal willingness to pay for the
attribute in question. For purposes of benefit estimation, the demand function for the attribute is
required, and so it is necessary to examine how the marginal implicit price of the environmental

                                                  5
attribute varies with changes in the quantity of the attribute and other relevant variables. If the
hedonic price equation (5) is non-linear, then fitted values of Pe can be calculated as e is varied, and
a second-stage equation can be estimated:

                                             ^
                                            Pe = g ( e, y )                                           (7)
                                                        
          ^
where    Pe = the fitted value of the marginal implicit price of e from the first-stage equation; and
         y = a vector of factors that affect marginal willingness to pay for e, including buyer
         
                characteristics.

         Equation (7), above, has been interpreted as the demand function for the environmental
attribute — from which benefits (consumers surplus) can be estimated in the ususal way — but there
are problems. Most important among these is the question of whether a demand function has
actually been estimated, since environmental quality may affect both the demand for housing and
its supply, raising the classic identification problem. In addition, informational asymmetries may
distort the analysis. Also, because the hedonic property method is based on analysis of marginal
changes, it should not be applied to analysis of policies with large anticipated effects.

        A related benefit-estimation technique is the hedonic wage method, based on the reality that
individuals in well functioning labor markets make trade-offs between wages and risk of on-the-job
injuries (or death). A job is a bundle of characteristics, including its wage, responsibilities, and risk,
among others factors. Two jobs that require the same skill level but have different risks of on-the-
job mortality will pay different wages. On the labor supply side, employees tend to require extra
compensation to accept jobs with greater risks; and on the labor demand side, employers are willing
to offer higher wages to attract workers to riskier jobs. Hence, labor market data on wages and job
characteristics can be used to estimate people’s marginal implicit price of risk, that is, their valuation
of risk. By regressing the wage on key attributes, the hedonic price function is estimated:

                                            W = h ( x, r )                                            (8)
                                                    
where W = wage (in annual terms);
      x = vector of worker and job characteristics; and
      r = mortality risk of job.

       The marginal implicit price of risk is calculated as the partial derivative of the annual wage
with respect to the measured mortality risk:

                                      ∂W             ∂ h (⋅)
                                                 =             = Wr                                   (9)
                                       ∂r             ∂r

This marginal implicit price of risk is the average annual income necessary to compensate a worker
for a marginal change in risk throughout the year, and it varies with the level of risk.


                                                        6
         Many of the issues that arise with the hedonic property value method have parallels here.
First, there is the possibility of simultaneity: causality between risk and wages can run in both
directions. Also, if individuals’ perceptions of risk do not correspond with actual risks, then the
marginal implicit price of risk calculated from a hedonic wage study will be biased, and
imperfections in labor markets (less than perfect mobility) can cause further problems.

       Direct application of the method in the environmental realm is limited to occupational, as
opposed to environmental exposures and risks. Yet hedonic wage methods are of considerable
importance in the environmental policy realm, because the results from hedonic wage studies have
frequently been used through “benefit transfer” to infer the value of a statistical life (VSL). In such
applications, the hedonic wage method brings with it possible bias, because studies typically focus
on risky occupations, which may attract workers who are systematically less risk-averse.

        Standard economic theory would suggest that younger people would have higher values for
risk reduction because they have a longer expected life remaining before them and thus a higher
expected lifetime utility (Moore and Viscusi, 1988; Cropper and Sussman, 1990). On the other
hand, some models and empirical evidence suggest that older people may in fact have a higher
demand for reducing mortality risks than younger people, and that the value of a life may follow an
“inverted-U” shape over the life-cycle, with its peak during mid-life (Shepard and Zeckhauser, 1982;
Mrozek and Taylor, 2002; Viscusi and Aldy, 2003; Alberini et al., 2004).

Stated Preference Methods of Environmental Benefit Estimation

        In the best known stated preference method, contingent valuation (CV), survey respondents
are presented with scenarios that require them to trade-off, hypothetically, something for a change
in an environmental good or service (Mitchell and Carson, 1989; Boyle, 2003). The simplest
approach is to ask people for their maximum willingness to pay, but there are few real markets in
which individuals are actually asked to generate their reservation prices, and so this method is
considered unreliable. In a bidding game, the researcher begins by stating a willingness-to-pay
number, asks for a yes-no response, and then increases or decreases the amount until indifference
is achieved. The problem with this approach is starting-point bias. A related approach is the use
of a payment card shown to the respondent, but the range of WTP on the card may introduce bias,
and the approach cannot be used with telephone surveys. Finally, the referendum (discrete choice)
approach is favored by researchers. Each respondent is offered a different WTP number, to which
a simple yes-no response is solicited.

         The primary advantage of contingent valuation is that it can be applied to a wide range of
situations, including use as well as non-use value, but potential problems remain. Respondents may
not understand what they are being asked to value. This may introduce greater variance, if not bias
in responses. Likewise, respondents may not take the hypothetical market seriously, because no
budget constraint is imposed. This can increase variance and bias. On the other hand, if the scenario
is “too realistic,” strategic bias may be expected to show up in responses. Finally, the “warm glow
effect” may plague some stated preference surveys: people may purchase moral satisfaction with
large, but unreal statements of their willingness-to-pay (Andreoni, 1995).




                                                  7
        The 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill off the coast of Alaska led to massive litigation, and
resulted in the most prominent use ever of the concept of non-use value and the method of
contingent valuation for its estimation. The result was a symposium sponsored by the Exxon
Corporation attacking the CV method (Hausman, 1993), and the subsequent creation of a
government panel — established by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) and chaired by two Nobel laureates in economics — to assess the scientific validity of the
CV method. The NOAA panel concluded that “CV studies can produce estimates reliable enough
to be the starting point of a judicial process of damage assessment, including lost passive (non-use)
values” (Arrow et al., 1993, p. 4610). The panel offered its approval of CV methods subject to a set
of best-practice guidelines.

        It is important to distinguish between legitimate methods of benefit estimation and
approaches sometimes encountered in the policy process that do not measure willingness-to-pay or
willingness-to-accept. Frequently misused techniques include: (1) employing as proxies for the
benefits of a policy estimates of the “cost avoided” by not using the next most costly means of
achieving the policy’s goals; (2) “societal revealed preference” models, which seek to infer the
benefits of a proposed policy from the costs of previous regulatory actions; and (3) cost-of-illness
or human-capital measures which estimate explicit market costs resulting from changes in morbidity
or mortality. Because none of these approaches provide estimates of WTP or WTA, these
techniques do not provide valid measures of economic benefits.

Choosing Instruments: The Means of Environmental Policy

        Even if the goals of environmental policies are given, economic analysis can bring insights
to the assessment and design of environmental policies. One important criterion is cost-
effectiveness, defined as the allocation of control among sources that results in the aggregate target
being achieved at the lowest possible cost, that is, the allocation which satisfies the following cost-
minimization problem:

                                                                 N
                                         min C =
                                             { ri }
                                                             ∑ c (r )
                                                                 i =1
                                                                        i   i                     (10)


                                                      N                         _
                                      s.t.            ∑ [ui − ri ] ≤ E
                                                      i =1
                                                                                                  (11)


                                         and 0 ≤ ri ≤ ui                                          (12)

where ri = reductions in emissions (abatement or control) by source i (i = 1 to N);
   ci(ri) = cost function for source i;
      C = aggregate cost of control;
      ui = uncontrolled emissions by source i; and
      Ē = the aggregate emissions target imposed by the regulatory authority.




                                                             8
        If the cost functions are convex, then necessary and sufficient conditions for satisfaction of
the constrained optimization problem posed by equations (10) through (12) are the following, among
others (Kuhn and Tucker 1951):

                                         ∂ci ( ri )
                                                    −λ ≥ 0                                         (13)
                                           ∂ri

                                           ∂ci (ri )
                                                         
                                         r ⋅
                                             
                                          i 
                                                     − λ  = 0                                    (14)
                                            ∂ri           
                                                      


Equations (13) and (14) together imply the crucial condition for cost-effectiveness that all sources
(that exercise some degree of control) experience the same marginal abatement costs (Baumol and
Oates, 1988). Thus, when examining environmental policy instruments, a key question is whether
marginal abatement costs are likely to be being equated across sources.

Command-and-Control versus Market-Based Instruments

       Conventional approaches to regulating the environment — frequently characterized as
command-and-control — allow relatively little flexibility in the means of achieving goals. Such
policy instruments tend to force firms to take on equal shares of the pollution-control burden,
regardless of the cost. The most prevalent form of uniform command-and-control standards are
technology standards that specify the adoption of specific pollution-control technologies, and
performance standards which specify uniform limits on the amount of pollution a facility can
generate. In theory, non-uniform performance standards could be made to be cost-effective, but the
government typically lacks the requisite information (on marginal costs of individual sources).

        Market-based instruments encourage behavior through market signals, rather than through
explicit directives regarding pollution control levels or methods. Market-based instruments fall
within four categories: pollution charges, tradeable permits, market-friction reductions, and
government subsidy reductions. Liability rules may also be thought of as a market-based
instrument, because they provide incentives for firms to take into account the potential
environmental damages of their decision.

        Where there is significant heterogeneity of abatement costs, command-and-control methods
will not be cost-effective. In reality, costs can vary enormously due to production design, physical
configuration, age of assets, and other factors. For example, the marginal costs of controlling lead
emissions have been estimated to range from $13 to $56,000 per ton (Hartman, Wheeler, and Singh,
1994; Morgenstern, 2000). But where costs are similar among sources, command-and-control
instruments may perform equivalent to (or better than) market-based instruments, depending on
transactions costs, administrative costs, possibilities for strategic behavior, political costs, and the
nature of the pollutants (Newell and Stavins, 2003).

        In theory, market-based instruments allow any desired level of pollution cleanup to be
realized at the lowest overall cost, by providing incentives for the greatest reductions in pollution
by those firms that can achieve the reductions most cheaply. Rather than equalizing pollution levels

                                                   9
among firms, market-based instruments equalize their marginal abatement costs (Montgomery,
1972). In addition, market-based instruments have the potential to bring down abatement costs over
time by providing incentives for companies to adopt cheaper and better pollution-control
technologies. This is because with market-based instruments, most clearly with emission taxes, it
pays firms to clean up a bit more if a sufficiently low-cost method (technology or process) of doing
so can be identified and adopted (Downing and White, 1986; Maleug, 1989; Milliman and Prince,
1989; Jaffe and Stavins, 1995). However, the ranking among policy instruments, in terms of their
respective impacts on technology innovation and diffusion is ambiguous (Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins,
2003).

        Closely related to the effects of instrument choice on technological change are the effects
of vintage-differentiated regulation on the rate of capital turnover, and thereby on pollution
abatement costs and environmental performance. Vintage-differentiated regulation is a common
feature of many environmental policies, wherein the standard for regulated units is fixed in terms
of their date of entry, with later vintages facing more stringent regulation. Such vintage-
differentiated regulations can be expected to retard turnover in the capital stock, and thereby to
reduce the cost-effectiveness of regulation. Under some conditions the result can be higher levels
of pollutant emissions than would occur in the absence of regulation. Such economic and
environmental consequences are not only predictions from theory (Maloney and Brady, 1988); both
types of consequences have been validated empirically (Gruenspecht, 1982; Nelson, Tietenberg,
Donihue, 1993).

Pollution Charges

       Pollution charge systems assess a fee or tax on the amount of pollution that firms or sources
generate (Pigou, 1920). By definition, actual emissions are equal to unconstrained emissions minus
emissions reductions, that is, ei = ui - ri. A source’s cost minimization problem in the presence of
an emissions tax, t, is given by:

                                    min [ ci ( ri ) + t ⋅ (ui − ri )]                            (15)
                                     { ri }



                                                    s.t. ri ≥ 0                                  (16)

The result for each source is:

                                              ∂ci ( ri )
                                                         −t ≥ 0                                  (17)
                                                ∂ri

                                               
                                                ∂ ci ( ri ) 
                                          ri ⋅           − t = 0                              (18)
                                                ∂r           
                                                    i      


Equations (17) and (18) imply that each source (that exercises a positive level of control) will carry
out abatement up to the point where its marginal control costs are equal to the tax rate. Hence,

                                                        10
marginal abatement costs are equated across sources, satisfying the condition for cost-effectiveness
specified by equations (13) and (14), at least in the simplest case of a uniformly-mixed pollutant.
In the non-uniformly-mixed pollutant case, where “hot spots” can be an issue, the respective cost-
effective instrument is an “ambient charge.”

         A challenge with charge systems is identifying the appropriate tax rate. For social efficiency,
it should be set equal to the marginal benefits of cleanup at the efficient level of cleanup (Pigou,
1920), but policy makers are more likely to think in terms of a desired level of cleanup, and they do
not know beforehand how firms will respond to a given level of taxation. An additional problem
is that despite the fact that such systems minimize aggregate social costs, these systems may be more
costly than comparable command-and-control instruments for regulated firms, because firms pay
both their abatement costs plus taxes on their residual emissions.

        If charges are broadly defined, many applications can be identified (Stavins, 2003). Coming
closest to true Pigovian are the increasingly common unit-charge systems for financing municipal
solid waste collection, where households and businesses are charged the incremental costs of
collection and disposal. Another important set of charge systems has been deposit refund systems,
whereby consumers pay a surcharge when purchasing potentially polluting products, and receive
a refund when returning the product to an approved center for recycling or disposal. A number of
countries and states have implemented this approach to control litter from beverage containers and
to reduce the flow of solid waste to landfills (Bohm, 1981; Menell, 1990), and the concept has also
been applied to lead-acid batteries. There has also been considerable use of environmental user
charges, through which specific environmentally related services are funded. Examples include
insurance premium taxes (Barthold, 1994). Another set of environmental charges are sales taxes
on motor fuels, ozone-depleting chemicals, agricultural inputs, and low-mileage motor vehicles.
Finally, tax differentiation has been used to encourage the use of renewable energy sources.

Tradeable Permit Systems

        Tradeable permits can achieve the same cost-minimizing allocation as a charge system,
while avoiding the problems of uncertain firm responses and the distributional consequences of
taxes. Under a tradable permit system, an allowed overall level of pollution, Ē, is established, and
allocated among sources in the form of permits. Firms that keep emission levels below allotted
levels may sell surplus permits to other firms or use them to offset excess emissions in other parts
of their operations. Let q0i be the initial allocation of emission permits to source i, such that:

                                              N

                                             ∑q
                                             i =1
                                                    0i   =E                                        (19)


Then, if p is the market-determined price of tradeable permits, a single firm’s cost minimization
problem is given by:

                                     min[ci(ri ) + p⋅(ui −ri −q0i )]                               (20)
                                     {ri}




                                                    11
                                               s.t. ri ≥ 0                                     (21)

The result for each source is:

                                       ∂ci (ri )
                                                 − p ≥ 0                                       (22)
                                         ∂ri

                                          ∂ci ( ri )
                                          
                                          
                                                          
                                       ri•          − p  = 0                                (23)
                                          ∂ri            
                                                      


Equations (22) and (23) together imply that each source (that exercises a positive level of control)
will carry out abatement up to the point where its marginal control costs are equal to the market-
determined permit price. Hence, the environmental constraint, Ē, is satisfied, and marginal
abatement costs are equated across sources, satisfying the condition for cost-effectiveness. The
unique cost-effective equilibrium is achieved independent of the initial allocation of permits
(Montgomery, 1972), which is of great political significance.

         The performance of a tradeable permit system can be adversely affected by: concentration
in the permit market (Hahn, 1984; Misolek and Elder, 1989); concentration in the product market
(Maleug, 1990); transaction costs (Stavins, 1995); non-profit maximizing behavior, such as sales
or staff maximization (Tschirhart, 1984); the preexisting regulatory environment (Bohi and Burtraw,
1992); and the degree of monitoring and enforcement (Montero, 2003).

        Tradeable permits have been the most frequently used market-based system (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 2000). Significant applications include: the emissions trading
program (Tietenberg, 1985; Hahn, 1989); the leaded gasoline phasedown; water quality permit
trading (Hahn, 1989; Stephenson, Norris, and Shabman, 1998); CFC trading (Hahn and McGartland,
1989); the sulfur dioxide (SO2) allowance trading system for acid rain control (Schmalensee et al.,
1998; Stavins, 1998; Carlson et al., 2000; Ellerman et al., 2000); the RECLAIM program in the Los
Angeles metropolitan region (Harrison, 1999); and tradeable development rights for land use.

Market Friction Reduction

        Market friction reduction can serve as a policy instrument for environmental protection.
Market creation establishes markets for inputs or outputs associated with environmental quality.
Examples of market creation include measures that facilitate the voluntary exchange of water rights
and thus promote more efficient allocation and use of scarce water supplies (Howe, 1997), and
policies that facilitate the restructuring of electricity generation and transmission. Since well-
functioning markets depend, in part, on the existence of well-informed producers and consumers,
information programs can help foster market-oriented solutions to environmental problems. These
programs have been of two types. Product labeling requirements have been implemented to
improve information sets available to consumers, while other programs have involved reporting
requirements (Hamilton, 1995; Konar and Cohen 1997; Khanna, Quimio, and Bojilova 1998).


                                                   12
Government Subsidy Reduction

        Government subsidy reduction constitutes another category of market-based instruments.
Subsidies are the mirror image of taxes and, in theory, can provide incentives to address
environmental problems. Although subsidies can advance environmental quality (see, for example,
Jaffe and Stavins, 1995), it is also true that subsidies, in general, have important disadvantages
relatives to taxes (Dewees and Sims, 1976; Baumol and Oates, 1988). Because subsidies increase
profits in an industry, they encourage entry, and can thereby increase industry size and pollution
output (Mestelman, 1982; Kohn, 1985). In practice, rather than internalizing externalities, many
subsidies promote economically inefficient and environmentally unsound practices. In such cases,
reducing subsidies can increase efficiency and improve environmental quality. For example,
because of concerns about global climate change, increased attention has been given to cutting
inefficient subsidies that promote the use of fossil fuels.

Implications of Uncertainty for Instrument Choice

        The dual task facing policy makers of choosing environmental goals and selecting policy
instruments to achieve those goals must be carried out in the presence of the significant uncertainty
that affects the benefits and the costs of environmental protection. Since Weitzman's (1974) classic
paper on "Prices vs. Quantities," it has been widely acknowledged that benefit uncertainty on its own
has no effect on the identity of the efficient control instrument, but that cost uncertainty can have
significant effects, depending upon the relative slopes of the marginal benefit (damage) and marginal
cost functions. In particular, if uncertainty about marginal abatement costs is significant, and if
marginal abatement costs are flat relative to marginal benefits, then a quantity instrument is more
efficient than a price instrument.

        In the environmental realm, benefit uncertainty and cost uncertainty are usually both present,
with benefit uncertainty of greater magnitude. When marginal benefits are positively correlated with
marginal costs (which, it turns out, is not uncommon), then there is an additional argument in favor
of the relative efficiency of quantity instruments (Stavins, 1996). On the other hand, the regulation
of stock pollutants will often favor price instruments, because the marginal benefit function —
linked with the stock of pollution — will tend to be relatively flat, compared with the marginal cost
function — linked with the flow of pollution (Newell and Pizer, 2003). In theory, there would be
considerable efficiency advantages in the presence of uncertainty of hybrid systems — for example,
quotas combined with taxes — or non-linear taxes (Roberts and Spence, 1976; Weitzman, 1978;
Kaplow and Shavell, 2002; Pizer, 2002), but such systems have not been adopted.

Conclusion

        The growing use of economic analysis to inform environmental decision making marks
greater acceptance of the usefulness of these tools to improve regulation. But debates about the
normative standing of the Kaldor-Hicks criterion and the challenges inherent in making benefit-cost
analysis operational will continue. Nevertheless, economic analysis has assumed a significant
position in the regulatory state. At the same time, despite the arguments made for decades by
economists, there is only limited political support for broader use of benefit-cost analysis to assess
proposed or existing environmental regulations. These analytical methods remain on the periphery


                                                 13
of policy formulation. In a growing literature (not reviewed in this article), economists have
examined the processes through which political decisions regarding environmental regulation are
made (Stavins 2004).

        The significant changes that have taken place over the past twenty years with regard to the
means of environmental policy — that is, acceptance of market-based environmental instruments
— may provide a model for progress with regards to analysis of the ends — the targets and goals
— of public policies in this domain. The change in the former realm has been dramatic. Market-
based instruments have moved center stage, and policy debates today look very different from those
twenty years ago, when these ideas were routinely characterized as “licenses to pollute” or dismissed
as completely impractical. Market-based instruments are now considered seriously for nearly every
environmental problem that is tackled, ranging from endangered species preservation to regional
smog to global climate change. Of course, no individual policy instrument — whether market-based
or conventional — is appropriate for all environmental problems. Which instrument is best in any
given situation depends upon a variety of characteristics of the environmental problem, and the
social, political, and economic context in which it is regulated.



                                                Bibliography
Ainslie, G. 1991. Derivation of Rational Economic Behavior from Hyperbolic Discount Curves. American Economic
         Review 81, 334-340.

Alberini, A., M. Cropper, A. Krupnick, and N.B. Simon. 2004. Does the Value of a Statistical Life Vary with Age and
         Health Status? Evidence from the US and Canada. Forthcoming in the Journal of Environmental Economics
         and Management.

Andreoni, J. 1995. Warm-Glow versus Cold-Prickle: The Effects of Positive and Negative Framing on Cooperation
       in Experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1), 1-21.

Arrow, K., M. Cropper, G. Eads, R. Hahn, L. Lave, R. Noll, P. Portney, M. Russell, R. Schmalensee, K. Smith, and R.
        Stavins. 1996. Is There a Role for Benefit-Cost Analysis in Environmental, Health, and Safety Regulation?
        Science 272, 221-222.

Arrow, K., R. Solow, P.R. Portney, E.E. Leamer, R. Radner, and H. Schuman. 1993. Report of the NOAA Panel on
        Contingent Valuation. Federal Register 58(10), 4601-4614.

Barthold, T.A. 1994. Issues in the Design of Environmental Excise Taxes. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(1), 133-
        151.

Baumol, W.J. and W.E. Oates. 1988. The Theory of Environmental Policy. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
        Press.

Bennear, L.D., R.N. Stavins, and A.F. Wagner. 2003. Private Options to Use Public Goods: Exploiting Revealed
        Preferences to Estimate Environmental Benefits. Faculty Research Working Paper Series, RWP03-013.
        Cambridge, MA: John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.

Bockstael, N.E. 1996. Travel Cost Methods. in: D. Bromley, ed., The Handbook of Environmental Economics. Oxford:
        Blackwell Publishers.



                                                        14
Bockstael, N.E. and K.E. McConnell. 1983. Welfare Measurement in the Household Production Framework. American
        Economic Review 73, 806-814.

Bohi, D. and D. Burtraw. 1992. Utility Investment Behavior and the Emission Trading Market. Resources and Energy
         14, 129-153.

Bohm, P. 1981. Deposit-Refund Systems: Theory and Applications to Environmental, Conservation, and Consumer
       Policy. Baltimore, MD: Resources for the Future / Johns Hopkins University Press.

Boyle, K.J. 2003. Contingent Valuation in Practice. in, P.A. Champ, K.J. Boyle, and T.C. Brown, eds., A Primer on
        Nonmarket Valuation. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Carlson, C., D. Burtraw, M. Cropper, and K. Palmer. 2000. Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities: What are the
         Gains from Trade? Journal of Political Economy 108, 1292-1326.

Coase, R. 1960. The Problem of Social Cost. The Journal of Law and Economics 3(1), 1-44.

Conrad, K. 2002. Computable General Equilibrium Models in Environmental and Resource Economics. in, T.H.
        Tietenberg and H. Folmer, eds., The International Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics
        2002/2003: A Survey of Current Issues. Northampton: Edward Elgar.

Cropper, M.L., S.K. Aydede, and P.R. Portney. 1994. Preferences for Life Saving Programs: How the Public Discounts
        Time and Age. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8, 243-265.

Cropper, M.L. and A.M. Freeman. 1991. Environmental Health Effects. in, J.B. Braden and C.D. Kolstad, eds.,
        Measuring the Demand for Environmental Quality. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publications.

Cropper, M.L. and D. Laibson. 1999. The Implications of Hyperbolic Discounting for Project Evaluation. in, P.R.
        Portney and J.P. Weyant, eds., Discounting and Intergenerational Equity. Washington, DC: Resources for the
        Future.

Cropper, M.L. and F.G. Sussman. 1990. Valuing Future Risks to Life. Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 19, 160-174.

Dewees, D.R. and W.A. Sims. 1976. The Symmetry of Effluent Charges and Subsidies for Pollution Control. Canadian
        Journal of Economics 9(2), 323-331.

Downing, P.B. and L.J. White. 1986. Innovation in Pollution Control. Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 13, 18-27.

Ellerman, D., P.L. Joskow, R. Schmalensee, J.P. Montero, and E.M. Bailey. 2000. Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid
        Rain Program. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Fisher, A., G.H. McClelland, and W.D. Schulze. 1988. Measures of Willingness to Pay versus Willingness to Accept:
         Evidence, Explanations, and Potential Reconciliation. in: G.L. Peterson, B.L. Driver and R. Gregory, eds.,
         Amenity Resource Valuation: Integrating Economics with Other Disciplines. State College, PA: Venture. 127-
         134.

Goulder, L.H. 1995. Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend: A Reader's Guide. International Tax and Public
        Finance 2:157-183.

Goulder, L.H. and R.N. Stavins. 2002. An Eye on the Future: How Economists' Controversial Practice of Discounting
        Really Affects the Evaluation of Environmental Policies. Nature 419(October), 673-674.

Gruenspecht, H.K. 1982. Differentiated Regulation: The Case of Auto Emissions Standards. The American Economic
       Review Papers and Proceedings 72(2), 328-331.

                                                        15
Hahn, R.W. 1984. Market Power and Transferable Property Rights. Quarterly Journal of Economics 99(4), 753-765.

Hahn, R.W. 1989. Economic Prescriptions for Environmental Problems: How the Patient Followed the Doctor's Orders.
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 95-114.

Hahn, R.W. and A.M. McGartland. 1989. Political Economy of Instrument Choice: An Examination of the U.S. Role
        in Implementing the Montreal Protocol. Northwestern University Law Review 83, 592-611.

Hanemann, M. 1991. Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept: How Much Can They Differ? American Economic
       Review 81(3), 635-647.

Hamilton, J.T. 1995. Pollution as News: Media and Stock Market Reactions to the Toxic Release Inventory Data.
        Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 28, 98-113.

Harrison, D., Jr. 1999. Turning Theory into Practice for Emissions Trading in the Los Angeles Air Basin. in: S. Sorrell
        and J. Skea, eds., Pollution for Sale: Emissions Trading and Joint Implementation. London: Edward Elgar.

Hartman, R.S., D. Wheeler, and M. Singh. 1994. The Cost of Air Pollution Abatement. World Bank Policy Research
       Working Paper #1398. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hausman, J.A., ed. 1993. Contingent Valuation: A Critical Assessment. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Hazilla, M. and R.J. Kopp. 1990. Social cost of environmental quality regulations: A general equilibrium analysis.
         Journal of Political Economy 98, 853-873.
Hicks, J.R. 1939. The Foundations of Welfare Economics. The Economic Journal 49, 696-712.

Howe, C.W. 1997. Increasing Efficiency in Water Markets: Examples from the Western United States. in: T.L.
       Anderson and P.J. Hill, eds., Water Marketing--The Next Generation. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield
       Publishers, Inc., 79-99.

Jaffe, A.B., R.G. Newell, and R.N. Stavins. 2003. Technological Change and the Environment. in: K.G. Mäler and J.
         Vincent, eds., The Handbook of Environmental Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland/Elsevier Science.

Jaffe, A.B., S.R. Peterson, P.R. Portney, and R.N. Stavins. 1995. Environmental Regulation and the Competitiveness
         of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence Tell Us? Journal of Economic Literature 33, 132-165.

Jaffe, A.B. and R.N. Stavins. 1995. Dynamic Incentives of Environmental Regulation: The Effects of Alternative Policy
         Instruments on Technological Diffusion. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 29, S43-S63.

Kaldor, N. 1939. Welfare Propositions of Economics and Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility. Economic Journal 49,
        549-552.

Kaplow, L. and S. Shavell. 2002. On the Superiority of Corrective Taxes to Quantity Regulation. American Law and
        Economics Review 4(1), 1-17.

Khanna, M., W.R.H. Quimio, and D. Bojilova. 1998. Toxic Release Information: A Policy Tool for Environmental
        Protection. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36, 243-266.

Kohn, R.E. 1985. A General Equilibrium Analysis of the Optimal Number of Firms in a Polluting Industry. Canadian
        Journal of Economics 18(2), 347-354.

Konar, S. and M.A. Cohen. 1997. Information as Regulation: The Effect of Community Right to Know Laws on Toxic
        Emissions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 32, 109-124.

Kuhn, H.W. and A.W. Tucker. 1951. Nonlinear Programming. in: J. Neyman, ed., Proceedings of the Second Berkeley
        Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. Berkeley: University of California Press 481-492.

                                                         16
Maleug, D.A. 1989. Emission Credit Trading and the Incentive to Adopt New Pollution Abatement Technology. Journal
        of Environmental Economics and Management 16, 52-57.

Maleug, D.A. 1990. Welfare Consequences of Emission Credit Trading Programs. Journal of Environmental Economics
        and Management 18, 66-77.

Maloney, M. and G.L. Brady. 1988. Capital Turnover and Marketable Property Rights. The Journal of Law and
       Economics 31(1), 203-226.

Menell, P. 1990. Beyond the Throwaway Society: An Incentive Approach to Regulating Municipal Solid Waste.
        Ecology Law Quarterly 17, 655-739.

Mestelman, S. 1982. Production Externalities and Corrective Subsidies: A General Equilibrium Analysis. Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 9(2), 186-193.

Milliman, S.R. and R. Prince. 1989. Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in Pollution Control. Journal
        of Environmental Economics and Management 17, 247-265.

Misolek, W.S. and H.W. Elder. 1989. Exclusionary Manipulation of Markets for Pollution Rights. Journal of
        Environmental Economics and Management 16, 156-166.

Mitchell, R.C. and R.T. Carson. 1989. Using Surveys to Value Public Goods: The Contingent Valuation Method.
         Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.

Montero, J.P. 2003. Tradeable Permits with Imperfect Monitoring: Theory and Evidence. Working paper, MIT Center
        for Energy and Environmental Policy.

Montgomery, D.W. 1972. Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Programs. Journal of Economic Theory
       5, 395.

Moore, M.J. and W.K. Viscusi. 1988. The Quantity-Adjusted Value of Life. Economic Inquiry 26(3), 369-388.

Morgenstern, R.D. 2000. Decision making at EPA: Economics, Incentives and Efficiency. Draft conference paper,
       "EPA at Thirty: Evaluating and Improving the Environmental Protection Agency," 7-8 December. Duke
       University.

Mrozek, J. and L.O. Taylor. 2002. What Determines the Value of Life? A Meta Analysis. Journal of Policy Analysis
        and Management 21(2), 253-270.

Nelson, R., T.H. Tietenberg, and M. Donihue. 1993. Differential Environmental Regulation: Effects on Electric Utility
        Capital Turnover and Emissions. Review of Economics and Statistics 75(2), 368-373.

Newell, R.G. and W.A. Pizer. 2003. Regulating Stock Externalities Under Uncertainty. Journal of Environmental
        Economics and Management 45, 416-432.

Newell, R.G. and R.N. Stavins. 2003. Cost Heterogeneity and the Potential Savings from Market-Based Policies.
        Journal of Regulatory Economics 23(1), 43-59.

Palmquist, R.B. 2003. Property Value Models. in: K. Mäler and J. Vincent, eds., Handbook of Environmental
        Economics, Volume 2. Amsterdam: North Holland/Elsevier Science.

Pareto, V. 1896. Cours d'Economie Politique. Volume 2. Lausanne.

Phaneuf, D.J. and V.K. Smith. 2004. Recreation Demand Models. in: K.G. Mäler and J. Vincent, eds., Handbook of
        Environmental Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland/Elsevier Science.


                                                        17
Pigou, A.C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.

Pizer, W.A. 2002. Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global Climate Change. Journal of Public
        Economics 85(3), 409-434.

Porter, M.E. and C. van der Linde. 1995. Toward a New Conception of the Environment-Competitiveness Relationship.
         Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 97-118.

Revesz, R.L. and R.N. Stavins. 2005. Environmental Law and Policy. in: A.M. Polinsky and S. Shavell, eds., The
        Handbook of Law and Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland/Elsevier Science

Roberts, M.J. and M. Spence. 1976. Effluent Charges and Licenses Under Uncertainty. Journal of Public Economics
         5, 193-197.

Sagoff, M. 1993. Environmental Economics: An Epitaph. Resources Spring, 2-7.

Schmalensee, R., P.L. Joskow, A.D. Ellerman, J.P. Montero, and E.M. Bailey. 1998. An Interim Evaluation of Sulfur
       Dioxide Emissions Trading. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(3), 53-68.

Shepard, D.S. and R.J. Zeckhauser. 1982. Life-Cycle Consumption and Willingness to Pay for Increased Survival. in:
        M.W. Jones-Lee, ed., The Value of Life and Safety. Amsterdam: North-Holland 95-141.

Stavins, R.N. 1995. Transaction Costs and Tradeable Permits. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
         29, 133-146.

Stavins, R.N. 1996. Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice. Journal of Environmental Economics and
         Management. 30, 218-225.

Stavins, R.N. 1998. What Have We Learned from the Grand Policy Experiment: Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading.
         Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(3), 69-88.

Stavins, R.N. 2003. Experience with Market-Based Environmental Policy Instruments. in: K.G. Mäler and J. Vincent,
         eds., The Handbook of Environmental Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland/Elsevier Science.

Stavins, R.N. 2004. The Political Economy of Environmental Regulation. Northampton, Massachusetts: Edward Elgar.

Stephenson, K., P. Norris, and L. Shabman. 1998. Watershed-based Effluent Trading: The Nonpoint Source Challenge.
        Contemporary Economic Policy 16, 412-421.

Tietenberg, T.H. 1985. Emissions Trading: An Exercise in Reforming Pollution Policy. Washington, DC: Resources
        for the Future.

Tschirhart, J.T. 1984. Transferable Discharge Permits and the Control of Stationary Source Air Pollution: A Survey and
        Synthesis. in: T.D. Crocker, ed., Economic Perspectives on Acid Deposition Control. Boston: Butterworth.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2000. Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. Washington, DC: U.S.
        EPA.

Viscusi, W.K. and J.E. Aldy. 2003. The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout
         the World. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27(1).

Weitzman, M.L. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41(4), 477-491.

Weitzman, M.L. 1978. Optimal Rewards for Economic Regulation. American Economic Review 68(4), 683-691.



                                                         18
Weitzman, M.L. 1994. On the Environmental Discount Rate. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
       26(2), 200-209.

Weitzman, M.L. 1998. Why the Far-Distant Future Should Be Discounted at Its Lowest Possible Rate. Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 36(3), 201-208.

Willig, R. 1976. Consumer's Surplus Without Apology. American Economic Review 66(4), 589-597.




                                                    19
