NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE? AN EXAMINATION OF THREE ECONOMIC ASSESSMENTS
OF CALIFORNIA CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY
Robert Stavins
Judson Jaffe
Todd Schatzki
Working Paper 13587
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13587

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Helpful comments on a previous version of this paper were provided by: Lawrence Goulder, Richard
Newell, Richard Richels, and Larry Williams. We also benefited from discussions with David Montgomery
and Anne Smith. The authors alone are responsible for any remaining errors. Financial support was
provided by the Electric Power Research Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Robert Stavins, Judson Jaffe, and Todd Schatzki. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Too Good to Be True? An Examination of Three Economic Assessments of California Climate
Change Policy
Robert Stavins, Judson Jaffe, and Todd Schatzki
NBER Working Paper No. 13587
November 2007
JEL No. Q28,Q38,Q48,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
California's Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 limits California's greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions in 2020 to their 1990 level. Global climate change is a pressing environmental
problem, and the best possible public policies will be required to address it. Therefore, analyses
of prospective policies must themselves be of high quality, so that policymakers can reasonably
rely on them when making the critical decisions they inevitably will face.
In 2006, three studies were released indicating that California can meet its 2020 target at no net
economic cost - raising questions about whether opportunities truly exist to substantially reduce
emissions at no cost, or whether studies reaching such conclusions may simply severely
underestimate costs. This paper provides an evaluation of these three California studies.
We find that although opportunities may exist for some no-cost emission reductions, these
California studies substantially underestimate the cost of meeting California's 2020 target. The
studies underestimate costs by omitting important components of the costs of emission reduction
efforts, and by overestimating offsetting savings that some of those efforts yield through
improved energy efficiency. In some cases, the studies focus on the costs of particular actions to
reduce emissions, but fail to consider the effectiveness and costs of policies that would be
necessary to bring about such actions. While quantifying the full extent of the resulting cost
underestimation is beyond the scope of our study, the underestimation is clearly economically
significant. A few of the identified flaws individually lead to underestimation of annual costs on
the order of billions of dollars. Hence, these studies do not offer reliable estimates of the cost of
meeting California's 2020 target. Better analyses are needed to inform policymakers.
While the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 sets a 2020 emissions target, critical policy
design decisions remain to be made that will fundamentally affect the cost of California's climate
policy. For example, policymakers must determine emission targets for the years before and
after 2020, the emission sources that will be regulated to meet those targets, and the policy
instruments that will be employed. The California studies do not directly address the cost
implications of these and other policy design decisions, and their overly optimistic findings may
leave policymakers with an inadequate appreciation of the stakes associated with decisions that
lie ahead. As such, California would benefit from studies that specifically assess the cost
implications of alternative policy designs.
Nonetheless, a careful evaluation of the California studies highlights some important policy
design lessons that apply regardless of the extent to which no-cost emission reduction
opportunities actually exist. In particular, policies should be designed to account for uncertainty
regarding emission reduction costs, much of which will not be resolved before policies must be

enacted. Also, consideration of the different market failures that lead to excessive GHG
emissions makes clear that to reduce emissions cost-effectively, policymakers should adopt a
market-based policy (such as a cap-and-trade system) as the core policy instrument. The
presence of specific market failures that may lead to some no-cost emission reduction
opportunities suggests the potential value of additional policies that act as complements, rather
than alternatives, to a market-based policy. However, to develop complementary policies that
efficiently target such no-cost opportunities, policymakers need better information than currently
exists regarding the specific market failures that bring about those opportunities.
Robert Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@harvard.edu
Judson Jaffe
Analysis Group, Inc.
111 Huntington Avenue, 10th Floor
Boston, MA 02199
jjaffe@analysisgroup.com

Todd Schatzki
Analysis Group, Inc.
111 Huntington Avenue, 10th Floor
Boston, MA 02199
tschatzki@analysigroup.com

I.

Introduction
On September 27, 2006, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed into law the California

Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006. The Act sets a statewide greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions limit for 2020 that is equivalent to California’s 1990 emissions level, and gives the
California Air Resources Board (CARB) substantial discretion to establish policies to achieve
that target.1 Global climate change is a pressing environmental problem, and the best possible
public policies will be required to address it. While there are divergent views about the merits of
California’s emissions objectives, most would agree on the importance of California developing
policies that minimize the economic costs and risks associated with achieving those objectives.
Toward that end, analyses of the costs of prospective policies can offer insights that inform the
development of those policies. However, to be useful, such analyses must be of high quality so
that policymakers can reasonably rely on them when making the critical decisions they
inevitably will face.
Three studies (hereafter the “California studies”) released in 2006, prior to the Act’s
passage, seek to quantify the emission reduction potential and costs of various measures that
could be implemented in California. These studies were performed by California’s Climate
Action Team (hereafter the “CAT study”), the Center for Clean Air Policy (hereafter the “CCAP
study”), and David Roland-Holst, a professor of economics at Mills College and an adjunct
professor at the University of California at Berkeley (hereafter the “Berkeley study”).2 The
California studies’ common and overarching conclusion is that California’s 2020 emissions
target can be achieved through a portfolio of measures that would involve no net economic cost.
That is, the studies find that California’s target can be achieved through measures whose direct
costs are outweighed by the offsetting savings they create, making them economically beneficial
even without considering the emission reductions they may achieve.
1

On October 17, 2006, Governor Schwarzenegger issued Executive Order S-20-06, which orders the California
Environmental Protection Agency (Cal/EPA) to take the lead role in developing climate change programs, raising
questions about the respective roles of CARB and Cal/EPA in designing regulations to meet the 2020 target.
2
Center for Clean Air Policy (CCAP) (2006); California Climate Action Team (CAT) (2006a); and Roland-Holst
(2006a). Professor Roland-Holst later published an extension to his original study (2006b), but that second study’s
findings are driven largely by aspects of his analysis that were present in the original study. This paper therefore
focuses on his original study.

1

Given the substantial emission reductions required to meet California’s 2020 target, such
findings are surprising and differ dramatically from the vast majority of economic analyses of the
cost of reducing GHG emissions. The California studies’ surprising findings and their influence
on the California climate policy debate suggest that their reliability should be carefully
evaluated.

This paper provides such an evaluation.

While of particular relevance to

development of California climate policy, lessons that emerge from this evaluation have broader
implications for similar studies that have been performed — and undoubtedly will continue to be
performed — at the state and national level.
Although they differ from many other economic analyses of climate policy, the
California studies’ findings are reminiscent of similar studies by the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) laboratories that were performed in the run-up to and aftermath of the Kyoto Protocol
negotiations.3 Like the California studies, the DOE studies suggested that substantial emission
reductions could be achieved at no net economic cost.4 Thus, the California studies once again
raise questions that emerged previously in response to the DOE studies.

Namely, do

opportunities exist to substantially reduce GHG emissions at no (or even negative) cost? Or are
there reasons to believe that studies reaching such conclusions significantly underestimate costs?
A distinguishing feature of the California and DOE studies is that they rely on “bottomup” analyses of policy costs. That is, they build an estimate of an individual policy’s costs from
the bottom up by piecing together the components of those costs, including any offsetting
savings resulting from the policy’s implementation.5

Researchers have highlighted several

reasons why some past bottom-up analyses — including the DOE studies — substantially
underestimated the cost of climate policy, including the omission or incorrect valuation of
components of those costs (including any offsetting savings).6 Since many of these flaws can be
avoided (or their effects can be mitigated) through careful analysis, we evaluate whether the
California studies represent an advance relative to previous analyses, or if they suffer from

3

Interlaboratory Working Group (1997) and Interlaboratory Working Group (2000).
For example, the 2000 DOE study found that, by 2020, the United States could reduce its carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions by up to 32 percent through a set of policies whose economic benefits (including savings on energy
expenditures) are comparable to their overall cost. Interlaboratory Working Group (2000), pp. ES.1, ES.5.
5
For brevity, we often refer to a policy’s net costs — including offsetting savings — simply as its costs.
6
For example, see Jacoby (1999); Sutherland (2000); and Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (1999).
4

2

similar significant flaws. We find that many of the well-recognized problems present in prior
bottom-up analyses are apparent in the California studies, leading those studies to overstate the
emission reduction potential of policies that they examine, and to understate the cost of
achieving those reductions.

While quantifying the full extent of the resulting cost

underestimation is beyond the scope of our review, we can conclude that the underestimation is
economically significant, because just a few of the identified flaws individually lead to
underestimation of annual costs on the order of billions of dollars. While some no-cost emission
reduction opportunities may exist, it is clear that the California studies arrive at overly optimistic
conclusions about the economic implications of meeting California’s emissions target.
It is important to recognize that regardless of what the underlying cost of particular
emission reduction measures may be, the cost of meeting California’s 2020 target will be
significantly affected by policy design decisions that policymakers must make in the coming
years. For example, policymakers must determine emission targets for the years before and after
2020, the emission sources that will be regulated to meet those targets, and the policy
instruments that will be employed — to name just a few key design decisions.
The California studies do not directly address the implications of alternative policy
designs, and their overly optimistic findings may lead some policymakers to pay insufficient
attention to the design decisions that lie ahead, the consequences of which could be dramatic.
Indeed, California’s own experience with electricity restructuring demonstrates how poor policy
design and implementation can undermine achievement of well-intentioned policy objectives.
Therefore, while it is important to recognize the California studies’ shortcomings, it is even more
important that future analyses assess the implications of alternative policy designs for achieving
California’s emissions objectives. In the meantime, our evaluation of the California studies
highlights some important policy design lessons that apply regardless of the cost of emission
reduction measures.
In Section II, we summarize the California studies’ findings. In Section III, we describe
how those studies overstate the emission reductions that would be achieved by the policies they
examine. In the subsequent two sections, we address the California studies’ assessments of
emission reduction costs. The three studies’ findings that substantial reductions can be achieved

3

at no cost are driven by assessments of energy efficiency policies. As such, the studies mark
another chapter in the “energy efficiency gap” debate. Central to this debate are questions about
the extent to which limited adoption of energy-efficient technologies reflects economic
inefficiencies that public policy can beneficially address. In Section IV, we describe this debate
and provide a framework for understanding both how some no-cost emission reduction
opportunities can exist, and how analyses like the California studies can underestimate emission
reduction costs. In Section V, we identify flaws in the California studies that lead them to
underestimate significantly the cost of meeting California’s 2020 emissions target. In Section
VI, we discuss lessons for the design of climate policy that emerge from an evaluation of these
studies, and we conclude in Section VII.
II. Overview of the California Studies
The amount of emission reductions necessary to meet the 2020 target established by the
California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 remains uncertain.

First, although the

emissions target is California’s 1990 emissions level, CARB has not yet made certain
measurement decisions that are necessary to determine that level.

Second, the amount of

emission reductions required to meet the target depends on what emissions would be in 2020 if
California did not establish emission reduction policies. That is, the amount of required emission
reductions depends on the baseline, or business-as-usual, emissions level. While both the 2020
emissions target and the baseline emissions level are uncertain, California’s Climate Action
Team estimates that baseline emissions in 2020 would be 600 million metric tons of carbon
dioxide equivalent (MMTCO2e), and that 1990 emissions were 426 MMTCO2e.7

Thus,

according to the CAT study, California will need to reduce its 2020 emissions by 174 MMTCO2e
(or 29 percent) from baseline levels in order to meet its target. To put California’s target in the
context of other climate initiatives, it is worth noting that the target’s timetable and stringency (in

7

CAT (2006a), p. 64. A ton of CO2 equivalent emissions is the amount of emissions of any GHG that has the same
radiative impact as one ton of CO2 emissions. This common measure of GHG emissions allows emissions of
different GHGs to be compared and added together into a measure of total GHG emissions.

4

terms of the percentage reduction in emissions that is required) are very similar to the timetable
and stringency of the target the United States would have faced under the Kyoto Protocol.8
The California studies seek to quantify the emission reduction potential and cost of
numerous measures that might contribute to limiting 2020 emissions.9 These measures range
from standards that have already been developed by California regulatory agencies to actions
that could be undertaken to reduce emissions, but for which an associated policy has not yet been
developed. The measures examined by the CAT, Berkeley, and CCAP studies are estimated to
reduce 2020 emissions by 195 MMTCO2e, 96 MMTCO2e, and 58 MMTCO2e, respectively.
Table 1 presents emission reduction estimates from these studies, grouped into major categories
of emission sources and emission reduction measures.
measures examined.

There is significant overlap in the

For example, the Berkeley and CAT studies both consider emission

reductions from California’s vehicle GHG emissions standards, and all three studies consider
opportunities for sequestration of CO2 through afforestation. In many cases, these studies rely on
the same underlying analyses for estimates of the emission reduction potential and cost of
particular measures.
Based on their analyses, the studies suggest that California can meet its 2020 emissions
target through measures that, on net, achieve economic gains. For example, the CAT study
identifies emission reduction opportunities that exceed the 174 MMTCO2e of reductions that it
estimates are necessary to achieve the 2020 target. In so doing, the CAT study concludes that,
“in 2020 the implementation of the [emission reduction] strategies is expected to increase jobs
and income by an additional 83,000 and $4 billion, respectively….”10 The Berkeley study finds
that more than half of the emission reductions needed to meet the 2020 target can be achieved
while increasing California’s gross state product (GSP) in 2020 by $55 billion.11,12 Professor

8

The U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimated that the United
States’ Kyoto Protocol target of seven percent below its 1990 emissions level would have required emissions to be
reduced to about 30 percent below business-as-usual levels less than 15 years after the Protocol was negotiated.
U.S. DOE, EIA (1998), p. xiii.
9
In some cases, these studies evaluate the emission reduction potential and cost of particular actions, rather than of
the policies that are necessary to bring about those actions. As we discuss in Section V.B, this distinction is
important because a policy’s cost can significantly exceed the cost of the actions that it seeks to encourage.
10
CAT (2006a), p. 65.
11
Roland-Holst (2006a), p. 2-8.

5

Roland-Holst subsequently released an extension to that study in which he finds that the
additional reductions necessary to meet the 2020 target can be achieved while still yielding
comparable economic gains.13
Table 1
Emission Reductions in 2020 from Measures Examined by the California Studies1
(MMTCO2e, with percent of total estimated reductions in parentheses)
Berkeley Study2

Category

CAT Study

Transportation Emissions
Motor Vehicle GHG Emissions Standards

30

(15.4%)

Measures to Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled Through
Improved Land Use and Transportation Infrastructure

27

(13.9%)

Other Measures to Reduce Vehicle Emissions
(Including Alternative Fuels)

14

(7.1%)

34

(17.6%)

30

(15.3%)

24

(25.0%)

34

(17.5%)

13

6

(3.1%)

11
9

Electricity Sector Emissions
Measures to Reduce the Carbon Intensity of
Electricity Generation
Programs and Standards to Increase Energy
Efficiency in Buildings
CO2 Sequestration and Non-CO2 GHG Emissions
Measures Targeting Forestry and Agricultural Practices
Measures to Reduce Methane Emissions
Measures to Reduce HFC, PFC, and SF6 Emissions
Other Measures
Total

31

CCAP Study3

(32.3%)
11

(18.9%)

(13.5%)

14

(23.6%)

14

(14.6%)

17

(28.5%)

(5.4%)

11

(11.5%)

15

(25.6%)

(4.7%)

3

(3.1%)

2

(3.3%)

195 (100.0%)

96 (100.0%)

58 (100.0%)

Notes:
1. Categories represent our categorization of specific measures described in the underlying studies, and not necessarily categories used by those
studies. Blank entries indicate that the study did not investigate measures within a given category. While the underlying studies provide some
estimates to the first decimal place (hundreds of thousands of tons), estimates are reported here in millions of tons.
2. The Berkeley study estimates are based on the "ambitious scenarios" evaluated by that study.
3. The CCAP study estimates are for those emission reductions that the CCAP study estimates to have costs of less than $30 per metric ton of CO2
equivalent. The total estimate does not match the sum of the categories because of rounding.

While the California studies focus on the aggregate economic impact of the portfolio of
measures they examine, their findings are largely driven by a subset of measures that target
12

The California studies use economic impacts in 2020 as a proxy for determining whether Californians are made
better off by emission reduction measures. However, this is an insufficient basis for concluding that Californians
would be better off, as it does not account for economic conditions in prior or subsequent years. For example, a
policy that forces individuals to sacrifice current consumption in order to make particular investments may increase
GSP in a future year (e.g., in 2020) as a result of those investments. But the lost value of current consumption that is
necessary in order to make those investments may outweigh any positive impact of the investments in future years.
13
Roland-Holst (2006b). As noted previously, that second study’s findings are driven largely by aspects of his
analysis that were present in the original study. We therefore focus on the original study.

6

improvements in energy efficiency. In particular, the net economic gains estimated by the
Berkeley and CAT studies result from their estimates of the impact of California’s vehicle GHG
emissions standards — which will increase vehicle fuel economy — and programs and standards
to improve energy efficiency in buildings (e.g., utilities’ energy efficiency programs).14 The
Berkeley study estimates that these measures alone would increase GSP by $64 billion in 2020,
while the remaining measures it examines are estimated to reduce GSP by $8.5 billion in 2020.15
Similarly, whereas the CAT study finds that the vehicle GHG emissions standards and energy
efficiency programs and standards offer annual savings of $10 billion in 2020, it finds that the
remaining measures it examines impose a net annual cost of $1 billion.16 The CCAP study does
not directly estimate the economic impact of the vehicle GHG emissions standards and energy
efficiency programs and standards. Moreover, the specific measures that the CCAP study does
examine are found to impose a net cost on California. But CCAP combines its estimates of the
costs of the measures that it does examine with others’ estimates of net savings from the energy
efficiency measures to conclude that California’s 2020 target can be achieved at no net cost.17
Because estimates of the economic impact of energy efficiency measures drive the California
studies’ findings, much of our assessment of the studies focuses on their analyses of those
measures.
To estimate the aggregate emission reduction potential and economic impact of the
measures it examines, the CCAP study simply sums the emission reduction and cost estimates

14

While there are limited other means by which manufacturers can reduce vehicles’ GHG emissions, the
predominant means is by improving fuel economy to reduce the amount of gasoline that vehicles burn.
15
Roland-Holst (2006a), p. 2-8. Professor Roland-Holst estimates that the vehicle standards alone will increase
GSP by $50 billion. In developing this estimate, he relies on the results of analyses that CARB conducted to support
the development of those standards. However, Professor Roland-Holst’s estimate of the standards’ impact in 2020
is approximately ten times greater than CARB’s own estimate of the annualized net savings from the standards.
Professor Roland-Holst offers no explanation for this dramatic difference. For CARB’s analysis, see CARB
(2004a), as revised in CARB (2004b).
16
Note that these values do not sum to the aggregate economic impact estimated by the CAT study. This is because
these values are based on estimates of each measure’s independent economic impact that the CAT study uses as
inputs to its subsequent economic modeling of the aggregate impact of all measures. The CAT study does not offer
estimates of the ultimate economic impact of each individual measure that emerges from that modeling. It only
offers an estimate of the aggregate impact of all measures. Nonetheless, these input values offer a reasonable means
of determining which measures drive the CAT study’s findings. Also, the CAT study does not offer any estimate of
the economic impact of certain measures that it examines, such as improvements in transportation infrastructure,
effectively treating them as if they have no cost. CAT (2006b).
17
CCAP (2006), p. 13.

7

that are independently developed for each measure. By contrast, the CAT and Berkeley studies
use results from independent analyses of each measure as inputs to a computable general
equilibrium (CGE) model. These studies’ CGE modeling serves as a means of aggregating the
individual emission reduction measures’ direct effects, while accounting for some of the indirect
effects of those measures on statewide economic activity and emissions.
There are significant shortcomings associated with how the Berkeley and CAT studies
estimate the aggregate effects of emission reduction measures through CGE modeling. Meeting
California’s 2020 target will lead to substantial changes in California’s economy, and its energy
markets in particular. For example, adjustments in energy supply and demand associated with
meeting the 2020 target will lead to changes in energy prices. As a result of these changes, a
given measure’s economic impact, which depends on energy prices, may differ significantly
from what it would be if the measure were the only one being implemented and energy prices
remained unchanged. That is, there will be important interactions among measures necessary to
meet California’s 2020 target. Properly executed CGE modeling can capture these interactions
by calculating each measure’s effects while accounting for the implications of all other emission
reduction measures. But the Berkeley and CAT studies estimate the direct effects of key
emission reduction measures outside of the CGE models they employ, as if those measures were
being conducted in isolation from one another. The studies then use these estimates of the
emission reduction measures’ direct effects as inputs to their CGE modeling. As a result, the
studies fail to account for important interactions among those measures in estimating their
aggregate cost and emission reduction potential.
Although there are significant flaws in the CGE modeling that the California studies
perform, we focus on the individual analyses of each emission reduction measure that serve as
inputs to that modeling, as these underlying analyses ultimately drive the models’ results.
However, in Section III we do address some of the interactions among policies that the studies
fail to consider in estimating the total emission reduction potential of those policies.
III. Factors Causing the California Studies to Overstate Emission Reductions
The California studies fail to account for a number of factors that lead them to overstate
the emission reduction potential of the measures they examine. One key omitted factor is

8

emissions leakage, which has long been recognized as a phenomenon that can limit the
effectiveness of climate policy. Leakage occurs when market adjustments resulting from a
regulation cause an increase in emissions that offsets some (or all) of the emission reductions
directly achieved by that regulation. While the measures that the California studies examine will
likely lead to emissions leakage in several ways, the studies do not account for leakage in
quantifying impacts of many of those policies. For example, policies considered by the CAT
study to reduce consumption of out-of-state coal-fired electricity generation would not have the
expected effect on emissions if that generation is simply reallocated to serve demand in other
states.18 Leakage will be particularly problematic for California’s policies because of their
narrow geographic scope. Of course, emissions leakage will hinder achievement of California’s
statewide emission targets only if it leads to offsetting increases in emissions within (rather than
outside of) the state. But, regardless of whether leakage leads to offsetting increases in in-state
or out-of-state emissions, it diminishes the ultimate impact of California’s policies on global
emissions, and hence their environmental benefits.
Interactions among policies introduce additional opportunities for emissions leakage.
Specifically, emission reductions resulting from one policy may diminish the amount of
additional reductions that regulated entities must achieve (either in-state or out-of-state) to meet
another policy’s requirements. Given the policies examined by the California studies, the most
significant example of this type of leakage is likely that resulting from interaction between
California’s vehicle GHG emissions standards and federal fuel economy standards. California’s
standards have the effect of requiring auto manufacturers to increase the average fuel economy
of vehicles sold in California. However, those manufacturers also must meet federal Corporate
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards. Because CAFE standards are average nationwide
standards, sales of more fuel-efficient vehicles in California make it possible for manufacturers
to sell less fuel-efficient (higher emitting) vehicles in remaining states while still meeting federal
CAFE standards.

That is, California’s standards may lead to increased vehicle emissions

elsewhere in the United States, relative to what those emissions would have been absent
California’s standards.19

Hence, while California’s vehicle GHG emissions standards may

18

CAT (2005), p. 64.
For example, as a result of federal CAFE standards finalized in 2006, by 2011, light truck manufacturers will have
to achieve an average fuel economy that is 16 percent more stringent than the 20.7 mile per gallon standard that was

19

9

achieve emission reductions within California, they may simply concentrate the costs of meeting
federal CAFE standards on Californians while having a far smaller net effect on national
emissions.20
Interactions among certain policies also can lead to leakage that creates offsetting
increases in in-state emissions. For example, the CAT study includes emission reductions from
policies specifically promoting biomass electricity generation and from increasing the stringency
of a renewable portfolio standard (RPS) for electricity generators.21 However, since biomass is a
renewable fuel, if the former set of policies increases biomass electricity generation, this will
lead to an offsetting reduction in the amount of generation from other renewables that is needed
to meet the RPS requirement. Therefore, while biomass policies may shift the composition of
renewable generation used to meet the RPS, they would not increase the total amount of
renewable generation (or resulting emission reductions) beyond what would be achieved by the
RPS alone. Yet, the CAT study adds together the individual effects of each policy without
considering this interaction.
Other policy interactions can diminish the total emission reductions achieved by a
portfolio of policies. A policy that reduces an activity’s emissions intensity also diminishes the
emission reductions that can be achieved by a policy that reduces the level of that activity, and
vice versa. Therefore, implementation of both policies will have a lesser effect on emissions
than the sum of each policy’s independent effect. For example, according to an analysis by
CARB, improvements in vehicle fuel economy resulting from California’s vehicle GHG
emissions standards will reduce vehicle emissions by 18 percent in 2020, and 27 percent in
2030.22

While the CAT study incorporates these estimated effects of the standards in its

analysis, it also estimates that “smart land use and intelligent transportation” policies can achieve

in effect until 2004. However, compliance with California’s more stringent standards will reduce the extent to
which the fuel efficiency of light trucks sold elsewhere in the United States must be improved in order to meet the
new federal standards. U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (2006).
20
Alternatively, it is possible that California’s standards may lead to increased fuel economy in other states because
of other states’ regulatory actions in response to those standards, or because of manufacturers’ marketing decisions
in response to California’s standards. However, if California’s standards lead to increased fuel economy in other
states, those improvements will be accompanied by additional costs that also would need to be considered.
21
CAT (2006a), pp. 49, 61.
22
CARB (2004a), as revised in CARB (2004b), Table 8.2-1.

10

significant emission reductions by substantially reducing vehicle miles traveled.23 However,
improvements in vehicle fuel economy will diminish the emission reductions that are achieved
by reducing vehicle miles traveled, and vice versa. Similar interactions would exist among
policies examined in the CAT study that reduce the emissions intensity of electricity generation
and those that reduce electricity use. Given that the CAT study’s estimates of emission reduction
potentials are based on independent analyses of each policy, it is unclear whether that study
accounts for these interactions.
In summary, the total emission reduction potential of policies like those examined by the
California studies is diminished by emissions leakage and policy interactions, some of which
introduce new opportunities for leakage. By failing to account fully for these effects, those
studies overstate the aggregate impact of the examined policies on state and, more importantly,
national and global GHG emissions.
IV. The “Energy Efficiency Gap” Debate: A Framework for Evaluating the California
Studies
Assessments of energy efficiency measures drive the California studies’ findings that
California’s 2020 GHG emissions target can be met at no net cost. As a result, in many respects,
those studies represent a new chapter in an on-going debate about the so-called “energy
efficiency gap.”24 An understanding of this debate provides a useful framework for evaluating
the California studies’ estimates of emission reduction costs.
It is widely recognized that existing technologies can substantially improve the
economy’s energy efficiency and, in so doing, reduce emissions.

There are broadly two

perspectives on the cost of more widespread adoption of these technologies.

One group,

sometimes referred to as “technologists,” asserts that numerous market barriers impede
widespread adoption of these technologies. Moreover, they assert that government initiatives to
overcome these barriers and thereby improve energy efficiency could reduce emissions and also
realize substantial cost savings through resulting reductions in energy expenditures. On the other
hand, most economists maintain that, while technology diffusion is typically a gradual process,
23

CAT (2005), p. 38.
One of the most extensive discussions of this debate appears in the October 1994 issue of Energy Policy. See
Huntington, Schipper, and Sanstad (1994). Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (1999) offer a more recent discussion.

24

11

energy efficiency improvements that truly yield cost savings largely will be adopted without the
need for government intervention.25 Moreover, economists note that many of the barriers that
slow or prevent broader adoption of more energy-efficient technologies reflect real economic
costs associated with their adoption. Where this is the case, policy intervention that requires or
encourages adoption of those technologies would be socially costly. However, some of the
barriers inhibiting technology adoption reflect true market failures that, if corrected, may both
improve energy efficiency and yield economic gains. Figure 1 depicts how efforts to address
market failures and other market barriers affect energy efficiency and economic efficiency.26
Individuals and firms typically voluntarily undertake investments and actions that reduce
their costs or increase their profits. But a few types of market failures may inhibit realization of
some cost-saving energy efficiency improvements.27

For example, economically desirable

energy efficiency investments may be foregone because of poor information about the value of
energy savings they offer. Moreover, because those who provide new information may be
unable to capture much of its benefits (i.e., information is a public good), there may be
insufficient incentives to provide this information.28 Cost-saving energy efficiency investments
also may be foregone because of principal-agent problems, such as when the individual financing
the investment is different from the individual directly benefiting from that investment (e.g., a
landlord’s investment may reduce a tenant’s electricity bill). In such cases, various factors may
prevent those individuals from establishing mutually beneficial agreements to facilitate such
investments. These and other market failures imply that some opportunities may exist for “nocost” or “negative-cost” policies that improve energy efficiency, reduce emissions, and increase

25

Technology diffusion represents the third of three stages that Josef Schumpeter (1942) distinguishes in the process
by which new, superior technologies permeate the marketplace. The first stage is invention, or the development of a
scientifically or technically new product or process. The second stage is innovation, or the commercialization of a
new product or process. See Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2003).
26
Improvements in energy efficiency involve reductions in energy use per unit of economic activity. Improvements
in economic efficiency entail reductions in the cost of existing goods and services, or improvements in their quality.
27
For further discussion of these market failures, see Jaffe and Stavins (1994).
28
Similarly, experiences of early technology adopters provide useful information to others considering similar
investments. However, early adopters are unlikely to be compensated for providing this information. Therefore,
when deciding whether to invest in new technologies, individuals and firms do not fully account for the value of the
public information that such investments create. As a result, they may not undertake some socially beneficial
investments in new technologies that would improve information or reduce costs for later adopters.

12

economic efficiency through resulting cost savings.29 In Figure 1, implementation of such nocost policies is reflected by northeasterly movement (along path A) relative to current conditions.
Of course, in seeking to address market failures, policymakers must recognize that
sometimes the cure is worse than the disease. That is, the cost of a corrective policy may
outweigh any savings gained by addressing targeted market failures. Thus, although energy
efficiency would be increased by going beyond implementation of no-cost policies to eliminate
all market failures affecting energy efficiency, such efforts would impose net costs and reduce
economic efficiency, as is indicated by northwesterly movement (along path B) from the
“Implementation of ‘No-Cost’ Policies” box in Figure 1. Moreover, while Figure 1 suggests that
eliminating all market failures may bring about an improvement in economic efficiency relative
to current conditions, it is possible that the cost of doing so could instead reduce economic
efficiency relative to current conditions.
Figure 1
Changes in Energy Efficiency and Economic Efficiency Resulting from Policies
That Eliminate Market Barriers and Failures

Increasing
Energy
Efficiency

Elimination of All
Market Barriers
Relating to Energy
Efficiency

Implementation of Policies
Whose Environmental Benefits
Outweigh Their Costs:
Internalization of Environmental
Externalities from Energy Use

C
Elimination of All Market
Failures Relating to Energy
Efficiency Regardless of
Policy Costs

D
B

A
Current
Conditions

Implementation of
“No-Cost” Policies:
Elimination of Market Failures
Relating to Energy Efficiency
That Can Be Corrected By
Economically Efficient Policies

Increasing Economic Efficiency

29

See Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2005).

13

While voluntary adoption of some energy efficiency improvements may be limited by
market failures whose elimination also can improve economic efficiency, many other market
barriers to voluntary adoption of energy efficiency improvements are factors that cause those
improvements’ economic costs to be greater than they may at first appear. Examples include the
adverse effects that energy efficiency improvements can have on valued attributes of affected
technologies (e.g., reduced power in more fuel-efficient vehicles) and the costs of learning about
and adapting to new technologies.

Because such barriers represent real economic costs,

overcoming them to improve energy efficiency reduces economic efficiency. This is represented
by northwesterly movement (along path C) in Figure 1 from elimination of all market failures to
elimination of all market barriers.
In summary, the presence of market failures affecting energy efficiency may offer some
opportunities for no-cost policies that achieve cost savings while reducing energy use and
associated emissions. But the extent of such opportunities is more limited than some have
suggested.30 Many improvements in energy efficiency may be socially costly for one of two
reasons.

First, energy efficiency improvements may be impeded by market barriers that

represent real economic costs, rather than by market failures. Second, even where market
failures are present, the cost of policies to address them may exceed resulting savings.
In evaluating a study that claims to find no-cost emission reduction measures, several
questions arise that require careful analysis. Has the study truly identified a market failure that
provides an opportunity to improve economic efficiency through policy intervention? Or, has
the study instead incorrectly estimated the economic costs of the examined measures? Put
simply, if opportunities truly exist to reduce costs while reducing emissions, why would potential
beneficiaries of these opportunities not undertake them voluntarily? Also, if a market failure is
present, can policies address that failure without imposing costs that exceed resulting savings?
While some no-cost emission reduction opportunities may exist, policymakers should not
lose sight of the fact that costly emission reductions still can be socially beneficial on net if they
offer sufficient environmental benefits. Compared with the contentious debate about the extent
of market failures that offer opportunities for no-cost emission reduction policies, there is
30

See Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (1999).

14

universal agreement that the core market failure leading to excessive GHG emissions is the
failure of emitters to internalize the social cost of their emissions, and thereby the social benefit
of emission reductions. As Figure 1 depicts, consideration of environmental benefits from
emission reductions offers additional opportunities to reduce emissions, improve energy
efficiency, and increase economic efficiency (by moving along path D) — even though such
efforts will impose direct costs on those that undertake them. However, justification of emission
reductions and energy efficiency improvements on these grounds requires critical evaluation of
both their costs and environmental benefits. Unfortunately, debates about the extent of no-cost
emission reduction opportunities that have been reinvigorated by the California studies distract
attention from important questions about the benefits of emission reductions, and the level of
costs that those benefits justify.
V. Factors Causing the California Studies to Underestimate the Costs of Achieving
Emission Reductions
The presence of market failures that affect energy efficiency decisions implies that some
opportunities for no-cost emission reduction policies may exist. However, economists have
identified several flaws that caused prior analyses claiming to identify substantial opportunities
for such policies to significantly underestimate those policies’ real economic costs. As we
describe in this section, many such flaws are apparent in the California studies, causing them to
severely underestimate the cost of meeting California’s 2020 emissions target.
Of course, studies finding opportunities for no-cost policies are not the only ones that
may incorrectly estimate costs. The points raised in this section should be carefully considered
in evaluating analyses of any policy. In fact, some of these points relate to the California
studies’ assessments of policies found to have positive costs.
Analyses like those relied on by the California studies seek to estimate a policy’s overall
economic costs by building an estimate of those costs from the bottom up. Execution of these
“bottom-up” analyses requires identifying and correctly estimating each individual component of
costs, including any offsetting savings, and it requires aggregating those components over
individuals and firms, as well as over time. Aggregation of costs and savings over time requires

15

discounting future costs and savings to make comparable costs and savings that occur in different
years. Thus, analysts must estimate how individuals and firms discount future cash flows.
Well-executed bottom-up analyses can, in principle, develop reliable estimates of
emission reduction policies’ costs. However, in light of the complexities described above, it is
not surprising that the California studies incorrectly estimate costs. Analyses can underestimate
the costs of emission reduction policies by underestimating the costs of the actions and
investments that are necessary to reduce emissions, and/or by underestimating the costs of
policies necessary to bring about those actions and investments. As we describe below, the
California studies suffer from both types of flaws.
A. Underestimation of the Costs of Actions and Investments to Reduce Emissions
Analyses may underestimate the costs of emission reductions by omitting important
components of those costs. Also, emission reductions arising from improvements in energy
efficiency generate offsetting savings in the form of reduced future energy expenditures.
Analyses therefore may underestimate net costs by measuring these future savings incorrectly, or
by employing inappropriately low discount rates in determining how those savings compare with
upfront costs. As we describe below, the California studies underestimate costs both by omitting
important components of costs and by overstating offsetting savings.
i. Omitted Costs
Omitted costs can range from those that are readily apparent to those that are more subtle
and difficult to quantify. In some cases, studies may consider the costs borne by the government
to administer a policy, but fail to account for costs that individuals and firms incur to achieve the
emission reductions that the policy targets. The California studies commit this mistake in
analyzing the impact of electric utility and state energy efficiency programs. These programs,
often referred to as demand-side management (DSM), achieve reductions in electricity use by
offering rebates and other incentives that encourage individuals and firms to undertake energy
efficiency improvements.31 In response to these programs, individuals and firms undertake

31

Some DSM programs raise awareness about opportunities to improve energy efficiency without providing direct
incentives that target those improvements.

16

energy efficiency improvements because the costs of those improvements are outweighed by the
combined value of any incentives they receive and the resulting electricity savings.
There is much debate about the true costs and effectiveness of DSM programs.32 But
putting this debate aside, it is clear that the California studies fail to account fully for those
programs’ costs.

While accounting for the incentives offered by those programs and the

resulting electricity savings, the California studies ignore the actual costs that individuals and
firms incur to undertake the targeted actions or investments.33,34 While difficult to measure,
these omitted costs can be as great as, or even greater than the value of the electricity savings
that the studies attribute to DSM programs. This is because individuals and firms would still
enjoy net savings — and thereby presumably still be willing to undertake the improvements —
as long as the costs of their actions or investments are no greater than the combined value of both
the incentives they receive and the resulting electricity savings.
Another common category of omitted costs relates to the impact of emission reduction
efforts on the quality of affected goods and services. For example, all else equal, making an air
conditioner more energy efficient may increase its size and weight, and making a car more fuel
efficient may reduce its acceleration. While more difficult to quantify than a consumer’s out-ofpocket expenses for a new technology, costs associated with impacts on the quality of a good can
be just as important. In evaluating costs related to quality impacts, one must estimate the value
that individuals and firms place on those attributes of a good or service that are lost by reducing
emissions. Estimates of those costs can be developed through economic (hedonic) analysis, but
they typically are ignored in bottom-up studies that rely primarily on engineering cost analysis.
For example, in its analysis of emission reduction opportunities, the CCAP study includes
emission reductions from adding limestone to Portland cement. CCAP finds that use of such
32

See Loughran and Kulick (2004) and Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer (2006).
The Berkeley study explicitly acknowledges that it does not account for these private adoption costs. RolandHolst (2006a), p. 2-16. The CAT study provides less methodological documentation. However, comparison of its
estimates of the per-kilowatthour cost for these programs with other estimates of the cost of funding such programs
suggests that the CAT study also considers only the costs incurred by utilities or the state to fund the programs, and
ignores costs borne by individuals and firms.
34
While imposing a cost on the state or utilities that fund them, the incentives themselves do not represent a social
cost. Rather, they are a transfer from the ratepayers or taxpayers that fund the programs to those that receive the
incentives. But even if the California studies incorrectly treat these incentives as costs, they may still underestimate
the total cost of these programs if the actual costs of undertaking the targeted actions or investments, which those
studies omit, exceed the value of the incentives. As we describe below, this is quite likely.
33

17

limestone cement blends would reduce both emissions and production costs. Yet, it also notes
that “Cal Trans has raised questions about the structural integrity of limestone blends.”35 While
including the estimated cost savings from limestone blends in its analysis, CCAP does not
estimate the cost of reduced structural integrity or of measures that cement users might undertake
to mitigate these potentially adverse effects.
Some bottom-up analyses attempt to account for impacts that emission reductions may
have on the quality of affected goods, but even these efforts often fall short of fully accounting
for those impacts. For example, the California studies’ estimates of the economic impact of
California’s vehicle GHG emissions standards are based on CARB’s analysis of those standards.
CARB estimates the cost of meeting the standards while maintaining vehicle acceleration,
weight, and other attributes at levels anticipated in 2009 — the year that the standards come into
effect.36 However, this approach fails to consider the standards’ impact on the costs of and
opportunities for further improvements in vehicle performance beyond 2009 levels.

If

Californians place any value on further improvements in vehicle performance beyond 2009
levels, and the standards raise the costs of or reduce opportunities for those performance
improvements, CARB will have omitted a significant component of its standards’ economic cost.
There are several other sources of emission reduction costs that bottom-up analyses like
the California studies can overlook. For example, in adopting new technologies, individuals and
firms may incur costs to learn about and adapt to using those technologies. While such costs
may be quite small for any one individual or firm, they can significantly affect the aggregate cost
of a technology’s widespread adoption. Indeed, estimates of the substantial nationwide or
statewide cost savings that can result from adopting more energy-efficient technologies often
represent the aggregation of very small individual or firm-level savings.37 Thus, these small
individual or firm-level savings could be outweighed by equally small costs associated with
learning about and adapting to new technologies.

35

CCAP (2005b), p. 6.
CARB (2004a), p. 58.
37
Sanstad, Hanemann, and Auffhammer (2006) note that the “magnitudes of [energy efficiency] savings may be
quite modest … from the individual’s perspective, what’s on the sidewalk may not be a $20 bill but rather a penny
or a nickel.”
36

18

ii. Overestimation of Future Savings from Reduced Energy Use
The net cost of some emission reductions, particularly those from energy efficiency
improvements, reflects both new costs and offsetting reductions in future energy expenditures.
Thus, analyses can underestimate the net cost of emission reduction measures by overestimating
the value of the energy expenditure savings that those measures create.
Analyses can overestimate the reduction in energy use realized from adopting more
energy-efficient technologies, in part because such estimates often are based on highly controlled
studies that do not reflect typical real-world conditions.38 Moreover, even if a study accurately
estimates the reduction in energy use enjoyed by those undertaking energy efficiency
improvements, differences between the price that consumers would have paid for the conserved
energy and the actual cost of producing that energy can cause resulting private cost savings to
differ from corresponding social cost savings. That is, emission reductions that are no-cost
opportunities for the individuals and firms undertaking them will not necessarily be no-cost
opportunities from a societal standpoint, and vice versa.
The California studies significantly overestimate the social cost savings from energy
efficiency measures by focusing on the private savings enjoyed by those undertaking the
measures, and failing to account for substantial differences between those private savings and the
actual social cost savings that the measures create. For example, the CAT study estimates that
electricity efficiency measures can reduce annual electricity use by 51 million megawatthours by
2020.39 The study values these annual savings at $5.6 billion by multiplying the reduction in
electricity use by a forecast of the electricity rate that consumers would pay in 2020, which is 11
cents per kilowatthour (kWh).40 This approach is a reasonable method of estimating private cost
savings from electricity efficiency measures. However, it leads the CAT study to overestimate
social cost savings from those measures because retail electricity rates that consumers pay cover
both electricity generation costs and fixed costs, such as transmission, distribution, and
administrative costs. Energy efficiency improvements reduce electricity generation, and thereby

38

For example, see Metcalf and Hassett (1999).
CAT (2006b).
40
For example, see CAT (2006b), p. 21. The Berkeley study’s description of how it estimates savings from these
measures suggests that it takes a similar approach. Roland-Holst (2006a), p. 2-16.
39

19

reduce generation costs, but have a more limited (and perhaps no) effect on fixed costs that
utilities recover through electricity rates. As a consumer reduces her electricity use, a significant
portion of her savings therefore comes at the expense of other ratepayers, who must bear a
greater share of those fixed costs (such as through increased rates). In light of this, use of
California’s retail electricity rates overstates the value of the social costs that can actually be
avoided (i.e., the social cost savings that can be realized) by electricity efficiency measures
examined in the California studies.41
Some indication of the extent to which the California studies overstate social cost savings
from electricity efficiency measures is offered by a 2003 California Energy Commission (CEC)
report.42 This report, which examines opportunities for such efficiency measures in California,
specifically addresses the social cost savings from those measures. For the efficiency measures
that the report deems to be economical, the average cost of the electricity generation that can be
avoided by those measures is 7 cents per kWh of demand reduction.43 This estimate of social
cost savings is nearly 40 percent less than the electricity rate of 11 cents per kWh used by the
CAT study, which captures the private savings from reductions in electricity use. Had the CAT
study instead focused on social cost savings by using the CEC’s estimates of avoided generation
costs, the CAT study’s estimate of annual savings from electricity efficiency measures in 2020
would be reduced by about two billion dollars.44
The California studies also incorrectly measure the social cost savings from reductions in
gasoline consumption that would result from California’s vehicle GHG emissions standards. For
41

During periods of peak electricity demand (e.g., afternoon hours in the summer), the cost of electricity generation
can exceed electricity rates, so that those rates understate the social cost savings from reducing electricity demand.
However, the vast majority of demand reductions from potential energy efficiency measures that have been
identified in California would occur during the “base load” period when total electricity demand (and the
incremental cost of generation) is at its lowest. California Energy Commission (2003).
42
CEC (2003).
43
The CEC develops three estimates of the cost of avoided electricity generation that differ depending on whether
that generation is avoided during periods of base load, shoulder, or peak electricity demand. Our 7 cent per kWh
estimate is a weighted average of these three cost estimates. The weight assigned to each estimate reflects the
corresponding demand period’s share of the total demand reduction that the CEC finds to be achievable through
economical energy efficiency measures. CEC (2003), pp. 7-11.
44
The Berkeley study does not provide the values that it employs to estimate savings from these measures. But its
estimate of the annual net impact of these measures (accounting for upfront costs and offsetting electricity savings)
is nearly $14 billion in net savings. This suggests that the overstatement of annual savings that would result from its
focus on private, rather than social, cost savings would be in the billions of dollars. Roland-Holst (2006a), p. 2-19.

20

example, the CAT study estimates savings from those standards based on the reduction in
gasoline expenditures that drivers are expected to enjoy.45 However, a significant share of the
price of gasoline in California is attributable to state and federal taxes. This share of the
reduction in gasoline expenditures enjoyed by drivers does not represent a true cost savings, as
the savings to drivers are offset by a corresponding reduction in state and federal tax receipts.
While accounting for the savings directly enjoyed by drivers, the CAT study fails to account for
this offsetting effect on tax receipts, thereby overstating savings from the standards. Given
current state and federal gasoline excise taxes (37.6 cents per gallon), the standards’ forecasted
effect on gasoline use in 2020 would reduce annual receipts of those taxes by about one billion
dollars, affecting both California’s state budget and its receipt of federal highway funds.46
iii. Incorrect Valuation of How Individuals and Firms Discount Future Savings
Analyses also may improperly estimate how individuals and firms discount the value of
future energy savings. Numerous economic studies of individuals’ and firms’ energy efficiency
investments have found that the value of future savings is discounted considerably more than is
typically assumed in bottom-up analyses of proposed policies. For example, in one of the first
such studies, Hausman found that consumer choices among air conditioner models imply
discount rates of 15 to 25 percent.47

More recently, Anderson and Newell found that

manufacturers’ energy efficiency investment decisions suggest discount rates as great as 80
percent.48 By contrast, the California studies employ discount rates as low as four percent.49
Use of such a low discount rate may improperly increase the estimated value of future savings.
Many studies have estimated discount rates by examining individual and firm decisions
regarding upfront investments that yield future energy savings. The tradeoffs between upfront
costs and future savings that are revealed by these decisions imply specific discount rates.
45

CAT (2006b), p. 6.
American Petroleum Institute (2006). This estimate of taxes includes an underground storage tank fee, but
excludes sales tax. While there is a sales tax on gasoline in California, sales tax receipts depend on gasoline prices,
and loss of these receipts may be offset by increased consumer expenditures on other taxed goods. The Berkeley
study’s description of how it estimates the impact of these standards suggests that it also fails to account for their
effect on excise tax receipts. Roland-Holst (2006a), p. 2-19.
47
Hausman (1979).
48
Anderson and Newell (2004).
49
For example, CCAP (2006), p. 4.
46

21

However, investment decisions that suggest high discount rates actually may reflect the effect of
market failures on investment decisions. For example, a firm with a low discount rate may fail
to invest in a beneficial energy efficiency improvement because of inadequate information about
the savings from that investment.

Its choice to forgo this investment may therefore be

interpreted incorrectly as evidence of a high discount rate. In such a case, it may be appropriate
to use a lower discount rate to evaluate a policy’s impact, even though the firm appears to use a
higher discount rate in valuing the investment targeted by the policy.
However, high implicit discount rates do not necessarily indicate the presence of market
failures.

There are well-established reasons why firms and individuals should use higher

discount rates in evaluating some investment decisions.50 Also, high estimated discount rates
have been found to be consistent with the rates that firms indicate they intend to use in
evaluating investments, calling into question the idea that high estimated rates imply a failure to
properly value future savings.51 Moreover, regardless of the underlying cause of high estimated
discount rates, analyses using lower rates to estimate the value that individuals and firms place
on future savings may overestimate the effectiveness of some policies that create incentives for
particular emission-reducing investments, but do not require those investments.
B. Underestimation of the Costs of Policies Necessary to Achieve Emission Reductions
The direct costs of particular emission reduction efforts may be of little relevance if
policies cannot elicit those efforts effectively. Moreover, policies can introduce additional costs
above and beyond the direct costs of undertaking the emission reduction efforts they target. As
we noted in Section IV, even if certain actions or investments to reduce emissions may yield cost
savings, the cost of a policy necessary to bring about those actions or investments may exceed
the value of those cost savings. Further, cost savings from emission reductions can only be
attributed to a policy if those reductions would not occur without that policy. Therefore, the
costs of a policy that targets potentially cost-saving measures can be underestimated (i.e., savings

50

For example, individuals and firms face uncertainty about the return that energy efficiency investments will earn.
If an investment’s value cannot be fully recovered in the event that the investment is later deemed undesirable (i.e.,
the investment involves a sunk cost) and an individual or firm has the option to delay that investment, a higher
expected return may be necessary to justify making the investment rather than delaying the investment decision. See
Metcalf and Rosenthal (1995); Hassett and Metcalf (1995); and Sanstad, Blumstein, and Stoft (1995).
51
Anderson and Newell (2004).

22

from that policy can be overestimated) by failing to account for the reality that some of those
cost savings would be realized even without the policy. The California studies offer several
examples of how analyses can underestimate the cost of meeting an emissions target by giving
inadequate attention to the effectiveness and cost of the actual policies necessary to achieve
emission reductions.
i. Failure to Consider the Effectiveness and Cost of Necessary Policies
Some of the emission reductions contemplated by the California studies could be
achieved by adjusting existing policies. But many of the emission reductions would require
implementation of new policies whose effectiveness and cost is not well understood. At one
extreme, nearly 15 percent of the 2020 emission reductions estimated by the CAT study come
from “measures to improve transportation energy efficiency” and “smart land use and intelligent
transportation”, including “encouraging high density … development.”52 The study provides no
estimate of the economic impact of such changes in development patterns (e.g., the impact of
smaller lot sizes), or of the cost and effectiveness of policies that would seek to achieve those
changes.
In other cases, the California studies estimate the cost of particular actions that would
achieve emission reductions, but do not consider the cost and effectiveness of the policies that
are necessary to elicit those actions. For example, all California studies consider opportunities to
sequester CO2 through land use changes, such as afforestation. However, as the CCAP study
notes, significant challenges remain in developing policies that can effectively bring about such
land use changes.53 For example, even if their land offers low-cost sequestration opportunities,
some landowners may not participate in programs designed to achieve sequestration because of
associated administrative burdens and transaction costs. Also, policies may incur costs by
subsidizing some land use changes that would have occurred even without those policies.
Finally, efforts to achieve sequestration through land use changes may suffer from leakage. That
is, land use changes in one area may bring about changes elsewhere that have offsetting effects
on sequestration, raising the cost of achieving a given net increase in sequestration. While
estimating the cost of particular land use changes, the California studies do not quantify how
52
53

CAT (2006a), pp. 58-59.
CCAP (2005a).

23

factors like those described above would limit the effectiveness and increase the cost of policies
that are necessary to bring about those changes.54 Absent an assessment of the effectiveness and
cost of policies necessary to bring about the hypothesized changes, the California studies’
evaluations of emission reduction measures are of limited use. While such evaluations may
identify promising areas for future research, they should not be interpreted as estimates of the
cost of actually realizing emission reductions.
ii. Failure to Characterize Baseline Behavior Appropriately
A critical step in estimating a policy’s impact is determining an appropriate baseline
against which the policy’s effects are measured.

This baseline represents the anticipated

behavior of individuals and firms in the absence of the policy.

Given particular baseline

behavior, a policy will only impose costs or create savings to the extent that the targeted
emission reduction measures would not already be adopted in that baseline (i.e., to the extent that
the policy actually has a binding effect on the behavior of regulated entities). For example, if
consumers would purchase more fuel-efficient vehicles even without a fuel economy standard,
the savings and emission reductions from purchasing those vehicles are not attributable to the
standard because they would have occurred even in its absence.
Economic analyses often assume that, in their baseline behavior, individuals and firms
will voluntarily adopt any emission reduction measures that have net cost savings. Thus, by
design, such analyses will not find opportunities for cost-saving emission reduction policies. In
these analyses, rather than creating cost savings, policies would have no net economic impact on
those firms and individuals for whom the required measures reduce costs, as the analyses would
assume that those cost-saving measures would be adopted in the baseline. But, as we described
in Section IV, certain market failures can prevent voluntary adoption of some cost-saving
emission reduction measures, presenting opportunities for cost-saving policies.

Therefore,

analyses assuming that all cost-saving opportunities are realized in the baseline may overestimate
a policy’s costs (by underestimating opportunities for cost savings) if such market failures are
present and significant, and can be addressed efficiently through policy intervention.
54

Recognizing the important implications of these factors, other analyses have at least made admittedly ad hoc
adjustments to their cost estimates. For example, in estimating the cost of a U.S. climate policy proposed in Senate
Bill 139 (the Climate Stewardship Act of 2003), the EIA assumed that only half of the estimated agricultural and
forestry sequestration opportunities would be available at any given cost. U.S. DOE, EIA (2003), p. 245.

24

Whereas many economic analyses of climate policies assume that market failures that
offer cost-saving opportunities are not present, analyses like the California studies depend on the
presence of such market failures to reach the conclusion that policies would create cost savings.
That is, they assume baseline behavior that — according to their own estimates — does not take
advantage of all cost-saving opportunities, and thereby leaves opportunities for cost-saving
policies. However, the extent to which baseline behavior would not take advantage of costsaving opportunities depends fundamentally on the nature and extent of relevant market failures,
about which there is substantial uncertainty and much debate (see Section IV). Indeed, as is the
case with the California studies, analyses that find opportunities for cost-saving policies typically
do not rely on explicit characterizations of relevant market failures in estimating baseline
behavior and resulting cost savings from a policy.55 Rather, such analyses’ assumptions about
baseline behavior and estimates of resulting cost savings from a policy imply that unspecified
market failures are present and sufficiently large to make the assumed baseline behavior and
estimated policy cost savings plausible. Thus, in principle, these analyses may overestimate
(underestimate) the cost savings and emission reductions from a policy if they assume baseline
behavior that overstates (understates) the extent of relevant market failures.
The possibility that baseline behavior may be characterized incorrectly is a particularly
significant source of potential error when seeking to estimate a policy’s impact many years into
the future. In fact, there is a tension in many studies that find substantial opportunities for costsaving emission reduction policies. These studies often assume that technological advances will
reduce relevant technologies’ costs in future years, creating substantial cost-saving opportunities.
But the studies simultaneously assume that market failures are sufficiently large that those
opportunities will not be realized without policy intervention. Consequently, even if such studies
develop accurate estimates of the future costs of emission-reducing technologies or actions, they
nonetheless may underestimate the cost of (overestimate cost savings from) emission reduction
policies by incorrectly characterizing the extent of market failures and resulting baseline
behavior. That is, these studies may incorrectly attribute particular emission reductions and

55

By contrast, other market distortions, such as taxes, can be (and are) explicitly and quantitatively characterized in
analyses in order to estimate their implications for baseline behavior and for a proposed policy’s economic impact.

25

associated cost savings to a policy when, in fact, those reductions and savings would occur even
without that policy.56
The California studies’ estimates of the impact of California’s vehicle GHG emissions
standards offer an example of how flawed forecasts of baseline behavior can lead to significant
overestimation of savings from a policy. The studies’ estimates are based on CARB’s analysis
of those standards. In turn, to estimate the standards’ effects, CARB forecasts the future baseline
behavior of California consumers, including the fuel-efficiency of vehicles that they would
purchase and the amount that they would drive in the absence of those standards. Together with
estimates of future gasoline prices and technology costs (among other factors), CARB’s forecast
of baseline behavior leads to its estimate of net cost savings resulting from the standards. In its
original analysis, CARB’s forecast of baseline behavior and its resulting estimate of net cost
savings from the standards are based, in part, on its assumption that future gasoline prices would
be $1.74 per gallon.57 In light of the recent higher level of gasoline prices, CARB performed an
additional analysis in which it assumes a higher gasoline price of $2.30. Yet, despite using a
gasoline price that is 32 percent higher than that in its original analysis, CARB does not revisit
its assumptions about consumers’ baseline vehicle purchases and driving habits. That is, the
only adjustment that CARB makes to its analysis in order to account for a much higher gasoline
price is to proportionately increase its estimate of the value of gasoline savings from those
standards, while assuming that the volume of gasoline savings remains the same.58 The CAT
study takes the same approach in adjusting CARB’s original analysis to account for the Climate
Action Team’s expectation that gasoline prices in 2020 will be $2.12, rather than CARB’s
original estimate of $1.74.59
Neither CARB nor the CAT study consider that significantly higher gasoline prices
would cause consumers to voluntarily adopt more fuel-efficient vehicles and to drive less,
56

While inaccurate forecasts of baseline behavior would lead to incorrect estimates of the amount of emission
reductions that is attributable to a policy, they would not necessarily lead to incorrect estimates of the absolute level
of emissions resulting from a policy’s implementation. A policy may ensure that a particular emissions level is
achieved (e.g., by setting a cap on emissions) regardless of the extent to which emission reductions necessary to
meet that level are attributable to the policy, rather than to baseline behavior.
57
CARB (2004a), p. xi.
58
CARB (2004a), as revised in CARB (2004b), Table 12.7-1.
59
CAT (2006b), pp. 3, 6. While the CAT study reports its gasoline price assumption in constant 2003 dollars, here
we report that price in constant 2004 dollars to make it comparable with CARB’s price forecast.

26

reducing the standards’ effect on gasoline consumption, and thereby reducing cost savings from
the standards. Thus, assuming that CARB’s original forecast of baseline behavior is appropriate
for a $1.74 gasoline price scenario, both CARB’s analysis of the $2.30 price scenario and the
CAT study overestimate net cost savings from the standards by failing to account for how
baseline behavior would adjust to much higher gasoline prices.60
Careful analysis is needed to evaluate precisely how alternative fuel prices would affect
baseline behavior and the resulting impact of California’s standards.

However, simplified

calculations can offer an indication of the extent to which the California studies overestimate
savings from those standards under higher fuel price scenarios. In particular, we focus on
CARB’s overestimation of savings under the $2.30 gasoline price scenario.
To estimate how a higher gasoline price could change baseline fuel economy levels and
vehicle miles traveled (VMT), we use estimates of the price elasticity of fuel economy and VMT
that the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) employed in a 2003 study.61 Given these elasticity
estimates, the 32 percent increase in the price of gasoline from $1.74 to $2.30 per gallon would
lead to a 6.4 percent increase in baseline fuel economy and to a 5.5 percent reduction in VMT.62
CARB estimates that its standards will increase the average fuel economy of vehicles that are in
use in 2020 to 21 percent above its forecast of baseline fuel economy when gasoline is $1.74 per
gallon.63 Thus, the standards would only increase fuel economy by 14 percent relative to the
higher baseline fuel economy level that would result from a $2.30 gasoline price. Moreover, the
effect of this fuel economy improvement on gasoline consumption would be diminished by the
reduction in baseline VMT. All told, the adjustment in baseline behavior in response to a $2.30
60

The CCAP study relies on CARB’s $2.30 price scenario analysis. CCAP (2006), p. 13. The Berkeley study does
not indicate whether it relies on CARB’s $1.74 price scenario analysis or its $2.30 price scenario analysis.
61
The price elasticities of fuel economy and VMT measure the percentage change in fuel economy and VMT,
respectively, that results from a one percent increase in gasoline prices. The CBO assumed that, in the long-run, a
one percent increase in gasoline prices would lead to a 0.22 percent increase in average fuel economy, and to a 0.2
percent reduction in VMT. Together, these estimates imply a long-run price elasticity of demand for gasoline of
-0.39, which is consistent with other existing estimates of that price elasticity. CBO (2003), p. 12.
62
These values assume that the price elasticities of fuel economy and VMT are constant across all price levels.
63
This value is derived from CARB’s estimate of the standards’ effect on 2020 vehicle emissions (which are related
to fuel consumption). CARB (2004a), as revised in CARB (2004b), Table 8.2-1. The percentage increase in
average fuel economy continues to grow beyond 2020 because the standards are not fully phased in until model year
2016. The standards’ full effect will not be realized until all earlier model year (less fuel-efficient) vehicles are
replaced by vehicles meeting the 2016 standards.

27

gasoline price would reduce CARB’s estimate of the volume of fuel savings attributable to the
standards in 2020 by more than 35 percent.64 Without accounting for any adjustment in baseline
behavior under the $2.30 price scenario, CARB estimates that the standards will offer drivers $7
billion in fuel savings in 2020.65 Therefore, assuming that CARB’s original forecast of baseline
behavior under the $1.74 price scenario is correct, our calculations indicate that the California
studies overstate annual savings from the vehicle GHG emissions standards by billions of dollars
because they fail to account for the effect of higher gasoline prices on baseline behavior.66
Our calculations also demonstrate that the total value of fuel savings from the standards
under some higher fuel price scenarios can be lower than the value of savings under lower price
scenarios. That is, the reduction in the volume of fuel savings from the standards under a higher
fuel price can outweigh that higher price’s effect on the value of those savings. Based on our
calculations, the value of annual fuel savings attributable to the standards in 2020 under the
$2.30 price scenario would be nearly one billion dollars less than the savings under the $1.74
price scenario.
iii. Implications of Cost Uncertainty for the Reliability of Deterministic Analyses of
Cost-Saving Policies
The California studies’ overstatement of cost savings from the vehicle GHG emissions
standards highlights another reason why analyses finding cost-saving policy opportunities may
underestimate costs. Even if an analysis of a cost-saving policy correctly forecasts baseline
behavior in the scenario it examines, it may underestimate the policy’s expected costs by failing
to account for the implications of cost uncertainty, and particularly how baseline behavior may
adjust to greater-than-anticipated cost savings.

64

The corresponding reduction in the volume of fuel savings under the CAT study’s forecast of future gasoline
prices would be more than 25 percent.
65
CARB (2004a), as revised in CARB (2004b), Table 12.7-1.
66
Along with reducing fuel savings attributable to the standards, adjustments in baseline fuel economy would reduce
the standards’ incremental effect on vehicle costs. However, under the $2.30 price scenario, CARB estimates that
the value of fuel savings resulting from the standards is more than five times greater than the corresponding increase
in annualized vehicle costs. Moreover, some of the reduction in fuel savings attributable to the standards under the
higher fuel price scenario result from changes in baseline VMT, rather than changes in baseline fuel economy.
Thus, the reduction in fuel savings attributable to the standards that results from these adjustments in baseline
behavior would be far greater than the corresponding reduction in the standards’ impact on vehicle costs.

28

As is the case in the California studies, a policy’s costs are typically estimated using a
deterministic analysis, which develops a single cost estimate based on “point estimates” of
relevant underlying determinants and a single forecast of baseline behavior. For example,
CARB’s analysis of California’s vehicle emissions standards estimates costs relative to one
baseline scenario based on point estimates of technology costs, fuel prices, and other cost
determinants. But there is typically significant uncertainty in the determinants of a policy’s
costs, including baseline behavior.
In principle, by failing to account for this cost uncertainty, a deterministic analysis can
either underestimate or overestimate the expected (or average) value of a policy’s potential
future costs (or savings).67 However, in the case of policies targeting cost-saving emission
reduction opportunities, deterministic analyses will tend to overestimate systematically the
expected value of a policy’s cost savings (i.e., underestimate the expected value of its costs).
This conclusion arises from a full consideration of how baseline behavior responds to changes in
the magnitude of emission reduction opportunities.
If cost savings from targeted emission reduction measures turn out to be greater than
anticipated, baseline behavior will likely adjust to realize some (if not all) of those cost-saving
opportunities, mitigating the extent of cost savings that the policy itself offers. At the extreme,
when the cost savings offered by targeted actions are greatest, a policy may have no binding
effect on individual or firm behavior, and therefore no economic impact. As a result, while a
deterministic analysis would overstate a policy’s cost savings if cost-saving opportunities turn
out to be lower than expected, that analysis may not understate the policy’s cost savings to the
same extent if cost-saving opportunities turn out to be greater than expected. Indeed, in the latter
case a deterministic analysis would overstate the policy’s cost savings if cost-saving
opportunities turn out to be so great that they would be realized without policy intervention.
Thus, accounting for the full distribution of possible policy impacts suggests that deterministic
analyses will tend to overestimate the expected cost savings (i.e., underestimate the expected
costs) of seemingly cost-saving policies.
67

The expected value of a policy’s costs can be estimated more accurately by using a probabilistic analysis, which
estimates the full distribution of potential costs (based on uncertainties in underlying determinants). For a
discussion of circumstances in which deterministic estimates can differ from the expected value of a policy’s costs,
see Jaffe and Stavins (2004).

29

A simplified example of a fuel economy standard illustrates the problem. Assume there
are two vehicles with different fuel efficiencies and that a proposed standard would require
consumers to purchase the more fuel-efficient vehicle. Given expected technology costs and fuel
prices, a deterministic analysis finds that the more fuel-efficient vehicle offers the typical
consumer savings of $100 over the vehicle’s lifetime, accounting for both the vehicle’s higher
cost and resulting fuel savings (see Table 2). The analysis also finds that, because of a market
failure, the consumer nonetheless would choose the less fuel-efficient vehicle absent the
standard. The deterministic analysis therefore estimates that the standard would yield $100 in
savings for the typical consumer. However, assume there are two additional equally likely
scenarios. In the second scenario, where technology costs are lower and/or fuel prices are higher
than anticipated, the consumer would save $600 by purchasing the more fuel-efficient vehicle.
In the third scenario, where technology costs are higher and/or fuel prices are lower than
anticipated, the consumer would incur $400 in costs by purchasing that vehicle.
In this example, the deterministic estimate of the standard’s impact is the same as the
expected value of the savings from adopting the more fuel-efficient vehicle, given the three
possible future scenarios. That expected value is $100 in savings — the average of $600 in
savings, $100 in savings, and $400 in costs. But the deterministic estimate of the standard’s
impact will equal the expected value of the standard’s impact only if the typical consumer would
not voluntarily purchase the more fuel-efficient vehicle under any of the scenarios. This is
because it is only under those circumstances that the expected value of the standard’s impact is
the same as the expected value of the savings from adopting the more fuel-efficient vehicle. If,
however, the opportunity for $600 in savings would cause a typical consumer to purchase the
more fuel-efficient vehicle voluntarily, then the standard would not affect her behavior in that
scenario, and thereby would offer no savings. As a result, while a deterministic analysis would
suggest that the standard offers the typical consumer $100 in savings, the expected value of the
standard’s impact would, in fact, be a cost of $100 — the average of $0 (no impact), $100 in
savings, and $400 in costs.
As the above example demonstrates, if individuals’ and firms’ baseline behavior
adjusts to changes in the level of cost-saving opportunities from emission reduction measures —
and economic analysis shows that it typically does — then deterministic analyses of seemingly

30

Table 2
Comparison of Deterministic Estimate of the Cost of a Hypothetical Fuel Economy Standard with the
Expected Value of that Standard’s Cost Under Different Assumptions About Consumers’ Baseline Behavior
(Cost Estimates Account for Technology Costs and Offsetting Fuel Savings and Are for a Typical Consumer)
Cost of Standard Requiring More Fuel-Efficient Vehicle*

Probability

Relative Cost of
More FuelEfficient Vehicle*

If Consumer Never
Voluntarily Chooses More
Fuel-Efficient Vehicle

If Consumer Voluntarily Chooses
More Fuel-Efficient Vehicle When
Savings Are Greatest

Deterministic Analysis of Cost:
Average Technology Cost/
Average Fuel Price

100%

Full Distribution and Expected Value of Possible Costs:
Low Technology Cost/
33%
High Fuel Price Scenario

-$100

-$100

-$100

-$600

-$600

$0

Average Technology Cost/
Average Fuel Price Scenario
(Basis for Deterministic Estimate)

33%

-$100

-$100

-$100

High Technology Cost/
Low Fuel Price Scenario

33%

$400

$400

$400

-$100

-$100

$100

Expected Value from Three Scenarios
(Probability-Weighted Average)
*Note: Negative values indicate net savings.

31

cost-saving policies will tend to underestimate those policies’ expected costs. The extent of such
underestimation will depend on how sensitive baseline behavior is to changes in cost-saving
opportunities, among other factors. In turn, the sensitivity of baseline behavior to changes in
cost-saving opportunities will depend, in part, on the nature and extent of market failures that
affect baseline behavior.

Thus, accurate estimation of the impacts (and desirability) of

potentially cost-saving policies requires both consideration of cost uncertainty and a far better
understanding of the market failures that those policies seek to address than currently exists. The
California studies do not explicitly account for cost uncertainty, which raises additional concerns
regarding the reliability of their estimates.
C. Summary of Flaws Causing the California Studies to Underestimate Costs
The California studies suffer from numerous flaws that cause them to underestimate
significantly the true cost of meeting California’s 2020 emissions target. In estimating the cost
of emission reduction efforts, these studies omit key components of costs and overstate the social
value of savings from resulting reductions in energy use. In addition to underestimating the cost
of particular actions that can reduce emissions, the California studies also underestimate the cost
and fail to consider the effectiveness of some of the policies that are necessary to bring about
those actions.

This is particularly problematic for those policies that are known to face

significant implementation challenges. Furthermore, the policies examined by the California
studies can yield cost savings only if market failures prevent individuals and firms from
voluntarily undertaking the cost-saving measures that those policies target. Otherwise, one
would expect that those cost-saving measures would be realized even without the policies. But
the California studies do not offer any evidence that market failures are sufficiently large to
make the estimated cost savings plausible. Thus, even if the California studies’ cost estimates
for particular technologies or actions were correct, the studies may incorrectly forecast baseline
behavior, leading them to underestimate policies’ costs by overstating any savings that those
policies may offer. In fact, the studies clearly underestimate the cost of California’s vehicle
GHG emissions standards as a result of a flawed forecast of consumers’ baseline behavior.
We have not attempted to quantify the implications of all of the problems that we have
identified. However, our analyses found that a few of these flaws each lead to underestimation
of annual costs on the order of billions of dollars. Other problems, whose effects we could not
32

quantify, may have equally significant implications. Thus, as a result of the cumulative effect of
these flaws, the California studies do not offer a reliable basis for estimating the cost of meeting
California’s 2020 emissions target.
Despite the issues described above, some of the measures examined by the California
studies may nonetheless offer cost-effective means of achieving California’s 2020 target. That
is, while they may be more costly than the California studies suggest, some of the measures still
may be among the least costly means of achieving that target. But additional improved analyses
are needed to better inform policymakers regarding the economic implications of such measures.
VI. Policy Lessons from Evaluating the California Studies
The ultimate cost of California’s climate policy will depend fundamentally on policy
design decisions that have not yet been made. While California’s Global Warming Solutions Act
of 2006 sets a target for 2020 emissions, it leaves many critical aspects of policy design
unresolved, such as emission targets for the years leading up to and following 2020, the emission
sources that will be covered by regulation, and the policy instruments that will be used to achieve
emission targets (e.g., market-based policies or performance and efficiency standards). These
and many other important design decisions will be made in the coming months and years.
The California studies do not directly examine the economic implications of alternative
policy designs. Moreover, by suggesting that the 2020 target can be achieved at no cost, they
may foster a policymaking approach that does not reflect the significant stakes associated with
the decisions that lie ahead — both in terms of unnecessary costs that may be incurred and
savings that may be foregone if policies are poorly designed. In light of this, analyses focusing
on the implications of alternative policy designs are particularly needed. In the meantime, some
important lessons emerge from our evaluation of the California studies. In this section, we
discuss lessons relating to uncertainty regarding the cost of meeting emission targets, and to the
design of cost-effective policy. As we describe below, some of the most important policy design
lessons do not depend on the extent to which opportunities for no-cost emission reduction polices
exist, or whether the California studies have substantially underestimated costs.

33

A. Uncertainty Regarding the Cost of Meeting Emission Targets
Even if the flaws identified in the California studies are corrected and additional analyses
are performed, significant uncertainty will remain regarding the cost of meeting California’s
2020 emissions target.

This is because further analysis cannot resolve many sources of

uncertainty that are inherent in forecasts of future costs, such as uncertainty regarding future fuel
prices, technological advances, and economic growth.
It is particularly important for policymakers to recognize the magnitude of cost
uncertainty because the consequences of imprecisely estimating emission reduction costs are far
greater for some policy designs than for others. For example, in the presence of cost uncertainty,
rigid adherence to particular standards or emission targets increases the risk that policies will
cause undesirable economic consequences. An inflexible cap on NOx emissions established
under California’s RECLAIM program led to a dramatic increase in that program’s costs in
2000, which contributed to California’s electricity crisis.68 Similarly, in the presence of cost
uncertainty, sector-specific standards can present greater economic risks than would a broadbased (i.e., economy-wide) emissions cap-and-trade system. Compared with an economy-wide
cap-and-trade system, such standards give regulated entities less flexibility to respond to
unexpectedly high costs by adjusting the distribution of emission reduction efforts across and
within sectors.
B. Importance of Considering the Cost-Effectiveness of Individual Policies
In evaluating a set of policies designed to achieve a particular objective, such as
California’s 2020 emissions target, policymakers should carefully evaluate the cost-effectiveness
of each policy. By focusing on the aggregate impact of a portfolio of policies, the California
studies divert attention from the question of which individual policies should be pursued to
achieve California’s 2020 emissions target at least cost. Nonetheless, careful examination of the
California studies demonstrates just how important it is for policymakers to consider the
individual merits of each component policy. For example, while the Berkeley study estimates
that the vehicle GHG emissions standards and building energy efficiency programs and standards
will yield significant cost savings, three of the remaining six policies that it examines are
68

See Joskow (2001).

34

estimated to have an average impact of reducing 2020 GSP by about $300 per ton of CO2
equivalent.69 It makes little sense to conclude that these relatively costly measures are desirable
simply because they are grouped with other measures that are estimated to create economic
benefits. The significant variation in the estimated cost-effectiveness of policies examined by
the California studies reinforces the fact that the choice and design of specific policy measures
will critically affect the cost of California’s climate policy.
C. A Cost-Effective Framework for Climate Policy
Much of the debate spurred by analyses like the California studies focuses on the costs of
meeting specific emission targets. In addition to leading policymakers to flawed conclusions
about the costs of meeting emission targets, such studies also may lead policymakers to illinformed conclusions about the relative merits of alternative policy instruments for achieving
those targets. As in the case of the California studies, those bottom-up analyses that yield
significantly lower cost estimates than do many other economic analyses of climate policy often
do so when analyzing a standards-based, sectoral policy approach. By contrast, other economic
analyses that find higher costs often focus on analyzing market-based policies, such as cap-andtrade systems. Yet the differences in cost estimates and in the types of policy instruments
examined by these analyses should not be interpreted as an indication that a standards-based,
sectoral approach to climate policy would be a less-costly alternative to economy-wide marketbased policies. In fact, regardless of one’s beliefs about the extent of no-cost emission reduction
opportunities, careful consideration of the different market failures that cause excessive GHG
emissions should lead to the same conclusions about a cost-minimizing policy framework.
Emission reductions can be achieved by addressing several fundamentally different
market failures. The core market failure contributing to excessive GHG emissions is the failure
of individuals and firms to internalize the social cost of their emissions. Bottom-up analyses
concluding that no-cost emission reduction opportunities exist reach this conclusion because of
assumptions about an additional set of market failures. These additional market failures may
prevent individuals and firms from making certain cost-saving decisions — such as with regard
to energy efficiency investments — that would also reduce emissions.

69

Roland-Holst (2006a), Tables ES-1 and ES-2.

35

The fact that the core market failure leading to excessive emissions is the failure of
individuals and firms to internalize the cost of their emissions suggests that a market-based
policy, such as a cap-and-trade system, should be the core policy instrument employed. By
creating a price signal that reflects the social cost of emissions, market-based policies can
address this core market failure far more cost-effectively than can standards or other policy
approaches. The economic logic leading to this conclusion is completely independent of debates
about the prevalence of no-cost emission reduction opportunities.
Whereas a market-based policy should cover as many emission sources as possible in
order to minimize the costs of meeting a given emissions target, the possibility that there may be
some no-cost emission reduction opportunities suggests that additional, carefully targeted
policies should be considered.

Such policies should serve as complements, rather than

alternatives, to a market-based policy because they address fundamentally different market
failures.

For example, even if a firm internalizes the cost of its emissions, inadequate

information may still cause it to forego some cost-saving energy efficiency investments that
would reduce emissions. Similarly, even if policies effectively address a market failure that
prevents a firm from making some cost-saving investments, that firm’s emissions still will be too
high if it does not internalize the cost of those emissions. Moreover, while complementary
policies addressing these additional market failures may offer some no-cost emission reduction
opportunities, none have claimed that those opportunities are sufficiently abundant to permit
achievement of long-run emission goals.
Additional policies also can be established to cover emission sources and sinks that
cannot be targeted effectively by a core market-based policy.

For example, difficulties

measuring and monitoring biological sequestration of CO2 and some non-CO2 GHG emissions
may hinder their direct inclusion in a cap-and-trade system. As we noted earlier, in part because
of these difficulties, the California studies underestimate the cost of policies targeting
sequestration and reductions in some non-CO2 GHG emissions. Nonetheless, in concluding that
these opportunities are important sources of low-cost reductions in net emissions, the California
studies are consistent with prior analyses of national climate policy.70 Thus, in this respect, the
70

See U.S. DOE, EIA (2003); U.S. DOE, EIA (2005); Reilly, Jacoby, and Prinn (2003); Stavins and Richards
(2005); and Lubowski, Plantinga, and Stavins (2006).

36

California studies are valuable in reinforcing the need to explore how climate policy can
effectively bring about sequestration and non-CO2 GHG emission reductions.
The policy framework described above would ensure that policy costs are minimized,
regardless of the extent to which no-cost opportunities exist. However, several points should be
considered in evaluating complementary policies that target no-cost emission reduction
opportunities. To be efficient, such policies must be tailored very carefully to reflect the specific
market failures that they seek to address. For example, if property owners forego cost-saving
energy efficiency investments because of inadequate information, this may call for different
corrective policies than if they forego such investments because they would not receive sufficient
compensation from their tenants. Moreover, unlike the failure of individuals and firms to
internalize the social cost of their emissions, market failures that create no-cost emission
reduction opportunities often call for narrowly targeted policy interventions. For example, a
frequently cited market failure that may offer no-cost emission reduction opportunities is the fact
that landlords may not have appropriate incentives for energy efficiency investments if their
tenants pay the utility bills.71 Yet less than one-quarter of U.S. residential energy consumption
occurs in rented — as opposed to owner-occupied — housing units.72
To develop complementary policies that efficiently target no-cost opportunities,
policymakers need better information about the nature and extent of the market failures that lead
to those opportunities. Bottom-up analyses like the California studies have the potential to
inform the development of such policies, but caution is in order. First, while bottom-up analyses
may suggest the presence of market failures by finding cost-saving opportunities, they typically
do not offer definitive evidence of such failures. These analyses may incorrectly identify no-cost
opportunities because of flaws such as those described in Section V. Second, even if market
failures are present, bottom-up analyses rarely offer any clear insight regarding the nature and
full extent of those failures. But such information is essential for the evaluation of policy
options. The cost of standards that might be developed to address these market failures depends
critically on the nature and extent of those failures. Finally, if complementary policies would
affect emission sources that are also covered by a market-based policy, such as a cap-and-trade
71
72

For example, see Brown (2001).
U.S. DOE, EIA (2001).

37

system, evaluations of such complementary policies would need to focus on the policies’
incremental effects.

Energy efficiency investments that regulated entities would make in

response to a cap-and-trade system presumably would diminish remaining opportunities for nocost investments that complementary policies could target.
D. A Safety Valve Allows Policy Design to Account for Different Beliefs About Costs
While consideration of the different market failures that lead to excessive GHG emissions
should point to the same cost-effective policy framework regardless of one’s beliefs about nocost emission reduction opportunities, undoubtedly it will be difficult to reach agreement on
appropriate emission targets within that framework.

However, it may be easier to reach

agreement on the maximum cost that should be incurred to achieve near-term emission
reductions, given the long-term nature of the climate problem. In light of this, a cap-and-trade
system can be designed in a way that bridges the gap between those who believe that aggressive
near-term targets can be met at no cost, and those who believe that such targets may impose
unacceptable economic consequences. A cap could be set to reflect the aggressive targets that
some analyses (like the California studies) suggest can be achieved at minimal or no cost, and a
safety-valve provision could ensure that costs do not exceed what both groups deem to be the
maximum acceptable level. A safety valve achieves this cost protection by guaranteeing that an
unlimited number of emission allowances would be made available by the government at a predetermined price. While firms would still undertake all emission reductions necessary to meet
the cap that are less costly than the safety valve’s “trigger price,” the safety valve ensures that
allowance prices — and thereby costs incurred to reduce emissions — will never rise above this
trigger price. Although the debate about emission reduction costs cannot be easily resolved, a
cap-and-trade with a safety valve can at least reduce the stakes of that debate by dramatically
reducing the consequences of underestimating costs.
VII. Conclusions
Analyses of the costs of emission reduction policies offer important insights that can
inform the development of climate policies in California and elsewhere. Economic analysis
indicates that while most emission reduction measures will impose costs, the presence of market
failures affecting energy efficiency may present some opportunities for low-cost or even no-cost

38

emission reduction policies. But there is substantial debate about the extent of such market
failures and about our ability to address them through economically efficient policy intervention.
Some analyses suggest that these market failures present opportunities to achieve
substantial emission reductions at no net cost. The three California studies that we evaluate in
this paper are the latest to make this claim.

But analyses finding substantial no-cost

opportunities may reach such a conclusion by incorrectly calculating the true economic costs of
emission reduction policies. Indeed, a careful examination of the California studies reveals that
they underestimate the cost of meeting California’s 2020 emissions target as a result of numerous
flaws. While quantifying the full extent of this cost underestimation is beyond the scope of our
study, that underestimation is clearly economically significant. A few of the flaws individually
lead to underestimation of annual costs that is on the order of billions of dollars. The California
studies also overstate the emission reduction potential of the policies that they examine, in part
because they fail to account for offsetting increases in emissions (i.e., emissions leakage) that
those policies would bring about within and outside of California. As a result, we conclude that
the California studies do not offer reliable estimates of the cost of meeting California’s 2020
emissions target. Better analyses are needed to inform policymakers.
The ultimate cost of meeting California’s 2020 emissions target will depend both on the
underlying cost of emission reduction measures and on many aspects of the design of
California’s policies that remain to be determined. The debate about opportunities for no-cost
emission reduction policies is unlikely to abate, but this debate is irrelevant to some important
lessons for climate policy design.

Specifically, in designing policy, policymakers should

recognize and account for the substantial uncertainty that characterizes emission reduction costs.
Even if debates about the accuracy of particular analyses were to be resolved, many other critical
and unresolvable sources of cost uncertainty would remain.
Also, debate about opportunities for no-cost emission reduction policies should not
influence the choice of an appropriate framework of policy instruments to minimize the cost of
achieving emission targets. Market-based policies, such as cap-and-trade systems, are the most
cost-effective means of addressing the core market failure leading to excessive GHG emissions:

39

the failure of emitters to internalize the social cost of their emissions. A market-based policy
should therefore be the core policy instrument employed to achieve California’s emissions target.
The California studies’ findings of no-cost emission reduction opportunities emerge from
assumptions about different market failures. To the extent that these other market failures exist,
they call for additional policies that could complement a market-based policy. However, to
develop complementary policies that efficiently target no-cost opportunities, policymakers need
better information and analysis than currently exists regarding the market failures that bring
about those opportunities.
While the debate about opportunities for no-cost emission reductions will undoubtedly
continue into the future, a well-designed market-based policy can facilitate consensus on climate
policy despite this debate. By setting aggressive caps and establishing a safety valve to protect
against cost uncertainty, a cap-and-trade system can bridge the gap between those who believe
aggressive near-term emission targets can be met at no cost, and those who maintain that
achieving such targets will impose unacceptable economic consequences.

40

REFERENCES

American Petroleum Institute. 2006. “State Gasoline Tax Reports.” October.
Anderson, Soren and Richard Newell. 2004. “Information Programs for Technology Adoption:
The Case of Energy-Efficiency Audits.” Resource and Energy Economics 26(1): 27-50.
Brown, Marilyn. 2001. “Market Failures and Barriers as a Basis for Clean Energy Policies.”
Energy Policy 29(14): 1197-1207.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2004a. Staff Report: Initial Statement of Reasons for
Proposed Rulemaking, Public Hearing to Consider Adoption of Regulations to Control
Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Motor Vehicles. August 6.
_______. 2004b. Addendum Presenting and Describing Revisions to: Initial Statement of
Reasons for Proposed Rulemaking, Public Hearing to Consider Adoption of Regulations
to Control Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Motor Vehicles. September 10.
California Climate Action Team (CAT). 2005. Draft State Agency Work Plans. December 8.
_______. 2006a. Climate Action Team Report to Governor Schwarzenegger and the
Legislature. March.
_______. 2006b. Documentation of Inputs to Macroeconomic Assessment of the Climate Action
Team Report to the Governor and Legislature. January.
California Energy Commission (CEC). 2003. Proposed Energy Savings Goals for Energy
Efficiency Programs in California. 100-03-021. October.
Center for Clean Air Policy (CCAP). 2005a. Activities and Policies to Enhance Forest and
Agricultural Carbon Sinks in California. October 14.
_______. 2005b. Reducing CO2 Emissions from California’s Cement Sector. October 14.
_______. 2006. Cost Effective GHG Mitigation Measures for California: Summary Report.
January 19.
Congressional Budget Office. 2003. The Economic Costs of Fuel Economy Standards Versus a
Gasoline Tax. December.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2006. “Energy Efficiency Policies:
A Retrospective Examination.” Annual Review of Environment and Resources 31:
161-192.

41

Hassett, Kevin and Gilbert Metcalf. 1995. “Energy Tax Credits and Residential Conservation
Investment: Evidence from Panel Data.” Journal of Public Economics 57(2): 201–217.
Hausman, Jerry. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of EnergyUsing Durables.” The Bell Journal of Economics 10(1): 33-54.
Huntington, Hillard, Lee Schipper, and Alan Sanstad. 1994. “Editors’ Introduction.” Energy
Policy 22(10): 795-797.
Interlaboratory Working Group. 1997. Scenarios of U.S. Carbon Reductions: Potential Impacts
of Energy-Efficient and Low-Carbon Technologies by 2010 and Beyond. Oak Ridge,
Tennessee and Berkeley, California: Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. September.
_______. 2000. Scenarios for a Clean Energy Future. Oak Ridge, Tennessee and Berkeley,
California: Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
November.
Jacoby, Henry. 1999. “The Uses and Misuses of Technology Development as a Component of
Climate Policy.” In Climate Change Policy: Practical Strategies to Promote Economic
Growth and Environmental Quality. Washington, DC: American Council for Capital
Formation Center for Policy Research. May.
Jaffe, Adam, Richard Newell, and Robert Stavins. 1999. “Energy-Efficient Technologies and
Climate Change Policies: Issues and Evidence.” In Climate Change Economics and
Policy: An RFF Anthology, ed. Michael Toman. Washington, DC: Resources for the
Future Press.
Jaffe, Adam, Richard Newell, and Robert Stavins. 2003. “Technological Change and the
Environment.” In Handbook of Environmental Economics, Volume I, ed. Karl-Göran
Mäler and Jeffrey Vincent, Chapter 11, 461-516. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Jaffe, Adam, Richard Newell, and Robert Stavins. 2005. “A Tale of Two Market Failures:
Technology and Environmental Policy.” Ecological Economics 54(2-3): 164-174.
Jaffe, Adam and Robert Stavins. 1994. “The Energy Efficiency Gap: What Does It Mean?”
Energy Policy 22(10): 804-810.
Jaffe, Judson and Robert Stavins. 2004. “The Value of Formal Quantitative Assessment of
Uncertainty in Regulatory Analysis.” Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for
Regulatory Studies, Related Publication 04-22. September.
Joskow, Paul. 2001. “California’s Electricity Crisis.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 17(3):
365-388.

42

Loughran, David and Jonathan Kulick. 2004. “Demand-Side Management and Energy
Efficiency in the United States.” Energy Journal 25(1): 19-41.
Lubowski, Ruben, Andrew Plantinga, and Robert Stavins. 2006. “Land-Use Change and
Carbon Sinks: Econometric Estimation of the Carbon Sequestration Supply Function.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 51(2): 135-152.
Metcalf, Gilbert and Kevin Hassett. 1999. “Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 81(3): 516–528.
Metcalf, Gilbert and Donald Rosenthal. 1995. “The ‘New’ View of Investment Decisions and
Public Policy Analysis: An Application to Green Lights and Cold Refrigerators.” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 14(4): 517–531.
Reilly, John, Henry Jacoby, Ronald Prinn. 2003. Multi-Gas Contributors to Global Climate
Change: Climate Impacts and Mitigation Costs of Non-CO2 Gases. Arlington, Virginia:
Pew Center on Global Climate Change. February.
Roland-Holst, David. 2006a. “Economic Assessment of Some California Greenhouse Gas
Control Policies: Applications of the BEAR Model.” In Managing Greenhouse Gas
Emissions in California, ed. Michael Hanemann and Alexander Farrell, Chapter 2.
University of California at Berkeley: The California Climate Change Center. January.
_______. 2006b. “Economic Growth and Greenhouse Gas Mitigation in California.”
University of California at Berkeley: The California Climate Change Center. August.
Sanstad, Alan, Carl Blumstein, and Steven Stoft. 1995. “How High Are Option Values in
Energy-Efficiency Investments?” Energy Policy 23(9): 739–743.
Sanstad, Alan, Michael Hanemann, and Maximillian Auffhammer. 2006. “End-Use Energy
Efficiency in a ‘Post-Carbon’ California Economy: Policy Issues and Research
Frontiers.” In Managing Greenhouse Gas Emissions in California, ed. Michael
Hanemann and Alexander Farrell, Chapter 6. University of California at Berkeley: The
California Climate Change Center. January.
Stavins, Robert and Kenneth Richards. 2005. The Cost of U.S. Forest-Based Carbon
Sequestration. Arlington, Virginia: Pew Center on Global Climate Change. January.
Schumpeter, Josef. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper.
Sutherland, Ronald. 2000. “‘No Cost’ Efforts to Reduce Carbon Emissions in the U.S.: An
Economic Perspective.” Energy Journal 21(3): 89 - 112.
United States Department of Energy (DOE), Energy Information Administration (EIA). 1998.
Impacts of the Kyoto Protocol on U.S. Energy Markets and Economic Activity. October.

43

_______. 2001. 2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey.
_______. 2003. Analysis of S.139, the Climate Stewardship Act of 2003. June.
_______. 2005. Impacts of Modeled Recommendations of the National Commission on Energy
Policy. April.
United States Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
2006. “Average Fuel Economy Standards for Light Trucks Model Years 2008-2011;
Final Rule.” Federal Register 71(No. 66, April 6): 17566.

44

