                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     REAL OPTIONS IN A DYNAMIC AGENCY MODEL, WITH APPLICATIONS TO
            FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT, IPOS, AND BUSINESS RISK

                                         Thomas Philippon
                                          Yuliy Sannikov

                                        Working Paper 13584
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13584


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We are grateful to Steven Davis, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda for providing
us with data, and to Patrick Kehoe, Alexander Ljungqvist, Fabrizio Perri and Jean-Charles Rochet,
as well as seminar participants at NYU, Princeton and the Minnesota Workshop in Macroeconomic
Theory for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Thomas Philippon and Yuliy Sannikov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Real Options in a Dynamic Agency Model, with Applications to Financial Development, IPOs,
and Business Risk
Thomas Philippon and Yuliy Sannikov
NBER Working Paper No. 13584
November 2007
JEL No. D82,D86,D92,E22,G31,G32,G33

                                             ABSTRACT

We study investment options in a dynamic agency model. Moral hazard creates an option to wait and
agency conflicts affect the timing of investment. The model sheds light, theoretically and quantitatively,
on the evolution of firms' dynamics, in particular the decline of the failure rate and the decrease in
the age of IPOs.


Thomas Philippon
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

Yuliy Sannikov
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
sannikov@gmail.com
        “Indivisibilities, fixed costs, and irreversibility are not the only frictions to cap-
        ital adjustments. Financial frictions — which are in many ways leveraged by the
        above frictions — are central to the investment literature.” Ricardo J. Caballero.1

      We study the optimal timing and financing of large, irreversible investments in the
presence of moral hazard. These two issues, timing and financing, have typically been
studied separately. The real option literature, well summarized in Dixit and Pindyck (1994),
focuses on the timing of irreversible investments. The corporate finance literature analyzes
financing issues when the lender and the borrower do not the share the same information
set, ex-ante or ex-post. These two literatures, however, are largely disjoint. We argue that
it is both possible and fruitful to bring them together.
      We develop a dynamic agency model in which the firm can be scaled up by paying a
fixed cost. We formulate the problem in continuous time and we obtain explicit compar-
ative statics regarding the probability of failure and the timing of investment. We show
theoretically that, when financial markets improve — with better property rights, disclosure
and enforcement — firms are less likely to fail and more likely to exercise the growth op-
tion. We then use our model to study quantitatively the evolutions of firms’ dynamics over
the past 50 years, in particular the decline of failure rates (Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin,
and Miranda (2006)), and the decrease in the age at which firms go public (Jovanovic and
Rousseau (2001)).
      The real option and agency literatures have remained separate mainly because of tech-
nical diﬃculties. For instance, real options are best understood in a continuous time frame-
work (Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Caballero and Engle (1999)), while agency problems have
traditionally been studied in discrete time. Discrete-time agency problems include papers
on optimal Venture Capital contracts such as Admati and Pfleiderer (1994), Chemmanur
and Fulghieri (1999), Casamatta (2003) and Schmidt (2003). This literature helps us un-
derstand the theoretical underpinnings of observed contracts, and in particular the role of
asymmetric information and moral hazard between the entrepreneur and the VC, as well as
between the VC and the outside investors. These models, however, use very stylized frame-
works, typically with two or three periods, that do not encompass the standard models of
  1
    Aggregate Investment: Lessons from the Previous Millenium, AEA Session. In Memoriam: Robert
Eisner. January 8, 2000.


                                                  2
investment used elsewhere in economics. Two notable exceptions are DeMarzo and Fishman
(2007) and DeMarzo, Fishman, He, and Wang (2007), who combine investment and agency
issues. These models, however, do not capture lumpy investments and real options.
       There is, on the other hand, a literature that looks at IPOs from the perspective of
classical investment theory, like Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001) and Pastor and Veronesi
(2005). These papers bring insights on IPO waves and valuations, but they do not deal
with incentives contracts. Yet, it is widely acknowledged that incentives and information
issues are of first order practical importance. Ideally, one would like to include an option
to invest into the multi-period agency models of DeMarzo and Fishman (2004), Clementi
and Hopenhayn (2006) or Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004), but discrete-time agency
models are already quite complex.2
       This paper makes two contributions to the literature: it provides a methodology and it
suggests an interpretation for a set of stylized facts. We are able to study lumpy investment
in a dynamic agency model thanks to the continuous-time formulation of DeMarzo and
Sannikov (2006).3 With this methodology, we obtain analytical comparative statics despite
the complexity of the problem. Technically, we derive our results from a system of scaled
diﬀerential equations. These tools turn out to be quite powerful and could be fruitfully
applied to other economic problems.
       The main diﬀerence between our model and the classic real option model comes from
the value of the option to wait. In the classic model, the value of the firm varies over time
because of persistent shocks to its profit rate, and once the value crosses a given threshold,
it becomes optimal to scale up. In our model, by contrast, cash flows are i.i.d. so that,
without moral hazard, the firm would either upgrade immediately, or it would never do so.
The option value comes entirely from the history dependence of the optimal contract. That
is, the upgrade option becomes valuable only when the agent’s future expected payoﬀ is
suﬃciently high and the threat of liquidation suﬃciently remote.
       We then use our model to study firm dynamics. In doing so, we interpret the first large
investment in the life cycle of the firm as its IPO, which is consistent with the empirical
   2
     See also Quadrini (2004), who studies the case where contracts are renegotiation-proof and Cooley, Mari-
mon, and Quadrini (2004) for a general equilibrium model with dynamic contracts and limited enforcement.
   3
     Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet (2007) show that the optimal contract of DeMarzo and Sannikov
(2006) arises in the limit of discrete-time models that converge to continuous time.



                                                     3
evidence and is also the interpretation in Pastor and Veronesi (2005). We perform a complete
calibration of the model using information on investment dynamics, assets prices and actual
VC contracts. The model allows us to quantify — for the first time to the best of our
knowledge — the consequences of moral hazard, in particular for business failures and the
timing of IPOs. Our quantitative model also sheds light on a set of recent stylized facts.
Using the Longitudinal Business Database, Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006)
document a decline in the failure rate, especially among private businesses, while Fink,
Fink, Grullon, and Weston (2005) document a decline in the age at which firms go public.
In our model, both facts can be explained by improvement in financial contracts. Our
model can also account for the increase in volatility among public firms (Campbell, Lettau,
Malkiel, and Xu (2001), Comin and Philippon (2005)) because most of the observed trend
in idiosyncratic risk is due to the fact that recent cohorts are made of younger and more
volatile firms (Fink, Fink, Grullon, and Weston (2005)).4
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 1, we present our model and
we discuss in more details how it relates to the literature. In section 2, we characterize
the optimal contract. In section 3, we derive the predictions of the model regarding the
age-profile of firm volatility and we show how financial development aﬀects IPO age, exit
rates, and volatilities. In section 4, we present a calibration of the model.


1        The Model

To achieve the goals presented in the introduction, the model must be dynamic, include
asymmetric information, allow for endogenous exit, and capture at least some of the key
features of IPOs. The challenge is therefore to keep the analysis tractable and transparent.
For this reason, we choose to work in a continuous time framework. Continuous time models
are more diﬃcult, and less well-known to many economists, than discrete time models, but
we hope that the ability to obtain clean, analytical results justifies our approach.
    4
     Using the idiosyncratic component of stock returns, Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) document
a rise in volatility among publicly traded companies. Comin and Philippon (2005) show that the rise in
idiosyncratic risk is also apparent in the growth rates of assets, employment, cash flows and sales. This result
does not extend to privately held companies, however. Using the Longitudinal Business Database, Davis,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006) show that volatility has decreased substantially among private
businesses, mostly because of a decline in the failure rate.




                                                       4
1.1   Technology and Preferences

A firm is run by an entrepreneur/manager and financed by an outside investor. The manager
and the investor are both risk neutral. The investor discounts future cash flows at the market
rate r, and the manager discounts her future consumption at rate γ > r. Setting up the
firm requires a fixed initial investment of I at time 0. The manager has limited wealth and
she contracts with the outside investor, who can pay the initial investment, cover the firm’s
losses and provide funding to upgrade the firm’s capital.
   Let Xt denote the cumulative cash flows produced by the firm up to time t. The
incremental cash flows dXt expected between t and t + dt depend on the scale of the firm
μ̃t and the action of the manager, αt :

                                    E [dXt ] = (μ̃t − αt )dt                              (1)

The scale of the firm can take two values. After the initial investment, the scale is μ̃t = μ.
At any point in time, the firm has the option to upgrade its capital stock for a cost K > 0.
The upgrade increases the scale of the firm to μ̃t = μ̄. We assume that μ̄ − μ > rK so that
the capital upgrade is potentially profitable from the point of view of investors. We shall
later explain how we can interpret the capital upgrade as an initial public oﬀering (IPO).
The manager gets a benefit at the rate of λαt by taking a hidden action αt ∈ [0, ∞), where
λ ∈ (0, 1). We can interpret αt as a reduction in eﬀort, or as diversion of cash flows for
private benefits.
   Note that, conditional on scale and managerial eﬀort, the expected cash flows are con-
stant. The usual real option trade-oﬀ therefore does not arise in our model. Without
asymmetric information, it would be optimal to upgrade immediately.

1.2   Information

Information is asymmetric, because the investor does not observe the action αt of the
manager. Rather, the investor observes a signal Ωt that evolves according to:

                                    dΩt = −αt dt + σdZt .                                 (2)

The signal Ωt summarizes all the information of the investor regarding the action of the
manager. In particular, we assume that Ωt is a suﬃcient statistic for αt given Xt . Therefore,

                                               5
without loss of generality, the optimal contract depends only on the process Ω. A particular
case of our setup is when Ω and X contain the same information, i.e., when the principal only
observes the cash flows. This is the case that is most often studied in the literature. This
is only a particular case, however, and while it make sense for mature companies, it does
not make sense for young firms that do not even produce cash flows. Venture Capitalists
certainly observe more than the current profits of the firm in which they invest.
   In our model, the degree of moral hazard depends on two parameters: σ and λ. In
fact, we will later show that only the product λσ matters: when it goes to zero, the model
converges to the case of full information. More generally, we can think of improvements in
financial contracts as a decrease in σ or in λ. A decrease in σ captures better disclosure of
information, while a decrease in λ captures better protection of property rights.

1.3   Contracting

To finance the firm, investors can write fully contingent dynamic contracts that specify
how the agent’s cumulative compensation Ct , the upgrade time τ K and the time when the
agent is fired τ L depend on the path of {Ωt }. If the manager is fired, the firm is worth
L < μ/r before the upgrade, and L̄ < μ̄/r after the upgrade. L and L̄ could capture either
liquidations values, or values under a new management, net of the replacement cost, without
loss of generality. The outside value of the manager upon liquidation is denoted WL .
   A contract (τ L , τ K , {Ct , t ≤ τ L }) is optimal if it maximizes the principal’s profit
                  " R min(τ ,τ )                                                    #
                                  L K
                                         e−rt (μ dt − dC ) + 1          Le−rτ L +
                            0    ³R                      t     τ L <τ K           ´
               E                    τ                                                           (3)
                       1τ L >τ K τ KL e−rt (μ̄ dt − dCt ) + e−rτ L L̄ − e−rτ K K

subject to delivering to the agent a payoﬀ of W0 , determined by the relative bargaining
powers of the agent and the principal, i.e.
                      ∙Z τ L                      ¸
                              −γt           −γτ L
              W0 = E         e dCt + WL e           ,     given actions {αt = 0},               (4)
                           0

and providing the agent with incentives to take action αt = 0,
               ∙Z τ L                               ¸
                       −γt                    −γτ L
      W0 ≥ E          e (dCt + λαt dt) + WL e         , given any actions {αt ≥ 0}.             (5)
                   0

In the optimal contract the agent’s action is αt = 0 at all times. Indeed, because λ < 1, it
is always cheaper to pay the agent cash directly rather than let him get utility indirectly
by reducing the firm’s cash flows.

                                                 6
1.4   Discussion and relation to the literature

The optimal contracting approach abstracts from the details of contractual implementation.
Those details can be diﬀerent depending on the institutional environment, the level of
financial development, and standards within an industry. Our approach is based on the
premise that the contracting parties have the interest to put together the best possible
contract given the tools available to them, to approximate the optimal contract. Thus,
the optimal contracting theory should deliver reasonable predictions about the timing of
investment and the growth of value across contractual environments. DeMarzo and Sannikov
(2006), Sannikov (2007a), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet (2007) and Piskorski and
Tchistyi (2006) give examples how optimal contracts can be implemented using standard
securities in various institutional environments. DeMarzo and Fishman (2004) focus on
how the optimal contract can be implemented using simple financial instruments, such as
a credit line and long term debt. In Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), the output of the
firm can be adjusted every period and production is typically below the first best while
the entrepreneur repays all the cash flows and incentives are provided through continuation
values. DeMarzo and Fishman (2007) study investment in dynamic agency models. They
show that a positive correlation between cash flows and investment, with higher sensitivity
for small firms, as well as serial correlation in investment follow from simple properties
satisfied by a large class of agency problems.
   Besides real options, IPOs and dynamic agency contracts, our paper is also related to the
literature on financial development. In our model, financial development is synonymous with
better monitoring, better property rights, better enforcement or better financial information.
Stulz (2005) argues that this view is consistent with much recent evidence.

1.5   Interpretation of the Upgrade as an IPO

We want to interpret the upgrade as an IPO, but we must acknowledge that the model
does not capture some financial features of IPOs. In reality, IPOs allow (partial) exit by
the initial investors and result in more dispersion of ownership. Chemmanur and Fulghieri
(1999) model the costs and benefits of ownership dispersion. We cannot address this issue
because it does not matter in our model whether the capital upgrade is financed by the initial
investor (the principal) or by new outside investors. To capture these features, we would

                                                 7
need to introduce diﬀerent classes of investors and another layer of moral hazard to justify
the initial concentration of ownership. We abstract from these issues in order to keep the
model as tractable and transparent as possible. One way to gauge the relative importance
of exit as a motivation for IPOs is to look at the relative issuances of primary and secondary
shares. Primary shares are newly created shares while secondary shares are existing shares
held by pre-IPO shareholders. One cannot exit by selling primary shares; anyone exiting
would have to sell secondary shares. Kim and Weisbach (2007) show that roughly 80% of
the proceeds from IPOs come from primary shares. They also show that over a three year
period following the IPO, 61% of the proceeds are used to increase R&D spending, and
22% are used to increase capital expenditures. Raising capital for productive investment
therefore seems to be an important aspect of IPOs, and, given the focus of our paper, we
believe that it is reasonable to focus on the investment aspect of IPOs rather than on the
change in the ownership structure. Other theories and important facts, most notably the
issues of underpricing and market timing, are reviewed in Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001)
and Ritter and Welch (2002).
      It may also appear objectionable that our contract specifies all contingencies, both be-
fore and after the IPO, whereas in practice VC contracts before the IPO are separate from
the contracts with equity-holders after the IPO. This objection is resolved by observing
that the optimal contract can be implemented simply by specifying the agent’s compensa-
tion {Ct , t ≤ min(τ L , τ K )} before the IPO and the agent’s payoﬀ Wτ K at the time of the
IPO.5 Then at time τ K , the manager and new equity-holders have incentives to write the
optimal continuation contract. This recontracting at time τ K implements the optimal fully
contingent contract ex-ante. In this argument it is important that, although our optimal
contract is not fully renegotiation-proof, the contracting parties do not have incentives to
renegotiate at time τ K (see Lemma 2 in the appendix)
      In Section 2 we proceed to characterize the optimal contract. In Section 3, we study
how the optimal contract and the resulting equilibrium dynamics depend on the eﬃciency of
financial contract, captured by σ. In Section 4, we show that the model can be quantitatively
consistent with the observed changes in the failure rate, the volatility of private and public
firms, and the age of IPO.
  5
      In practice, Wτ̂ can be implemented by specifying the agent’s stake in the firm.


                                                       8
2     The Optimal Fully Contingent Contract

In this section we derive the optimal contract in two steps. First, we present and explain
the optimal contract after the upgrade, i.e., assuming that investment K has already been
made. Next, given the post-upgrade value function, we derive the optimal contract before
the upgrade, as well as the optimal timing of the IPO/upgrade.

2.1    The Optimal Contract after the Upgrade

Consider the firm after the upgrade. We would like to characterize contracts that maximize
the investors’ profit for any payoﬀ W0 to the agent. That is, the investors’ problem is to
find a contract (τ L , {Ct , t ≤ τ L }) that maximizes
                                 ∙Z τ L                                ¸
                                          −rt                  −rτ L
                               E         e (μ̄ : dt − dCt ) + e      L̄ ,                                         (6)
                                                   0

subject to
                                 ∙Z       τL                             ¸
                                               −γt           −γτ L
                W0 = E                         e       dCt + e       WL ,        given actions {αt = 0},          (7)
                                      0

and
                 ∙Z     τL                                                   ¸
                                 −γt                             −γτ l
        W0 ≥ E               e            (dCt + λαt dt) + e             WL ,      given any actions {αt ≥ 0}.    (8)
                    0

    The theory of dynamic contracts shows that the optimal contract for this problem can
be written recursively with the agent’s continuation payoﬀ Wt as the unique state variable
(e.g. see Spear and Srivastava (1987) or Sannikov (2007b)). The agent’s continuation value
Wt is his future expected payoﬀ at time t when he plans to take actions αs = 0 at all times
until termination, i.e.
                    ∙Z           τL                                ¸
           Wt = Et                    e−γ(s−t) dCs + e−γ(τ L −t) WL ,               given actions {αs = 0}.       (9)
                             t

DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) derive the optimal contract for a firm without an upgrade
option. Here we summarize their characterization:


Proposition 1 (DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006)) In the optimal contract the agent’s con-
tinuation value Wt evolves according to

                                                   dWt = γWt dt + λdΩt − dCt                                     (10)

                                                                  9
starting with value W0 . When Wt ∈ [WL , WC ), dCt = 0, and when Wt reaches WC , payments
dCt cause Wt to reflect at WC . If W0 > WC , the agent receives an immediate payment of
W0 − WC at time 0, and his continuation value drops to WC .
   The point where the agent consumes WC as well as the principal’s profit b̄(W ) are
determined by the solution of the HJB equation

                                                               1
                                   rb̄(W ) = μ̄ + γW b̄0 (W ) + λ2 σ 2 b̄00 (W )                                   (11)
                                                               2

on the interval [WL , WC ] with boundary conditions

                             b̄(WL ) = L̄,   b̄0 (WC ) = −1,        and          b̄00 (WC ) = 0.                   (12)

The contract is terminated at time τ L when Wt reaches WL .


   Let us discuss the optimal contract. The law of motion of the agent’s continuation
value, Wt , contains two terms related to promise keeping and the agent’s incentives. Since
Wt measures the value that the principal owes to the agent, it must grow at the rate γ and
decrease with the payments dCt . The term λdΩt is responsible for the agent’s incentives.
If the agent reduces eﬀort by αt , he benefits immediately at rate λαt . At the same time,
the signal about the agent’s performance Ωt gets lower at rate αt , leading to a reduction in
the agent’s continuation value at rate λαt . We see that in the optimal contract, the agent’s
incentive constraint is just binding: the agent is indiﬀerent between putting full eﬀort and
reducing eﬀort by any amount αt . This property of the optimal contract makes sense, since
it is costly to give the agent incentives that are too strong.
   Second, if b̄(Wt ) reflects the principal’s profit when the agent’s continuation value is Wt ,
then
              Z   t                                                ∙Z   τL                                    ¸
                      −rs                     −rt                            −rs                    −rτ L
       Gt =           e     (μ̄ds − dCs ) + e       b̄(Wt ) = Et             e      (μ̄ds − dCs ) + e       L̄ ,
              0                                                     0

is a martingale. When Wt < WC , we have dCt = 0. Then (10) together with Ito’s lemma
imply that the drift of Gt is e−rt times

                                                                 1
                                  μ̄ − rb̄(Wt ) + γWt b̄0 (Wt ) + λ2 σ 2 b̄00 (Wt ).
                                                                 2

Thus, equation (11) follows from the condition that the drift of Gt must be 0.

                                                          10
   Regarding the boundary conditions (12), the first one, b̄(WL ) = L̄, follows from the fact
that the principal’s profit is L̄ when the contract is terminated. Next, we have b̄0 (WC ) = −1
because the principal’s profit translates into the agent’s value at one-to-one ratio at the point
where the principal pays the agent. Finally, the supercontact condition b̄00 (WC ) = 0 comes
from the optimal choice of WC .

2.2   The Optimal Contract before the Upgrade

The optimal contract before the upgrade is also based on the state variable Wt , the agent’s
continuation payoﬀ. In the optimal contract this variable follows

                                     dWt = γWt dt + λdΩt .

The principal’s profit before the upgrade is a concave function that satisfies equation
                                                     1
                            rb(W ) = μ + γW b0 (W ) + λ2 σ 2 b00 (W ),                      (13)
                                                     2
with boundary conditions

              b(WL ) = L,    b(WK ) = b̄(WK ) − K,      and b0 (WK ) = b̄0 (WK ) ,          (14)

where K is the investment required for the upgrade and WK is the agent’s value that triggers
the upgrade. The smooth pasting condition b0 (WK ) = b̄0 (WK ) determines the optimal
upgrade point WK to maximize the principal’s profit b(WK ). The agent does not receive
any compensation before the upgrade because b0 (W ) ≥ b0 (WK ) > −1 for all W ∈ [WL , WK ].
Paying a dollar to the agent would result in a gain of value of −b0 (W ) < 1. A typical form
of the principal’s profit before and after upgrade is illustrated in Figure 1.
   We summarize the principal’s profit in the optimal contract for a private firm by the
following proposition.

Proposition 2 In the optimal contract for a firm before the upgrade the agent’s value
follows
                                     dWt = γWt dt + λdΩt                                    (15)

until liquidation at the time τ L when Wt reaches WL or a capital upgrade at the time τ K
when Wt reaches WK , whichever happens sooner. The agent does not receive any compen-
sation until the upgrade. After the upgrade the continuation contract is given by Proposition
1 for the starting value WK .

                                               11
    Proof. See Appendix.

    Why is investment of capital K delayed in the optimal contract? Without moral hazard,
capital K would be invested immediately to generate a net present value of (μ̄−μ)/r−K > 0.
However, due to the agency problem, there is a risk of losing value in case the project is
terminated or the manager fired. If L̄ − L < K, it is ineﬃcient to invest when Wt is close
to WL . Determining the optimal investment time is a real option problem (see Dixit and
Pindyck (1994)). It is optimal to invest only when the manager accumulates suﬃcient
promised utility, so that the risk of losing value upon termination is suﬃciently small.
Unlike in a standard real option setting, however, where the decision to invest is driven by
investment opportunities, in our model the optimal investment time is driven by the agency
problem.


3      Theoretical properties

In this section we show that our model can deliver a number of stylized facts about the age
at which firms upgrade and go public (Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001), Fink, Fink, Grullon,
and Weston (2005)) and the rate at which private and public firms go out of business (Davis,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006)). We focus on the following set of facts:

    1. The exit rate of private firms is higher than the exit rate of public firms.

    2. Over the past 50 years,

        (a) firms have been going public at an earlier age and

       (b) the exit rate of private firms has decreased.

    Stylized fact 1 is a property of the cross section of firm level risk at any point in time.
Stylized facts 2a and 2b reflect the evolution of the US economy over the post-war period.

3.1    Failure Rates before and after IPOs

The first lemma shows that the average lifetime of a firm is increasing in the agent’s value
W0 .




                                               12
Lemma 1 In the model, the value of E[τ L |W0 ] does not depend on the current size of the
firm (before or after the upgrade) and it is increasing in W0 .

       Proof. Equations (10) and (15) imply that the agent’s continuation payoﬀ Wt follows
the same law
                                       dWt = γWt dt + λσdZt

with reflection at WC and absorption at 0 both before and after the upgrade. As a result
the value of E[τ L |W0 ] does not depend on the current size of the firm. Now, consider two
values W0 and W00 < W0 . Denote by τ L the time when the process Wt hits value W00 for the
first time. Then
                         E[τ L |W0 ] = E[τ L |W0 ] + E[τ L |W00 ] > E[τ L |W00 ].

QED.
       Since the starting value for a private firm W0 is always lower than the value WK at
which the firm’s capital is upgraded, it follows immediately that private firms on average
exit more quickly than public firms. This conclusion delivers stylized fact 1 above.

Proposition 3 Private firms on average exit more quickly than public firms.


3.2      Ex-ante probabilities of IPO and failure

We now study the trends in failure rates and IPOs, and how they relate to financial devel-
opment.6 We capture the development of financial markets by reductions in λ and/or σ,
which capture the severity of the agency problem in our model. Note that the consequences
of financial development are not obvious because the optimal contract depends on λ and σ,
and we need to understand how the thresholds for failure and for IPO change with these
parameters.
       Several properties of the model allow us to compare firms’ dynamics for diﬀerent values
of λ and σ. One important property is that we can define a normalized continuation value
to the agent wt = Wt /(σλ), whose law of motion does not depend on σ or λ:

                                         dwt = γwt dt + dZt .
   6
    Multiple factors certainly explain the historical experience. For instance, IPO firms are younger when
market valuations are high (see for example Baker and Wurgler (2006) and the papers discussed there). Here
we focus on the long run trend.


                                                   13
The firm goes public and investment K is made when wt reaches wK = WK /(σλ). The firm
exits when wt reaches wL = WL /(σλ).
   The following proposition states that wK is uniquely determined by wL , independently
of σ and λ. Thus, firm dynamics for diﬀerent values of σ and λ are fully determined by w0
and wL .


Proposition 4 For a given value of wL , the upgrade point wK does not depend on λ or
σ, it increases with K, and decreases with L̄ − L and μ̄ − μ. Moreover, as wL changes,
dwk /dwl ∈ (0, 1).

   Proof. The proof of the second part is in the appendix. We include here the proof
of the first part because it is simple and informative. The optimal contract is defined by
two value functions b and b̄ and the endogenous thresholds WC and WK , that solve the two
diﬀerential equations (11) and (13) subject to the two sets of boundary conditions (12) and
(14). Define a new function ∆(w) by

                                  ∆ (w) = b̄ (λσw) − b (λσw)

Then, ∆ is the solution to

                                                         1
                           r∆ (w) = (μ̄ − μ) + γw∆0 (w) + ∆00 (w)                     (16)
                                                         2

subject to
                     ∆ (wL ) = L̄ − L,   ∆ (wK ) = K,   and ∆0 (wK ) = 0.             (17)

Therefore neither ∆ nor wK depend directly on λ or σ. We show in the appendix that
dwk /dwl ∈ (0, 1). QED.

   The following proposition shows that firms are more likely to reach an IPO as financial
markets improve.


Proposition 5 Keeping the outside option WL and the starting value W0 constant, a de-
crease in λσ leads to:

   • a higher ex-ante probability of IPO,


                                              14
     • a lower ex-ante probability of exit.

                       0 , w0 and w0 the values of w = W /(σλ), w = W /(σλ) and
     Proof. Denote by wL    t      K                L   L        t   t
                                                 0 , w − w < w0 − w0 and the interval
wK = WK /(σλ) after a decrease in σλ. Then wL < wL    0   L   0    L
                            0 , w0 ] by Proposition 4. These changes are illustrated in Figure
[wL , wK ] is longer than [wL    K

2.
     Since
                          dwt = γwt + dZt     and dwt0 = γwt0 + dZt ,

it follows that
                        wt0 − wt = ert (w00 − w0 ) ≥ w00 − w0 > wL
                                                                 0
                                                                   − wL

for any path of Z. Therefore, it is possible that wt0 reaches the IPO before exiting while wt
exits before reaching the IPO, but not the other way around. That is, any realization of
the Brownian motion that leads to an IPO when λσ is high also leads to an IPO when λσ
is low. It is therefore clear that the probability of an IPO increases. QED.
     As we see from the proof, a decrease in σλ causes these eﬀects in firm dynamics: the
starting point w0 moves away from the point of exiting wL and closer to the point of IPO
wK , and the drift towards the point of IPO increases.

3.3     Ex-post exit rate and average IPO age

It is important to distinguish the ex-ante probability of failure from the ex-post exit rate,
and the ex-ante probability of IPO from the average age of realized IPOs. While it seems
intuitive that financial development should lead to a decrease of the average IPO age and
a decrease in the exit rate of existing firms, it is not necessarily true.
     Consider a decrease in λσ. All firms that previously reached the IPO threshold now
reach it sooner, but some firms that previously exited now also reach the IPO stage. For
this latter category of firms, IPOs happen quite late, increasing the average IPO age. For
the exit rate, of the firms that exited before the improvement in financial markets, some
exit more slowly, while others now reach an IPO. The confounding eﬀect here is that firms
that become successful with improved financial markets are the ones that took longer time
to exit previously.



                                               15
   We are able to demonstrate analytically that the exit rate and the average IPO age
decrease in the special case where the agent’s outside option is WL = 0. In Section 4, we
calibrate the model and we study quantitatively the case where WL > 0.
   When WL = 0 it follows that wL = 0 and wK takes the same value both before and
after the IPO. As a result, the exit rate and average IPO age depend on the initial value
w0 = W0 /(λσ) at which the contract starts. As w0 increases, both the IPO age and the
exit rate increase, as shown by the following proposition.

Proposition 6 Suppose that wL = 0, wK is fixed, and w0 < w00 . Then, starting from w00 ,
the exit rate and average IPO age are lower than starting from w0 .

   Proof. The average IPO age starting with w0 equals the average age or reaching w00
starting from w0 plus the average IPO age starting from w00 . Therefore, firms that reach
IPO starting from w00 are younger. Denote by P r[w0 |w00 ] the probability of reaching starting
from w00 before reaching the IPO, etc., and by T [w0 , wK |w00 ] the expected time it takes to
reach w0 or wK starting from w00 , etc. The exit rate starting from w00 is

  P r[0|w00 ]                P r[w0 |w00 ]P r[0|w0 ]               P r[w0 |w00 ]P r[0|w0 ]       P r[0|w0 ]
              0 =              0               0                <          0                 =                ,
T [0, wK |w0 ]    T [w0 , wK |w0 ] + P r[w0 |w0 ]T [0, wK |w0 ]   P r[w0 |w0 ]T [0, wK |w0 ]   T [0, wK |w0 ]

where P r[0|w0 ]/T [0, wK |w0 ] is the exit rate starting from w0 . Therefore, the exit rate start-
ing from w00 is lower. QED.
   Of course, w0 depends on the division of bargaining powers between the principal and
the agent. Proposition 7 shows that w0 increases as σλ decreases for two extreme cases
when the principal has all the bargaining power, and when the agent has all the bargaining
power.


Proposition 7 If investors act competitively, then w0 = W0 /(λσ) increases as σ decreases.
If the investor acts as a monopolist and chooses W0 to maximize his profit, then also w0 =
W0 /(λσ) increases as σ or λ decreases.

   Proof. See Appendix.

   The intuition behind the first part of Proposition 7 is straightforward. The firm becomes
more valuable as the agency problem decreases. Since the agent captures all the surplus

                                                   16
when investors act competitively, it follows that W0 increases when σ decreases, and a
fortiori, so does w0 . We feel that the assumption of competitive investors is the more one
natural in practice, but the second part of the proposition shows that, in any case, our
result does not hinge on this assumption.
    The intuition behind the second part of Proposition 7 is more subtle. If the investor
has all the bargaining power, he does not extract all the value from the agent by setting
w0 = wL in order to be able to reward and punish the agent. As σ decreases, the firm
becomes more profitable. As a result, it is in the principal’s interest to set w0 higher in
order to allow the firm to survive for a longer period of time.


4     Quantitative properties

In this section, we propose a calibration and we investigate the quantitative properties of the
model. We have argued in the introduction that a better understanding of firms’ dynamics
requires a model that captures agency conflicts as well as large, irreversible investments. The
lack of such a model means that the theoretical corporate finance literature has tended to
remain qualitative. We do not know, for instance, whether moral hazard causes significant
delays in investment and significant increases in business failures, or whether the sensitivity
to performance of actual contracts can be explained with plausible amounts of private
information. An important advantage of our model is that we can draw on information
for many diﬀerent sources in order to calibrate the structural parameters, and that we can
investigate the predictions of the model along many dimensions.

4.1   Calibration of the parameters

In our model, the principal and the agent are risk neutral. For the principal, this is without
loss of generality. It simply means that the model is written under the risk neutral measure:
all cash flows are risk adjusted and discounted at the real risk-free rate, which we set at
r = 2%.
    For the agent, the issue is more complicated. In reality, entrepreneurs care about idio-
syncratic risk. Hall and Woodward (2007) report that this risk is substantial. The expected
value of entrepreneurship is $60,000 per month, but for an individual with a risk aversion
of 1, the certainty equivalent is around $13,000. Entrepreneurs are certainly much less risk

                                              17
averse that the median individual. We take the benchmark value to be around $30,000
which is half of the expected value. To be consistent, we set γ = 2r = 4%. We calibrate the
outside option of the manager by looking at the wages of skilled individuals. Philippon and
Resheﬀ (2007), for instance, report that engineers with post-graduate degrees earn around
$6,600 dollar per month in 2001, while financiers with post-graduate degrees earn about
$10,000 a month. We set the outside option such that

                                         WL  1
                                            = .
                                         W0  3

Regarding the starting values, W0 and b (W0 ), Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) report that
founders typically hold 30% of the cash flow rights in VC contracts. So we set

                                       W0
                                                 = 0.3.
                                    W0 + b (W0 )

   The technological parameters are the profit rates μ and μ̄, the initial setup cost I and
the upgrade cost K. We identify I and K with the book values of assets in place before
and after the IPO. We could identify K/I either as the growth of the firm around its
IPO, or as the diﬀerence between the average size of pre-IPO firms and post-IPO firms.
For the first measure, Jain and Kini (1994) report industry-adjusted increases of 111% for
capital expenditures around IPOs, which we would translate as K/I = 1.11. For the second
measure, Jain and Kini (1994) report that, in their sample of firms between 1978 and 1988,
the median book value of assets pre-IPO is $14.7 million. Over the same period, the median
book value for Compustat firms in the first 15 years post-IPO is $38.52 million, which we
would translate as K/I = 1.62. These two ways to calibrate are not widely diﬀerent, and
we take the average as our benchmark:

                                        K
                                          = 1.36.
                                        I

   Regarding μ and μ̄, it is important to realize that we should not calibrate using the
average historical profit rates, because this would be inconsistent with our assumption that
cash flows are discounted at the risk free rate. Instead, we use Tobin’s Q. Jain and Kini
(1994) report that a value of Q around 1.5 for firms within 3 years of their IPO. The median
Q in Compustat for firms that have been listed for less than 3 years is 1.37 in the 1980s
and 1.44 between 1990 and 1998. We take 1.4 to be a representative value. The book value

                                            18
post-IPO is I + K. The total value of the firm is W + b̄ (W ). We calibrate Tobin’s Q after
the IPO as
                                               WK + b̄ (WK )
                                      QK =                   = 1.4.
                                                 I +K
For the relative value of μ̄/μ, we can use the observed average profit rates, under the
plausible assumption that systematic risk is scale-invariant.7 Jain and Kini (1994) report
that the profit rate drops by roughly 30% when firms go public. We therefore calibrate
                                                μ̄      μ
                                                   = 0.7 .
                                              I +K      I
    Next, we must calibrate the liquidation values. Kim and Weisbach (2007) report that
only 20% of the investment made by VC-backed companies is made of capital expenditures.
If we assume that tangible assets and half of non-tangible assets can be recovered, we get a
liquidation value of 0.2+0.5*0.8=0.6. We therefore set
                                            L     L̄
                                              =      = 0.6.
                                            I   I +K
Note that the recovery rate is with respect to the book value of assets. It is substantially
smaller with respect to the value of the project, since Q is larger than one.
    We normalize I = 1. There are 8 free parameters: K, μ, μ̄, WL , W0 , L, L̄ and λσ.
We have 7 calibrating equations above. Given a value for λσ we can therefore solve the
model. What is the range of plausible values for λσ? This depends on our interpretation
of the signal Ω. For young ventures, when revenues are either non-existent or very volatile,
VCs obtain information about the actions of the entrepreneurs through various means. In
our model, we have assumed that the signal to noise ratio does not depend on the scale of
the firm. On the one hand, when the firm is young, the VC is very involved and observes
a lot of extra information. On the other hand, young firms are intrinsically more volatile.
Therefore, it seems to us that the correct starting place is to assume a constant signal to
noise ratio. Post-IPO, we use accounting information to calibrate the precision of the signal.
We use firms in Compustat that have traded for less than 5 years and we compute firm
specific volatilities. The median volatility of revenues (sales) over assets in the post 1980
sample is 13%.8 We set σ = 13%. The parameter λ is less than one. As a benchmark,
    7
      This would not hold for investments that aﬀect the diversification of firms, but this does not seem to be
relevant for IPOs.
    8
      The average is 20% but given the skewness, it seems more sensible to use the median. It is also more
conservative because it decreases the importance of moral hazard.


                                                      19
we set the product λσ = 10%. We show below that this implies a plausible sensitivity of
entrepreneur’s wealth to performance, when we compare our optimal contract with actual
VC contracts.
   Here is finally the complete set of structural parameters that defines our benchmark
calibration:
                  K      μ        μ̄       WL     W0       L     L̄      λσ
                  1.36   0.0532   0.0879   0.19   0.574    0.6   1.416   0.1
With these parameters the model matches the moments described above.


4.2   Quantitative implications

In this section, we interpret the predictions of the calibrated model and, when possible, we
compare the predictions to their empirical counterparts.
   Return to VC
   The setup cost of the project is I. The value of the project is b (W0 ) + W0 , and the
return to the principal is b (W0 ) /I. The model predicts a return to the principal of 1.28.
We argue that this is a sensible value. The principal in our calibration can be seen as a
Venture Capital fund. VC funds have general partners, who choose projects and work with
entrepreneurs, and limited partners who provide the money needed for the investments.
Hall and Woodward (2007) find that limited partners earn approximately the risk adjusted
returns. We can therefore assume that I is paid by outside investors at fair value. Our
model therefore predicts that the general partners of the VC funds obtain a return of 28%
on invested capital, which is a payment for the monitoring and advising services provided
to the project. This is quantitatively consistent with the available evidence: Hall and
Woodward (2007) report VC compensation of 26%, 3% from fees and 23% from carry.
Gompers and Lerner (1999) report a carry of 20.7%.
   Sensitivity to performance
   A key prediction of dynamic incentive theory is that the entrepreneur’s share should
increase when the firm performs well. Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) show that this is
also the case in actual contracts. They find that managerial ownership is 6.8 percentage
points higher if the management meets all performance and time vesting milestones than
if it does not meet any milestone. One way to understand this number is to look at the


                                            20
entrepreneur’s share just before the firm reaches the IPO threshold relative to its starting
value: WK / (WK + b (WK ))−W0 / (W0 + b (W0 )) = 6.4%. Thus, the model seems to predict
a reasonable sensitivity to performance. This can be seen as a check that the parameter λσ
is correctly calibrated.
       IPOs
       What is the quantitative impact of moral hazard on IPOs? We show in the appendix
that one can obtain explicit formulas for various observable quantities: probability that a
firm will eventually do an IPO, failure rate of pre-IPO firms, age at which firms go public,
etc. For instance, the probability that a firm with a current promised value w will eventually
go public is:                          µZ                ¶ µZ                 ¶
                                            w                   wK
                                                −γs2                 −γs2
                             p (w) =            e      ds /          e      ds
                                          wL                  wL

The consequences of moral hazard can therefore be seen in several dimensions.

           Pr(No IPO)     Annual failure rate pre-IPO           Median and Mean Age of IPO
           12%            2.7%                                  2.94 and 3.97 years

Recall that in the model without moral hazard, it is never optimal to liquidate and IPOs

occur immediately with probability one. Because of moral hazard, 12% of the firms do not
do an IPO. If we consider the population of private firms, the annual failure rate due to
moral hazard is 2.7%. This is economically significant since the average annual failure rate
of private firms between 1990 and 2001 is 6.78% in the data of Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin,
and Miranda (2006).
       In the calibrated model, the median age of IPO is 3 years. Empirically, during the last
25 years, the median IPO age is 7 years (Loughran and Ritter (2004)).9 Therefore, our
model suggests that moral hazard has a significant impact of business failures, as well as
the probability and age of IPOs.

4.3      Financial development and firm dynamics

Our final task is to study the consequences of financial development on observed firm dynam-
ics. We have calibrated the model using data from recent decades, and we have compared
   9
    The average is around 15 years, because the extreme skewness of the distribution: many firms go public
quickly, while some take a very long time. The distribution implied by the model is also skewed, but not as
much as in the data, because we do not include ex-ante heterogeneity.


                                                       21
the predictions of the model for the exit rate and the age of IPO to recent data as well. In
earlier decades, however, the exit rate was higher and IPOs took place later in the life cycle
of the firm. Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001) and Fink, Fink, Grullon, and Weston (2005)
show that the median age of IPO was more than 20 years before 1980, compared to 7 years
in the post 1980 sample.
   It is more diﬃcult to obtain consistent estimates of the failure rates. The data in Davis,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006) cover the whole economy, but are only available
from 1977 onward. The average failure rate of privately held firms between 1977 and 1989 is
10%, compared to 6.8% in recent years. Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) report a
10-year survival rate around 34%, which corresponds to a failure rate of 10%. Prior to this
date, we could only find data for the manufacturing sector. For instance, Dunne, Roberts,
and Samuelson (1989) report (annual) failure rates around 10% for young manufacturing
plants in the 1970s, but the exit rate is lower in manufacturing that in other sectors.
   We argue that financial development can account for part of these changes. To show
this, we simulate our model for diﬀerent values of the parameter λσ

                             1-Pr(IPO)     Median Age of IPO      Failure Rate
                λσ = 0.10    12%           3 years                2.7%
                λσ = 0.15    36%           6.3 years              5.25%
                λσ = 0.20    71%           8.6 years              14.9%

Financial development can therefore have significant eﬀects on the failure rate and the age

of IPO.
   To conclude this section, we would like to discuss briefly the issue of firm level volatility.
In the model, we did not need to specify the volatility of cash flows because the optimal
contract depends only on the suﬃcient statistic Ω. To be more concrete, assume that the
cash flows evolve according to the process

                                  dXt = (μ̃t − αt )dt + dMt ,                               (18)

where M is a martingale. The process Mt cannot be independent of Zt . For instance, we
could assume that Mt = Zt + M̃t where M̃ is independent of Z. Note that M does not
need to be a Brownian motion: it can include discrete jumps. Note also that the volatility
of M can vary with the age of the firm. The process M does not appear in the solution

                                              22
of the model, since the optimal contract depends only on the suﬃcient statistic Ωt . We
can therefore freely choose the age profile of volatility in order to fit the data. Table 4 in
Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006) shows that volatility decreases with age,
and also that the age-profile of volatility is fairly stable over time: volatility decreases with
age roughly in the same way in the 1990s as it did in the 1970s. Moreover, since Fink, Fink,
Grullon, and Weston (2005) have shown that the drop in IPO age can account for most of
the change in the volatility of public firms, it follows that if we match the trend in IPO
age, we can automatically match the trend in volatility, provided that we use the correct
empirical age profile of volatility. This is why we focus on the age of IPO and the failure
rates, and not directly on the volatilities of cash flows among publicly traded companies.


5    Concluding Remarks

We view this paper as making two contributions to the literature. First, we have shown
how one can use diﬀerential equations to obtain analytical comparative statics in a dynamic
moral hazard model with optimal contracting, endogenous exit and investment growth op-
tions. Second, we have proposed a complete calibration of the model and we have investi-
gated the quantitative consequences of agency issues. Our results suggest that improvement
in financial contracts can explain some of the observed changes in firm dynamics over the
past fifty years, in particular the decrease in the rate at which firms go out of business and
the decrease in the age at which firms go public.




                                               23
A       Proof of Proposition 2
For an arbitrary contract ({Ct , t ≤ τ L }, τ L ), under which the agent’s continuation value
follows (15), consider the process
                                    Z t
                               Gt =      e−rs μds + e−rt b(Wt )
                                                     0

for t ≤ τ L , τ K . Because b0 (W ) > −1 for all W, Gt jumps down when Ct jumps up. Further-
more, when Ct is continuous, we have

     dGt = e−rt (μ − rb(Wt ) + γWt b0 (Wt ) + β 2t σ 2 b00 (Wt )/2 − dCt (1 + b0 (Wt )))dt + β t σdZt .

Because b is also a concave function that satisfies (13), it follows and Gt is a supermartingale,
and a martingale if and only if β t = λ and dCt = 0.
    By Proposition 1, the principal’s profit at time τ K is bounded from above by b̄(Wτ K ) ≤
b(Wτ K ), with equality only if Wτ K = WK . Therefore, the principal’s expected profit at time
0 is bounded from above by
    "Z                                                      #
            min(τ L ,τ K )
 E                           e−rs μds + e−r min(τ L ,τ K ) b(Wmin(τ L ,τ K ) ) = E[Gmin(τ L ,τ K ) ] ≤ G0 = b(W0 ).
        0

This bound is attained only for the contract presented in Proposition 2, that is, if β t = λ and
dCt = 0 until the capital upgrade, which happens when Wt hits WK , and if the continuation
contract is given by Proposition 1 for starting value WK after the capital upgrade. QED


B      Implementation with recontracting at time τ K
We claimed in Section 1.5, that the optimal contract can be implemented just by specifying
the agent’s compensation {Ct , t ≤ min(τ L , τ K )} before the IPO and the agent’s payoﬀ Wτ K
at the time of the IPO. The following lemma proves this claim:

Lemma 2 Whenever it is optimal to wait to upgrade, rather than to upgrade immediately,
the principal and the agent do not have incentives to renegotiate at time τ K .

    Proof. There are two cases to consider. If b0 (WK ) = b̄0 (WK ) ≤ 0, the upgrade point
WK is on the decreasing portion of b̄ and it is not possible for both parties to benefit by
renegotiating away from (WK , b̄(WK )) to another point on b̄. If b0 (WK ) = b̄0 (WK ) > 0,
then b(W ) < b(WK ) = b̄(WK ) − K on [WL , WK ) because b is a concave function. In this
case, it would be optimal to upgrade immediately, and to start the agent with a value
W0 > WK that maximizes b̄. To see why, note that b̄(W0 ) − K > b̄(WK ) − K ≥ b(W ) for
all W ∈ [WL , WK ]. QED.


C       Proof of Proposition 4
The first part of the proposition is proven in the text. The comparative statics with respect
to K, L̄−L and μ̄−μ follow from the diﬀerential equation and the boundary conditions. We
only provide a brief sketch of the proofs here since they are straightforward. For instance,
an increase in μ̄ − μ decreases ∆00 (wK ), which makes the function ∆ more concave and


                                                             24
therefore steeper to the left of wK . To make sure that ∆ (wL ) is still equal to L̄ − L, it is
clear that wK must decrease when μ̄ − μ increases.
    Now consider an increase in wL to wL + vl , and let us show that this causes wK to
increase by vk < vl . Denote by ∆  ˜ the function that solves equation (16) with boundary
conditions
            ˜ L + vl ) = L̄ − L,
            ∆(w                       ˜ K + vk ) = K,
                                      ∆(w                        ˜ 0 (wK + vk ) = 0,
                                                             and ∆

and let us compare it with the function ∆ that solves (16) with boundary conditions (17).
If we show that
                                 ˜ 0 (w + vk ) − ∆0 (w) > 0
                                 ∆                                                   (19)
for all w < wK , it follows immediately that vl > vk . The boundary conditions together
                                                                        ˜ match at wK
with equation (16) imply that the first and second derivatives of ∆ and ∆
and wK + vk respectively, while
       ˜ 000 (wK + vk ) = 4γ (wK + vk ) (μ̄ − μ − rK) > 4γwk (μ̄ − μ − rK) = ∆000 (wK ).
       ∆

It follows that (19) holds for w < wK suﬃciently close to wK . If (19) is ever violated, let
w < wK be the largest value where ∆     ˜ 0 (w + vk ) − ∆0 (w) = 0. Then, since ∆ ˜ 0 (w + vk + ) −
                               ˜ 00 (w +vk )−∆00 (w) ≥ 0. At the same time, since (19) holds on
∆0 (w + ) > 0, it follows that ∆
                          ˜
(w, wK ), it follows that ∆(w +vk ) < ∆(w). But then (16) implies that ∆    ˜ 00 (w +vk ) < ∆00 (w),
a contradiction. QED.


D      Proof of Proposition 7
The proof uses the diﬀerential equation
                                                          1
                                rḡ(w) = μ̄ + γwḡ 0 (w) + ḡ 00 (w)                           (20)
                                                          2
and relies on the following lemma:

Lemma 3 Suppose that a function g (w; φ) solves (20) subject¡ to g 0¢(0) =¡ φ. Then
                                                                                 ¢ for all
w > 0, g (w; φ) and g 0 (w; φ) increase with φ. Reciprocally if g w; φ1 > g w; φ0 for some
                          ¡      ¢    ¡     ¢        ¡     ¢      ¡     ¢
w > 0, then: φ1 > φ0 , g w; φ1 > g w; φ0 and g 0 w; φ1 > g 0 w; φ0 for all w > 0.
                                                                      ¡     ¢     ¡    ¢
      Proof. First of all it is clear that for w small and positive, g w; φ1 > g w; φ0 since
    ¡    ¢       ¡     ¢
g 0 0; φ1 > g 0 0; φ0 . If the ranking was reversed for larger values of w, the two functions
would have to cross. But then they would have two common points, and they would be
identical
   ¡     ¢ since¡ the space
                       ¢    of they are solutions to the same second order equation. Therefore
g w; φ1 > g w; φ0 . Now define
                                    ©       ¡     ¢     ¡      ¢ª
                            wL = min w ; g 0 w; φ1 ≤ g 0 w; φ0
                  ¡       ¢      ¡       ¢               ¡     ¢      ¡     ¢
By continuity, g 0 wL ; φ1 = g 0 wL ; φ0 . But then, g 00 w; φ1 > g 00 w; φ0 , and therefore
   ¡     ¢     ¡     ¢
g 0 w; φ1 < g 0 w; φ0 at least on a small interval to the left of wL . This contradicts the
                                 ¡     ¢     ¡     ¢
definition of wL . Therefore, g 0 w; φ1 > g 0 w; φ0 for all w ≥ 0. The second part of the
lemma is easily proved using similar arguments. QED.

                                                25
    We can now proceed to proving parts one and two of Proposition 7.
    If the agent has all the bargaining power, the initial condition is determined by b (W0 ) =
I, where I is the setup cost of the firm, and the condition b0 (W0 ) < 0. Diﬀerentiating the
initial condition, we get
                                  ∂b (W0 ) ∂W0 0
                                          +       b (W0 ) = 0
                                     ∂σ       ∂σ
Since ∂b(W
         ∂σ
            0)
               < 0 and b0 (W0 ) < 0, we see that ∂W ∂σ < 0.
                                                      0

    If the investor has all the bargaining power, then he will choose W0 to maximize b (W0 ),
so b0 (W0 ) = 0. Define
                                        ḡ (w) = b̄ (λσw)
Then ḡ(w) satisfies equation (20) with boundary conditions
                       ḡ(0) = L̄,   ḡ 0 (wc ) = −λσ,         and ḡ 00 (wc ) = 0.                    (21)
Consider solutions to the equation (20) with a boundary condition ḡ(0) = L and various
slopes ḡ 0 (0). Lemma 3 shows that the slopes ḡ 0 (w) are increasing in ḡ 0 (0) for all w, and so
the minimum slope of ḡ (at point wc ) is also increasing in ḡ 0 (0). See the phase diagram on
Figure 3. It follows that as σ decreases, ḡ 0 (w) increases at all points.
    Recall the definition of ∆ from the proof of Proposition 4. Point w0 = W0 /(λσ), the
maximum of b(λσw) = ∆(w) + ḡ(w), is determined by the first-order condition
                                         ∆0 (w0 ) + ḡ 0 (w0 ) = 0.
Since ḡ 0 (w0 ) increases as σ decreases, it follows that w0 also increases. QED


E     Closed form expressions for observed quantities
The dynamics of w are given by
                                          dwt = γwt dt + dZt
We will use Ito’s lemma to obtain the drift of any function f (w) twice continuously diﬀer-
entiable:                          µ              ¶
                                             1 00
                             df = γwf + f dt + f 0 dZ
                                         0
                                             2
The model imposes restrictions on the drift that lead to diﬀerential equations of the form
                                                1
                                         γwf 0 + f 00 = h (w)                                          (22)
                                                2
for some function h (.). We shall then use the following lemma repeatedly

Lemma 4 The solution to equation (22) takes the form
                              Z w               Z w        µZ                 z                  ¶
                         0         −γz 2             −γz 2                               γs2
        f (w) = f (0) + f (0)     e      dz + 2     e                             h (s) e      ds dz
                                     0                     0              0
                                                                    2
    Proof. Multiply both sides of equation (22) by 2eγw
                                 2                         2                         2
                         2γweγw f 0 (w) + f 00 (w) eγw = 2h (w) eγw
                                             ³       2
                                                       ´              2
                                          d f 0 eγw      = 2h (w) eγw

                                                    26
so                                                     ∙        Z      w                        ¸
                              0           −γw2           0                              γs2
                             f (w) = e                  f (0) +            2h (s) e           ds
                                                                   0
and                                      Z     w             ∙        Z            z                    ¸
                                                   −γz 2       0                                γs2
                     f (w) = f (0) +               e       dz f (0) +                  2h (s) e       ds
                                           0                                   0
QED



E.1    Probability of IPO
Consider the probability that an IPO occurs, Pr (τ K < τ L ) = E [1τ K <τ L ], and define the
function p (w) by
                             p (w) ≡ Et [1τ K <τ L | wt = w] .
The drift of p must be zero because it is a martingale. The function p must therefore satisfy
the diﬀerential equation
                                              1
                                  γwp0 (w) + p00 (w) = 0 ,
                                              2
with boundary conditions p (wL ) = 0 and p (wK ) = 1. Using Lemma 4, it is easy to see that
                       µZ w          ¶ µZ wK            ¶
                              −γs2               −γs2
               p (w) =       e     ds /         e     ds for all w ∈ [wL , wK ]
                             wL                          wL

The probability of IPO is increasing and concave.

E.2    Age at IPO
The average age of firms when they go public is:
                                                                E [τ K · 1τ K <τ L ]
                                  E [τ K | τ K < τ L ] =                             ,
                                                                 Pr (τ K < τ L )
where E [τ K · 1τ K <τ L ] is a martingale. Define the function f (w) ≡ E [τ K · 1τ K <τ L | w0 = w].
This function is such that:
      Et [τ K · 1τ K <τ L ] = Et [(τ K − t) · 1τ K <τ L ] + t · Et [1τ K <τ L ] = f (wt ) + t · p (wt ) .
The drift of the left hand side is zero, and since the drift of p is also 0, f (.) must satisfy:
                                                1
                                     γwf 0 (w) + f 00 (w) = −p (w) ,
                                                2
with boundary conditions f (wL ) = 0 and f (wK ) = 0. The solution is:
                   Z wK        µZ z            ¶       Z w        µZ z            ¶
                         −γz 2             γs2              −γz 2             γs2
  f (w) = 2p (w) ×      e           p (s) e ds dz − 2      e           p (s) e ds dz .
                        wL               wL                                     wL                    wL

The average age of IPO firms is therefore:
                     Z wK        µZ z            ¶          Z w0        µZ z            ¶
          f (w0 )          −γz 2             γs2        2         −γz 2             γs2
a (w0 ) =         =2      e           p (s) e ds dz−             e           p (s) e ds dz .
          p (w0 )     wL           wL                p (w0 ) wL           wL


                                                           27
E.3    Exit Rate
Private firms enter at w0 and then either go out of business at time τ L or go public at time
τ K . Define the average age of existing private firms

                             z (w) ≡ E [min (τ L , τ K ) | w0 = w] .

Since Et [min (τ L , τ K ) | wt = w] = z (wt ) + t is also a martingale, the function z (.) must
solve
                                                 1
                                    γwz 0 (w) + z 00 (w) + 1 = 0,
                                                2
with boundary conditions z (wL ) = 0 and z (wK ) = 0. The solution is
                             Z wK        µZ z         ¶       Z w        µZ z       ¶
                                   −γz 2        γs2                −γz 2       γs2
       z (w) = 2p (w) ×           e            e ds dz − 2        e           e ds dz.
                           wL           wL                    wL         wL

The total exit rate is equal to 1/z, but a fraction p (w0 ) of the firms go public. Therefore,
the rate at which private firms go out of business is

                                          1 − p (w0 )
                                            z (w0 )




                                               28
References
Admati, A. R., and P. Pfleiderer (1994): “Robust Financial Contracting and the Role
 of Venture Capitalists,” The Journal of Finance, 49(2), 371—402.
Albuquerque, R., and H. A. Hopenhayn (2004): “Optimal Lending Contracts and
 Firm Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 285—315.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler (2006): “Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock
 Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61, 1645—1680.
Biais, B., T. Mariotti, G. Plantin, and J.-C. Rochet (2007): “Optimal Design
  and Dynamic Pricing of Securities,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 345—390, Working
  paper, Université de Toulouse.
Caballero, R., and E. Engle (1999): “Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S. Man-
 ufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach,” Econometrica, 67, 783—826.
Campbell, J. Y., M. Lettau, B. Malkiel, and Y. Xu (2001): “Have Individual Stocks
 Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of
 Finance, 56(1), 1—43.
Casamatta, C. (2003): “Financing and Advising: Optimal Financial Contracts with Ven-
 ture Capitalists,” The Journal of Finance, 58(5), 2059—2085.
Chemmanur, T. J., and P. Fulghieri (1999): “A Theory of the Going Public Decision,”
 Review of Financial Studies, 12, 249—279.
Clementi, G. L., and H. Hopenhayn (2006): “A Theory of Financing Constraints and
  Firm Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 229—265.
Comin, D., and T. Philippon (2005): “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and
 Consequences,” in Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by M. Gertler, and K. Rogoﬀ. NBER.
Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini (2004): “Aggregate Consequences of Lim-
 ited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 817—847.
Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2006): “Volatility and Dis-
  persion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in
  Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford. NBER.
DeMarzo, P., and M. M. Fishman (2004): “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contracting
 with Privately Observed Cash Flows,” Working Paper, Stanford University.
        (2007): “Agency and Optimal Investment Dynamics,” Review of Financial Studies,
  20, 1—151.
DeMarzo, P., M. M. Fishman, Z. He, and N. Wang (2007): “Agency Frictions and
 Investment Dynamics,” Working Paper Kellogg School of Management.
DeMarzo, P., and Y. Sannikov (2006): “Optimal Security Design and Dynamic Capital
 Structure in a Continuous-Time Agency Model,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Dixit, A. K., and R. S. Pindyck (1994): Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton Uni-
  versity Press.


                                         29
Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1989): “The Growth and Failure of U.
 S. Manufacturing Plants,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 671—698.
Fink, J., K. Fink, G. Grullon, and J. Weston (2005): “Firm Age and Fluctuations
  in Idiosyncratic Risk,” Working Paper.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner (1999): “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture
 Capital Partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51(1), 3—44.
Hall, R. E., and S. Woodward (2007): “The Incentives to Start New Companies:
 Evidence from Venture Capital,” Working Paper, Stanford University.
Jain, B. A., and O. Kini (1994): “The Post-Issue Operating Performance of IPO Firms,”
  The Journal of Finance, 49, 1699—1726.
Jenkinson, T., and A. Ljungqvist (2001): Going Public: The Theory and Evidence on
  How Companies Raise Equity Finance. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Jovanovic, B., and P. L. Rousseau (2001): “Why Wait? A Century of Life Before
  IPO,” AER paper and proceedings, pp. 336—341.
Kaplan, S. N., and P. Strömberg (2003): “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the
 Real World: An Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies,
 70, 281—315.
Kim, W., and M. S. Weisbach (2007): “Motivations for Public Equity Oﬀers: An Inter-
  national Perspective,” forthcoming in Journal of Financial Economics.
Loughran, T., and J. Ritter (2004): “Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed Over
  Time?,” Financial Management, pp. 5 — 37.
Moskowitz, T. J., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002): “The Return to Entrepreneurial
 Investment: A Private Equity Puzzle?,” American Economic Review, 92(4), 745—778.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2005): “Rational IPO Waves,” Journal of Finance, 60,
  1713—1757.
Philippon, T., and A. Resheff (2007): “Skill Biased Financial Development: Educa-
  tion, Wages and Occupations in the U.S. Financial Sector,” Working Paper, New York
  University.
Piskorski, T., and A. Tchistyi (2006): “Optimal Mortgage Design,” Working Paper,
  New York University.
Quadrini, V. (2004): “Investment and Liquidation in Renegotiation-Proof Contracts with
 Moral Hazard,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 713—751.
Ritter, J. R., and I. Welch (2002): “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Alloca-
  tions,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1795—1828.
Sannikov, Y. (2007a): “Agency Problems, Screening, and Increasing Credit Lines,” Work-
  ing Paper, NYU.
           (2007b): “A Continuous-Time Version of the Principal-Agent Problem,” Working
  Paper.


                                           30
Schmidt, K. M. (2003): “Convertible Securities and Venture Capital Finance,” The Jour-
  nal of Finance, 58(3), 1139—1166.
Spear, S. E., and S. Srivastava (1987): “On Repeated Moral Hazard with Discounting,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 54, 599—617.
Stulz, R. M. (2005): “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, 60,
  1595—1638.




                                         31
                           Figure 1

Principal
                               rb + γW = μ
Value
                 b (W )


             b(W )                                b ' (Wc ) = −1
        L


             b (W ) − K
        L



    L −K




        WL                WK                 WC                    W
           Figure 2

0   wl     w0          wk

0    wl´        w0 ´    wk ´
             Figure 3



              g ( w)

                            g '( w c ) = −λσ
L




    0   w0             wc      w
