                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  FERTILITY, FEMALE LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION, AND THE DEMOGRAPHIC
                              DIVIDEND

                                           David E. Bloom
                                           David Canning
                                            Günther Fink
                                          Jocelyn E. Finlay

                                        Working Paper 13583
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13583


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




The authors are grateful to David Weil and the participants of the Workshop on Population Aging
and Economic Growth for their valuable comments. We extend our thanks to Mansour Farahani for
compiling the family planning data. Support for this research was provided by grant number 5 P30
AG024409 from the National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, and by grants from
the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David E. Bloom, David Canning, Günther Fink, and Jocelyn E. Finlay. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fertility, Female Labor Force Participation, and the Demographic Dividend
David E. Bloom, David Canning, Günther Fink, and Jocelyn E. Finlay
NBER Working Paper No. 13583
November 2007
JEL No. J01,J1,J13,J21

                                               ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of fertility on female labor force participation in a cross-country panel data
set using abortion legislation as an instrument for fertility. We find a large negative effect of the fertility
rate on female labor force participation. The direct effect is concentrated among those aged 20-39,
but we find that cohort participation is persistent over time giving an effect among older women. We
present a simulation model of the effect of fertility reduction on income per capita, taking into account
these changes in female labor force participation as well as population numbers and age structure.


David E. Bloom                                         Günther Fink
Harvard University                                     Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Population                               Harvard University
and International Health                               gfink@hsph.harvard.edu
Building I
655 Huntington Ave.                                    Jocelyn E. Finlay
Boston, MA 02115                                       Harvard School of Public Health
and NBER                                               Harvard University
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu                                jfinlay@hsph.harvard.edu

David Canning
Harvard School of Public Health
SPH Population International Health
SPH1 1211
677 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
dcanning@hsph.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

        During the demographic transition, sharp declines in fertility lead to large changes
in a population’s age structure. Smaller birth cohorts decrease youth dependency ratios
and mechanically increase output per capita if output per worker and the labor force
participation rate of the working-age population remain unchanged. This generates the
demographic dividend, which has been shown to be important in explaining cross-
country variation in the growth of per capita income (Bloom and Freeman 1987; Brander
and Dowrick 1994; Kelley and Schmidt 1995; Bloom and Williamson 1998; Bloom,
Canning et al. 2003).


        In addition to creating these age structure effects, demographic change may also
incite behavioral changes. Longer life spans may affect retirement and savings decisions
(Bloom, Canning et al. 2007), while fertility reduction can affect female labor market
participation. We use a panel of 97 countries over the period 1960 to 2000 to examine the
effect of fertility on female labor force participation by five-year age groups.


        Studies of the impact of fertility are complicated by the endogeneity of fertility
and the resulting difficulty in identifying the direction of causality (Browning 1992). In
microeconomic studies it is common to use twins, or the sex composition of previous
births, as factors that produce exogenous variation in fertility (e.g., Rosenzweig and
Wolpin 1980; Angrist and Evans 1998). Changes in legislation have also been used as
instruments for fertility. Levine, Staiger, Kane and Zimmerman (1999) and Klerman
(1999) find that the legalization of abortion in the United States led to a decrease in
fertility. Angrist and Evans (1996) find that state-level legalization of abortion reduced
fertility and increased the labor force participation of black women. Bailey (2006) uses
state-level variations in contraceptive pill legislation as an instrument for fertility, and
finds an effect of fertility on labor force participation.


        In our analysis we use country level abortion legislation as an instrument for
fertility. Henshaw, Singh and Haas (1999) estimate that worldwide around 26 percent of
pregnancies end in abortion, making it a common method of avoiding childbirth.
Although the precise timing of abortion laws may be considered random, this type of
liberal legislation may reflect broader trends in society that are also correlated with
female labor market participation. We control for these social factors by including both
country fixed effects and country-specific time trends in our analysis.


       Mammen and Paxson (2000), expanding on work by Goldin (1995), find the
relationship between female participation rates and per capita income to be U-shaped. In
poor, agricultural economies, female participation is high as family responsibilities and
agricultural work can easily be combined. Female participation is lowest in urbanized,
middle-income countries that are dominated by a manufacturing sector. Low levels of
female education, the income effect of male earnings, and the separation of home and
work environments contribute to lower participation rates. Female participation rates are
again high in high-income countries with large service sectors and highly educated
women. This reflects the role of urbanization in female labor force participation, which
we control for in our analysis.


       Our empirical results imply that the effect of fertility on female labor supply is
strongest during the fertile years (20–39 years of age). We find a high degree of
persistence in labor market participation, so that higher total fertility is associated with
lower female labor force participation even at older ages. On average, our results imply
that with each additional child, female labor force participation decreases by about 10–15
percentage points in the age group 25–39, and about 5–10 percentage points in the age
group 40–49. These results imply a reduction of about four years of paid work over a
woman’s lifetime for each birth.


       To illustrate the growth effects of the demographic transition with endogenous
labor supply, we simulate long-run income dynamics using a simple production function
model. We calibrate the model using data for South Korea, which saw a reduction in its
total fertility rate from 5.6 children per woman in 1962 to 1.2 in 2002. The decline in
fertility has three main effects. First, lower fertility implies lower population growth, and
thus increases the capital-to-labor ratio in the standard Solow model. In our simulations,



                                               2
this effect leads to an increase in per capita income of about 36 percent over the period.
Second, the fertility reduction increases the ratio of working-age population to total
population by lowering the youth dependency ratio. Keeping age- and sex-specific
participation rates steady at their 1960 levels, this age structure effect raises the relative
size of the labor force, leading to a 47 percent increase in per capita income. Third, the
fertility reduction increases female labor force participation. Using our point estimates
from the empirical section, we find that the increase in female labor force participation
generates a further gain in income per capita of 21 percent.


         The combination of these effects2 implies an increase in income per capita by a
factor of around 2.4. Although this is only a portion of the almost eleven-fold rise in
income per capita that South Korea saw over the period, the reduction in fertility and
increase in labor supply per capita may help explain this apparent growth “miracle”
(Bloom, Canning et al. 2000). Although labor supply per capita is bounded above, and so
cannot affect the rate of economic growth in the very long run, it can give a substantial
boost to growth over a medium period of fifty years. If the transition from high fertility to
low fertility is permanent, then there are long-run effects on age structure and persistent
effects on female labor supply, and the gains in income per capita may be permanent.


         A common finding in the empirical growth literature is that there is little
relationship between the rate of population growth and the rate of growth of income per
capita (see, e.g., Simon 1989). Our results do not invalidate this. We argue that a decline
in population growth associated with a decrease in fertility can produce economic
growth. However, if slow rates of population growth are due to ill health and high
mortality, positive growth effects do not yield. Even though population growth has little
correlation with economic growth, fertility and mortality rates considered separately
appear to have large effects (Bloom and Freeman 1987; Kelley and Schmidt 1995).




2
 The effects are roughly multiplicative, even though the labor supply effects tend to reduce the
capital/labor ratio somewhat.


                                                     3
       This paper is structured as follows: in section two, we present a model of labor
supply and fertility. In section three, we present the data, and in section four, we discuss
abortion legislation as an instrument for fertility. In section five we present the empirical
results, and in section six, we discuss our simulation framework and show the simulation
results of the medium-run effects of fertility decline on per capita income. We conclude
with a summary and discussion.



2. Model

       We propose a simple model of female fertility and labor supply choices. The
utility function U for a representative woman is defined over consumption c, leisure d,
and fertility n. It is assumed to be given by:
                                                                                   ⎛N⎞
                 U (c, d , n) = log ( c + c0 ) + α log ( d ) + β log ( n ) − k log ⎜ ⎟     (1.1)
                                                                                   ⎝n⎠
For simplicity we assume a logarithmic functional form. The weight on consumption is
normalized to 1. The relative weight of leisure in utility is α > 0 , while the relative
weight given to children is β > 0. We might think of c0 as being negative and

representing subsistence consumption. Alternatively, c0 might be taken to be positive and
reflect transfers from a working husband to the woman. In addition to the utility of
children, we assume there is a psychological cost k of avoiding childbirth and achieving
fertility lower than N, the potential reproductive capacity (or fecundity rate), usually
taken to be around 15 on average. Obviously, actual fertility is usually regulated to be
lower than this maximum. This regulation usually takes the form of delayed marriage,
contraceptive use, abortion, or postpartum insusceptibility due to abstinence and
breastfeeding after birth (Bongaarts 1984).

       Total time available is normalized to one. This is divided between working time l,
leisure time d, child care bn and other non-market household work ε . That is,
                                         1 = l + d + bn + ε                                (1.2)
       The time allocated to child care is assumed to be linear in the number of children,
with a time cost per child b. We assume b > 0 and 0 ≤ ε < 1 . A woman's consumption


                                                  4
possibilities are limited by the amount of income she earns: the prevailing wage w times
the amount of time she spends working l. All income earned is consumed, and the
consumption constraint is defined as
                                               c = wl                                         (1.3)

       We assume w(1 − ε ) + c0 > 0 , so that consumption above the subsistence level is
feasible. We treat constraints (1.2) and (1.3) as binding; if they are regarded as inequality
constraints the fact that consumption and leisure time are always desirable will make
them binding under maximization. Given these time allocation and consumption
constraints we can write utility as a function of labor supply and the number of children:
                                                                                        ⎛N⎞
           V ( n, l ) = log ( wl + c0 ) + α log (1 − l − bn − ε ) + β log ( n ) − k log ⎜ ⎟   (1.4)
                                                                                        ⎝n⎠
where 0 ≤ n ≤ N and 0 ≤ l ≤ 1 .


       The first order conditions for an interior maximum with respect to l and n are:
                                dV   w            α
                                   =      −               =0                                  (1.5)
                                dl wl + c0 1 − l − bn − ε


                                 dV β k       αb
                                   = + −               =0                                     (1.6)
                                 dn n n 1 − l − bn − ε

In Appendix A we show that the Hessian matrix is negative semi-definite, which implies
that the first-order conditions above generate a local maximum. Given a fixed number of
children n the optimal labor supply is given by
                                        1 ⎛ α c0            ⎞
                                  l=        ⎜1 −   − bn − ε ⎟ ,                               (1.7)
                                       1+ α ⎝    w          ⎠

while given a fixed labor supply l the optimal number of children is
                                            β +k
                                   n=                  (1 − l − ε ) .                         (1.8)
                                        b (α + β + k )


       We wish to estimate the structural equation (1.7) to find the effect of variations in
fertility on female labor supply. The optimal labor supply is decreasing in fertility and the


                                                   5
slope of the relationship depends on the time cost of children and the relative weights of
consumption and leisure in utility. There is a possibility that the time required by other
non-market household work ε is random and not observed, which will create an error
term in the estimation of equation (1.7). However, the non-market work time required
also affects fertility in equation (1.8). Both fertility and labor supply are thus jointly
determined and the parameters of equation (1.7) will not be identified in a simple
regression. However, solving equations (1.7) and (1.8) for fertility we have
                                        ( β + k ) ( c0 + w (1 − ε ) )
                                 n* =                                 ,                       (1.9)
                                           bw (1 + α + β + k )

and
                               dn * ( c0 + w (1 − ε ) ) (1 + α )
                                   =                             > 0.                        (1.10)
                                      bw (1 + α + β + k )
                                                             2
                                dk

This implies that optimal fertility is high when the cost of fertility control is high. The
cost of fertility control is correlated with the fertility decision, but is not correlated with
the error term in labor supply given by equation (1.7). The cost of fertility control affects
labor supply only through its effect on the level of fertility. It follows that the cost of
fertility control can be used as an instrument for fertility in estimating equation (1.7).


        The wage rate affects both fertility and labor supply. The effect depends on the
balance of income and substitution effects. If c0 > 0 , the substitution effect dominates,
and, conditional on fertility, labor supply is rising with female wages. On the other hand,
if c0 < 0 , the income effect dominates, and for a given fertility female labor supply is
declining in the wage rate.


        We estimate the causal negative effect of fertility on labor supply, holding
everything else constant, as given by equation (1.7). Note, however, that fertility and
labor supply can rise together if some of the parameters in our model change. For
example, a decrease in ε , the time required for non-child related work in the home, can
increase both fertility and female labor supply, which is consistent with the positive




                                                   6
correlation between female labor supply and fertility in OECD countries found by
Engelhardt and Prskawetz (2004).



3. Data

           The data set we use in our empirical work is an unbalanced five-year panel
covering the period from 1960 to 2000 for 97 countries.3 The dependent variable in our
empirical analysis is female labor force participation. Labor market participation data are
taken from the International Labor Organization (2007) and cover all age groups between
15–19 years old and 60–64 years old in five-year age increments. The International Labor
Organization (ILO) data are based on national labor market surveys and censuses. The
female participation rate is the number of economically active women divided by the
total female population in the same age group. Although definitions vary slightly across
countries, a woman is classified as “economically active” if she is either employed or
actively looking for work (ILO Bureau of Statistics 2007).


           Our explanatory variables are the fertility rate, the percentage of the population
living in urban areas, physical capital per working-age person, female life expectancy and
the average years of schooling of men and women. We use the stock of physical capital
per working-age person, female life expectancy and the education level of women as a
proxy for the wage rate. The education level of men serves as a proxy for male income
and intra-family transfers, even though male education may also directly affect female
wages if male and female human capital are substitutes.


           Total fertility rates, female life expectancy and urbanization rates are from the
World Development Indicators (World Bank 2006). The physical capital stock is from
the Penn World Tables 6.2 (Heston, Summers et al. 2006), deflated by the working-age
population rather than the number of workers as would be more usual, to avoid potential
simultaneity biases in our estimation. Our human capital measures are the average years



3
    For a full list of countries, please see Appendix Table A2.


                                                        7
of schooling in the female and male population aged 15 and older, respectively, as
measured by Barro and Lee (2000).


           Table 1 provides summary statistics for our main variables; a more detailed
description of the data and data sources is provided in Appendix Table A1. The total
fertility rate ranges from 1.18 (Spain and Italy in 1995) to 8.5 (Rwanda in 1980), with an
average in the panel of 4.35. The average female labor force participation shows little
variation across age groups, but great variation across countries for each age group.
Figure 1 shows average female participation rates for women aged 15–64 in 2000. These
range from values close to 90 percent in Tanzania and Mozambique to only 20 percent in
Egypt, and show a pronounced U-shape. Figure 2 shows the change in participation over
the period 1980 to 2000. Although a general increase in female labor force participation
is visible in the data, and particularly pronounced in high-income countries, there is
sizable variation in participation rates, ranging from an increase of more than 25 percent
in Ecuador, Peru and Kuwait to a decrease of nearly 20 percent in Turkey.

            [Table 1]

4. Abortion Legislation as an Instrument for Fertility

           To construct an instrument for fertility we use data on national abortion
legislation compiled by the United Nations Population Division (United Nations
Population Division 2002). The data contain detailed information on the availability of
abortion over time.4 We use the United Nations system to classify the laws in place. The
United Nations system classifies seven legal reasons for an abortion: to save the life of
the woman; to preserve her physical health; to preserve her mental health; consequent on
rape or incest; fetal impairment; economic or social reasons; and available on request.
Our data contain indicator variables for each of these seven categories. A “1” indicates
that abortion is available for the given reason, and “0” means that it is not. When an
abortion is available on request, we assume availability for any of the other reasons if this
is not explicitly stated.


4
    We are grateful to Mansour Farahani for compiling the data.


                                                      8
        Although these categories are broad, they are not comprehensive descriptions of
abortion law. There are frequently cutoffs for lawful abortions depending on the length of
the pregnancy. The mechanisms for adjudicating if a pregnancy meets a particular
criterion differs across countries, relying in some cases on a single doctor, while in others
two are more doctors are required to agree. In some countries a husband's consent is
required. The United Nation coding scheme ignores these additional factors and declares
an abortion for a particular reason lawful if it is allowed at any time during the
pregnancy. In federal systems, abortion laws sometimes differ across regions. In this case
the law that covers the majority of the population, if one exists, is used to classify at the
national level.


        We use the values of these variables as coded by the United Nations to provide a
value for the most recent year at which data are available. For earlier years we recode the
variable to reflect a country's legal situation at a given time as set out in the United
Nations documentation of abortion legislation history. This recoding is complicated by
the need to consider not only statutes that relate to abortion, but also the evolution of case
law in the interpretation of those statutes.


        In many countries there is a divergence between law and practice, with abortions
being widely available despite being technically illegal, or vice versa. We take the
objective stance and code according to the law. For example, in the United Kingdom
(excluding Northern Ireland) the Abortion Act of 1967 allows abortion to protect the life,
physical and mental health of the mother, and in cases where there is a risk the child will
be handicapped. The law also covers cases where a birth might affect the health of
existing children and allows the woman's actual and potential environment to be taken
into account. Legally, abortion is not explicitly available in the case of rape or simply on
request. Although this is the legally restricted set of criteria, in practice the physical and
mental health criteria appear to be interpreted liberally. They include the effects of
childbirth on socio-economic circumstances and hence health outcomes so that de facto
an abortion is available if a woman requests one. In the case of rape a claim that abortion



                                               9
was needed to preserve the mental and physical health of the mother would be very likely
to succeed (as in the case of Rex v. Bourne, 1938). A second example is Chile. The law
of 1874 prohibited abortions carried out with malice; it was understood that abortions to
save the life of the mother were permitted. This was explicitly recognized in the law of
1967. The law was changed in 1989 to outlaw abortions in all circumstances (though
some commentators suggest that a defense of necessity to save the life of the mother
would succeed). Despite these strict laws, abortion has been relatively common in Chile
throughout the period. We code Chile as allowing abortion to save the life of the mother
from 1960 to 1988 and as not allowing abortion under any circumstances thereafter.


       Table 1 summarizes the abortion data. The “life threatening” indicator has an
average of 0.95, which implies that almost all countries across the sample period allow
abortion under this circumstance. There is more variation across countries and time for
the availability of abortion on the remaining categories. We construct an index
summarizing the availability of abortion. A country gets a score of zero if abortion is not
legal for any reason. One is added to the score for each circumstance in which abortion is
available, with a maximum score of 7.


       Although we found these abortion indicators to have significant explanatory
power as a group, it is difficult to find independent effects for the different indicators.
Table 2 shows the correlation matrix for the abortion variables. Apart from abortion when
the pregnancy threatens the life of the mother, which is almost universally allowed, the
other indicators are highly collinear. We find that each abortion variable has significant
explanatory power for fertility when used singularly, but additional abortion variables
add little to the fit of the first-stage regression. Accordingly, using more than one variable
may lead to a weak instrument problem, increasing the finite sample estimation bias.
Using multiple instruments would have the potential advantage of allowing an over-
identifying restrictions test of instrument validity; when we use multiple instruments we
indeed pass this test. However, this test relies on at least one instrument being valid and
lacks appeal in our context when the intuitive justification for each instrument is the
same, and it is likely that either all, or none, of our instruments are valid. These issues are



                                              10
discussed in more detail in Murray (2006), and lead us to use only one instrument in our
analysis. Rather than using one of the raw abortion measures we use an abortion index
giving equal weight to each measure in an aggregate; this index has a slightly higher
predictive power for fertility than any single abortion measure.


        As an alternative to using a simple additive index, one might consider using the
principal component of the seven abortion variables in the empirical analysis. As can be
seen in Table 2, the first principal component is virtually identical to the index we use in
our empirical specification. The correlation between the abortion index and the first
principal component is 0.997. The weight assigned to each of the abortion indicators in
the construction of the first principal component, shown on the final row of Table 2, is
almost identical for each measure (except for the “life threatening” category) making it
very similar to an additive index. For ease of interpretation, we use the abortion index
rather than the first principal component.

        Our abortion index is correlated with fertility, but a key issue is that for abortion
legislation to be a valid instrument it must be uncorrelated with the error term in the
female labor market participation regression. It seems likely that the only way that
abortion laws affect labor market participation is through their effect on fertility. We
measure the effect through the total fertility rate. The total fertility rate is the number of
births a woman would have if she experienced the current age-specific fertility in the
population; this is a period rather than cohort measure. Thus it captures permanent shifts
in fertility as well as temporary shifts due to changes in the timing of births.

        The instrument validity condition will hold if abortion legislation occurs
randomly, but this is highly unlikely. There are two ways instrument validity may break
down if abortion legislation is not random. The first is that abortion legislation is
endogenously responding to fertility desires, or to female labor force participation, so that
the direction of causality is the opposite to what we require of an instrument. The second
is that there are some unobserved variables, perhaps social or cultural norms, which
influence both abortion legislation and female labor force participation. We control for
the unobserved national social and cultural norms in our analysis using country fixed


                                              11
effects, and country-specific time trends. This allows the average level and time trend of
the abortion index in a country to be endogenous. We identify the effect from abortion
legislation that deviates from the average level and time trend of the abortion legislation
index in that country. Although the level and time trend in abortion legislation may be
endogenous, we take the exact timing of abortion legislation, which generates deviations
from these long-term trends, to be random.

       To examine the issue of reverse causality from fertility or female labor market
participation to abortion legislation we carry out Granger causality tests. The tests seek to
determine if lagged female labor force participation of a specific cohort and fertility are
predictive of abortion legislation. Table 3 reports the results of a regression of our
abortion legislation index on two lags of its own value, the female participation rate of
25–29 year olds (the age group whose participation we find is most sensitive to fertility)
and the total fertility rate. The first column includes worldwide time dummies, the second
column adds country fixed effects, while the third adds country-specific linear time
trends. The results in the first column suggest that a low fertility rate and high female
labor force participation rate are predictive of a higher value of the abortion legislation
index. However, this predictive power disappears in columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 when we
add country fixed effects (column 2) and country-specific time trends (column 3). These
results are consistent with the view that there are country-specific cultural factors that
drive fertility, female labor force participation, and abortion legislation. However, once
we control for these generic differences in levels and trends using country fixed effects
and time dummies, movements in the abortion law appear random.

       [Table 3]

       An alternative potential instrument in this context could be the measure of family
planning program effort compiled by Ross and Stover (2001). The family planning effort
score provides an aggregate of 30 scores on a range of variables that measure a
government’s commitment to family planning. We find that there is a positive correlation
between these effort scores and our abortion law index. We do not use the effort scores as




                                             12
an instrument because of evidence that some of the scores measured may be highly
responsive to the demand for family planning (Kelly and Cutright 1983).

       A final point about our instrument is that we treat the estimates as identifying a
single effect of fertility on female labor market participation. If there is heterogeneity in
the response across women, and abortion legislation only affects the fertility of a
subgroup of the population, it is the average labor market response to fertility within this
subgroup (the local average treatment effect) that we measure, not the population average
response.



5. Empirical Specification and Results

       Equation 1.7 suggests that female labor force participation depends on the fertility
rate, the wage rate, and intra-family transfers. We include the fertility rate in our
empirical specification and proxy the wage rate of women by the ratio of capital per
working-age person, female life expectancy, and the female education level. The level of
intra-family transfers is captured using the male education level. In addition to these
variables, we add the percentage of the population living in urban areas. In agricultural
societies, the workplace is located around the family home, making it easier to
simultaneously care for children and work. In urban areas, by contrast, the workplace is
usually distinct from the home, making it more difficult to do both concurrently.
Moreover, urbanization can also have a negative effect on female labor supply during the
transition from agriculture to manufacturing. If working outside the home in manual
labor carries a social stigma for women, this may reduce their labor market opportunities
(Goldin 1995).


       In our empirical work we estimate the following equation,


                     Pijt = α i + β i Fert jt + γ i Cap jt + ϕi Life jt + λi Urban jt
                                                                                           (1.11)
                             + φi f Eduf jt + φim Edum jt + δ it + δ ij + τ ij t + ε ijt




                                                    13
where Pijt is the participation rate of females of age group i in country j at period t. Fert
is the total fertility rate, Cap is the capital stock per working-age person, Life is female
life expectancy, Urban is the percentage of the population living in urban areas, Edum is
the average years of schooling of men while Eduf is the average years of schooling of
women, δij and δit are country and year fixed effects, respectively, while τ ij denotes

country-specific time trends. Note that each of these fixed effects, time dummies, and
time trends can vary by age group, i. The country fixed effects, time dummies and
country-specific time trends allow for different labor market institutions and cultural
norms across countries and over time.


       The inclusion of fixed effects and country-specific time trends makes the model
robust to unobserved heterogeneity, but comes at the cost of reducing the signal-to-noise
ratio. We therefore start our empirical analysis by estimating the model with fixed effect
but without country-specific time trends. The regression for the participation of each age
group is run separately. The results are reported for ten groups aged 15–64, although the
results for the first group, the age group 15–19, should be treated with caution because
labor market participation in this group is reduced by school attendance. The results for
this specification, without instrumentation, are summarized in Table 4 below.


       Table 4 shows that the marginal effect of fertility on female labor force
participation is negative and statistically significant for all age groups between 20 and 44.
Capital per working-age person, female life expectancy, and female education all appear
to have positive and relatively large effects on female labor participation (at least for ages
above 20). Male education reduces female labor market participation, which is consistent
with male earnings producing an income effect that lowers female work incentives. The
estimated coefficient on urbanization is negative; a 10 percentage point increase in
urbanization leads to a decrease in female labor force participation of between 2 and 5
percentage points. This effect implies high participation in rural economies, even when
female wages may be low.


       [Table 4]


                                              14
        In Table 5, we use the abortion index as an instrument in a two-stage least squares
estimation as an alternative specification. The estimated fertility effects are very large:
according to the instrumental variable (IV) estimates, a unit decrease in the total fertility
rate leads to an increase of 5 to 17 percentage points in female labor force participation.


        The point estimates from the IV estimation appear large in absolute magnitude
relative to the OLS estimates presented in Table 4. If higher female labor supply
depresses fertility, the OLS estimate should be larger, and not smaller than the IV
estimate. One possible explanation for this finding is that measurement error may
attenuate the OLS estimates but not the instrumental variable estimate. Another possible
explanation is that fertility and female labor supply are positively correlated due to some
unobserved variables (for example, the non-child-care time required for household tasks),
so that instrumentation reduces this omitted variable bias.


        The bottom half of Table 5 reports the first-stage estimation of fertility. The
estimated effect of abortion laws on fertility is relatively small. The maximum increase in
the abortion index (from 0 to 7) leads to a predicted reduction in fertility of about 0.5
children. This effect appears reasonable, but is relatively small compared to the average
change in fertility rates observed in the sample period. The first stage F-statistic larger
than 16 suggests that abortion laws are highly predictive in the first-stage regression.


        [Table 5]


        In the OLS estimates in Table 4, female education is associated with higher
female labor market participation, while male education is associated with lower female
participation. In Table 5, when fertility is instrumented, these education effects on female
participation are not statistically significant. Note, however, that education has strong
effects on fertility in the first-stage regression reported in Table 5. Fertility falls as female
education levels rise, but rises with male education levels. Because the effect of female
education is larger, an equal rise in education for both sexes implies lower fertility. It



                                               15
follows that, conditional on fertility, education may not be very significant in the
participation equation, but it still has a large impact on female labor market participation
through its effect on fertility. This is similar to the argument by Smith and Ward (1985)
that the effect of higher female wages on female labor supply works partly through
fertility reductions.


        Although we control for country fixed effects and time dummies in the empirical
specifications presented in the previous section, one may still worry about country-
specific trends that are not picked up by time fixed effects. As individual societies
become westernized, more or less religious, or more open to trade, attitudes towards the
female role in society may change, affecting abortion legislation, fertility, and female
labor force participation. To control for such trends, we repeat the previous analysis
allowing for a country-specific time trend. The results, which are summarized in Table 6,
confirm our previous findings. The inclusion of a country-specific time trend slightly
lowers the point estimates on capital, urbanization and fertility, but does not change our
basic result: the average fertility response across the main age groups ranges from 6 to 12
percentage points.


        [Table 6]


        The effects of fertility on the labor participation of women appear to peak among
35–39 year olds, and are significant even for 50 year olds. We would expect fertility to
affect mainly younger women. However, exit from the labor market due to fertility may
have long-run effects if participation behavior is persistent. One reason for such
persistence might be returns to experience, which lower the wages of women who
temporarily exit the labor market relative to women who stay employed. To investigate
this, we include lagged cohort participation in the specifications shown in Table 7.
Because our lagged variable is the participation of a different age group – the age group
five years younger in the previous time period – rather than lagged participation of the
same age group, the problem of bias in a dynamic panel with short time dimension
(Nickell 1981) does not apply.



                                             16
       The results for the model with lagged participation included as an explanatory
variable are reported in Table 7. First-stage results for this specification are displayed in
Table 8. Note that the first stage for the 15–19 year olds (which does not include a lagged
participation term) is the same as the first stage for fertility when we do not include a lag
in the specification. This corresponds to the first stage of the static model reported in
Table 6. Female education is again highly significant in the first-stage regressions, and
education works indirectly through fertility rather than directly on labor market
participation. The abortion index is also highly significant in the first-stage regression.


       Even when controlling for country fixed effects, time dummies, a country-specific
time trend, and a lagged cohort participation rate (Table 7), the highly significant
negative effect of fertility on female labor force participation persists. The marginal
effect of fertility is statistically significant for the age groups 20–24, 30–34 and 35–39,
but highly relevant for all age groups given the persistence of female labor force
participation. The significant coefficient on the lagged participation implies that the
fertility effect on participation at young ages may impact female labor force participation
throughout working life.


       Although the dynamic framework reported in Tables 7 and 8 seems plausible, we
regard the results from the static model reported in Table 6 as our preferred estimates. In
the dynamic estimates, we need to assume the lagged cohort female labor force
participation to be exogenous. If the disturbances in the model are auto-correlated, this
assumption will not be valid. In principle, we can overcome this by instrumenting the
lagged participation rate. However, lagged abortion has little predictive power for lagged
participation, giving rise to the weak instrument problem. In a dynamic model with fixed
effects, country-specific time trends, and lagged participation, proper identification of a
2SLS model becomes difficult.


       Overall, our static and dynamic models give very similar estimates of the long-run
effect of fertility on female labor market participation. Our estimates imply a reduction in



                                              17
paid work of 8 percent of a woman’s potential working life, or 4 years of paid
employment, for each child born.

6. Simulations

         To illustrate the magnitude of the growth effects associated with the demographic
transition, we provide simulation results. The Republic of Korea (South Korea) poses a
prime example for a developing country moving through the demographic transition, and
we calibrate our model to this economy. Total fertility rates in South Korea dropped from
5.6 children per woman in the early 1960s to 1.2 children in the period 2000–2005.
According to the United Nations, fertility rates in the South Korea are expected to reach
their low at 0.85 children in 2015 before gradually recovering to levels around 1.35 in the
long run5 (World Population Prospects, 2004). As shown in Figure 4, the drop in fertility
over the last 40 years has been accompanied by a rapid increase in female labor force
participation rates: average participation in the age group 25–39 has risen from 26.6
percent in 1960 to 54.5 percent in 2000 (ILO Bureau of Statistics 2007).


[Figure 4]


         The representative economy we simulate is based on a standard Cobb-Douglas
production function with constant returns to scale. Total output Y in each period t is given
by

                                              Yt = AK tα L1t−α
where A is a productivity measure, K is the stock of physical capital, and L denotes the
labor force. Technological progress and education are assumed to be constant and are
included in the parameter A. We are interested in how changes in the fertility rate affect
the labor force, the physical capital stock, and income per capita. The physical capital
stock Kt in each period t is determined by



5
 The numbers cited reflect the United Nations' most conservative projections (low-fertility scenario). We
use the low fertility scenario as it assumes a continuous decline in fertility for the next 15 years which is
consistent with the trends in fertility observed over the past 20 years. Results using the other scenarios are
very similar.


                                                      18
                                           K t = sYt −1 + (1 − δ ) K t −1 ,
where s is the aggregate savings rate and δ is the depreciation rate.


         We initialize our simulations with the age structure in South Korea in 1960. The
evolution of population numbers and age structure after 1960 in the simulation differ
from the actual figures recorded in South Korea because we keep age-specific mortality
rates fixed at their 1960 levels.6 Our simulation therefore only captures the effect of
fertility decline on population, and not the impact of improved longevity. Modeling each
male and female birth cohort separately, the population Pits of sex s, age i, and time t is
given by

                                          (1 − σ ) for i ≥ 1,
                                                                                         45
                     P =P
                        s
                       it
                                s
                              i −1,t −1
                                                  s
                                                 i −1                           P = λs ∑ f it Pitf
                                                                                   s
                                                                                  0t
                                                                                        i =16

where ft is the age-specific fertility rate7 at time t, and λs is the fraction of sex s in
births. To determine the size of the population we take the age- and sex-specific mortality
rates σ is to be fixed at the 1960 levels.8 The sex ratio at birth is set at 51 percent male
and 49 percent female, which corresponds to the makeup of the current adult population
in South Korea.9


         The labor force Lt used in production in each period t is given by
                                                        100
                                              Lt = ∑          ∑         Pits ρits ,
                                                        i =0 s = m, f

where ρits captures the age- and gender-specific labor participation rates at time t.


         We assume capital and labor shares in income to be one third and two thirds
respectively (so that α = 1/ 3 ). Our other baseline assumptions are a savings rate s of 24
6
  We also perform alternative specifications with actual and predicted survival tables for the period 1960 to
2050. The results look very similar to the ones presented in this section.
7
  We assume that fertility is distributed uniformly over the fertile years as the exact age of birth is unknown
in the aggregate data.
8
  Note that (1-σi) is the survival probability between age i and age i+1.
9
  In recent years, the percentage of female newborns has fallen to 47%; we take the average of the last 30
years as our baseline assumption.


                                                              19
percent and an annual capital stock depreciation rate of 8 percent. This gives a steady-
state capital output ratio of three. Rather than estimating the capital stock for South Korea
in 1960, we assume that the economy starts in steady state with a steady level of GDP per
capita. This is the steady state that would have emerged if fertility rates, participation
rates, and mortality schedules had remained at the 1960 levels. Because we consider only
relative output levels, we set the level of total factor productivity A to one without loss
of generality.


        The only exogenous variable that we change during the simulation is the fertility
rate, for which we use the actual and forecast rates as published by the United Nations
(2004). Although we assume that male participation rates remain constant at 1960 levels,
we allow for female labor force participation to respond to the lower fertility in line with
the estimates reported in Table 6.


        We report our simulation results in Figure 5. The baseline is the steady-state
income per capita level at constant 1960 fertility rates. We then consider the effect of the
actual and predicted future decline in fertility rates relative to this baseline. We first
estimate the Solow effect of lower population growth on the capital-labor ratio.
Assuming that the ratio of workers to population is constant as in the standard Solow
model, lower fertility rates imply lower population growth, a higher capital-labor ratio
and higher output per capita. According to our model, income per capita rises by 36
percent if we take only this Solow effect into account.


        [Figure 5]


        However, falling fertility also translates to changes in the population age
structure. Keeping age- and sex-specific participation rates constant at the 1960 levels,
the “Solow plus age structure” effect in Figure 5 combines the Solow capital-labor effect
with the high labor supply per capita due to a falling youth dependency ratio. Assuming
that male and female (age-specific) participation rates do not change, the shift in age
structure implies that the percentage of population working increases from 31 to 46



                                               20
percent in the long run. This leads to an additional 47 percent in steady-state output per
capita over and above the Solow effect.10 It should be noted that the transition is not
monotonic. The rapid decline in fertility generates a “baby boom cohort,” whose
members produce high output during their working age, but also a high old-age
dependency rate once they retire. This cohort effect is very mild in our simulation. Even
when we include the effect of longer life spans on age structure, the decrease in the youth
dependency generated by the fertility decline dominates the increase in old-age
dependency, such that the overall dependency rate declines. This effect is even stronger
when old-age participation rates are high as is the case in South Korea.


         The effects on income per capita are even bigger once we allow for female labor
market participation to adjust to lower fertility. Using our point estimates from Table 6 to
simulate the female labor supply responses, we find that the female labor supply response
leads to an additional increase of steady-state income per capita of 21 percent relative to
the scenario with the Solow and age structure effect. Combining all effects implies an
increase in steady-state per capita income of 141 percent relative to the base line.11 The
results suggest that reductions in fertility increased the growth rate of per capita income
in South Korea by 1.9 percent per year between 1960 and 1990. Between 1990 and 2020
the effect is smaller, increasing the growth rate by 1.2 percent per year. Our simulation
suggests that economic growth from this source will end around 2020, but that the high
level of income attained due to low fertility will persist.


         Our simulation examines only the effects of fertility decline. In fact, since 1960
there have been large reductions in mortality rates in South Korea, particularly at older
ages, while old-age labor market participation rates have declined. Including these effects
in the simulation reduces the gain in income per capita somewhat and produces a more
pronounced downturn in income per capita after 2020 due to population aging and earlier
retirement, though the long run steady-state income level stays well above its 1960 level.

10
   The effects do not add up linearly because the capital-labor ratio “Solow” effect is somewhat reduced by
higher labor force participation.
11
   The individual effects multiply each other; 36 percent Solow effect is multiplied by 47 percent from age
structure and 21 percent from the female labor supply response: (1.36 × 1.47 × 1.21 = 2.41) .


                                                    21
7. Discussion and Conclusions


          The concept of the "demographic dividend" (Bloom, Canning et al. 2001; Bloom,
Canning et al. 2003) elucidates the economic benefits that a country can gain if it
experiences a decline in fertility. The decline in fertility reduces population growth, and
increases the capital-labor ratio. At the same time, the shift in fertility increases the ratio
of working-age to total population; compounding this is the positive behavioral response
of female labor force participation, which further increases labor supply per capita. Using
a simulation model, our parameter estimates suggest that the effects of fertility reduction
on income levels can be large – more than doubling the steady-state level of output per
capita.


          In this paper, we have only considered the effect of fertility on female labor
supply. The model presented here does not account for the possible effect on education of
a decline in fertility. Increased female labor supply may raise the economic returns to
women’s schooling, providing positive incentives for women to invest in education. The
effect of fertility on saving is another important aspect not taken into account. To the
extent that children provide old-age support to their parents, a decline in fertility may
increase financial savings for old age and retirement. The decline in fertility may also
have beneficial effects on long-run economic growth by allowing greater investment in
children’s health and education. These mechanisms suggest that the overall effect of a
fertility decline on economic growth may be even larger than we report.




                                               22
8. References

Angrist, J. and W. Evans (1998). "Children and Their Parents' Labor Supply: Evidence
from Exogenous Variation in Family Size." American Economic Review 88(3): 450-477.

Angrist, J. D. and W. N. Evans (1996). "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of
the 1970 State Abortion Reforms." NBER Working Paper W5406.

Bailey, M. J. (2006). "More power to the pill: The impact of contraceptive freedom on
women's lifecycle labor supply." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 289-320.

Barro, R. J. and J.-W. Lee (2000). "International Data on Educational Attainment:
Updates and Implications." CID Working Paper 42.

Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, et al. (2000). "Population Dynamics and Economic Growth in
Asia." Journal of Population Economics 26(supp.): 257-90.

Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, et al. (2007). "Demographic Change, Social Security Systems,
and Savings." Journal of Monetary Economics 54(1): 92-114.

Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, et al. (2001). "Economic Growth and the Demographic
Transition." NBER Working Paper(8685).

Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, et al. (2003). "The Demographic Dividend: A New
Perspective on the Economic Consequences of Population Change." RAND Monograph
Report.

Bloom, D. E. and R. B. Freeman (1987). "Population Growth, Labor Supply, and
Employment in Developing Countries." Population growth and economic development:
Issues and evidence.

Bloom, D. E. and J. G. Williamson (1998). "Demographic transitions and economic
miracles in emerging Asia." World Bank Economic Review 12(3): 419-455.

Bongaarts, J. (1984). "Implications for future fertility trends for contraceptive practice."
Population and Development Review 10(2): 341-352.

Brander, J. A. and S. Dowrick (1994). "The Role of Fertility and Population in Economic
Growth." Journal of Population Economics 7(1): 1-25.

Browning, M. (1992). "Children and Household Economic Behavior." Journal of
Economic Literature 30(3): 1434-1475.

Engelhardt, H. and A. Prskawetz (2004). "On the changing correlation between fertility
and female employment over space and time." European Journal of Population 20: 35-62.



                                             23
Goldin, C. (1995). The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic
Development and Economic History. Investment in Women's Human Capital and
Economic Development. T. P. Schultz. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press: 61-90.

Henshaw, S. K., S. Singh, et al. (1999). "The Incidence of Abortion Worldwide."
International Family Planning Perspectives 25(Supplement): S30-S38.

Heston, A., R. Summers, et al. (2006). "Penn World Table Version 6.2." Center for
International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
Pennsylvania.

ILO (1997). Economically Active Population, 1950-2010. Geneva.

ILO Bureau of Statistics (2007). ILO Database on Labour Statistics, International Labour
Organization.

Kelley, A. C. and R. M. Schmidt (1995). "Aggregate Population and Economic Growth
Correlations: The Role of the Components of Demographic Change." Demography 32(4):
543-555.

Kelly, W. R. and P. Cutright (1983). "Determinants of national family planning effort."
Population Research and Policy Review 2(2): 111-130.

Klerman, J. A. (1999). "U.S. Abortion Policy and Fertility " The American Economic
Review 89(2): 261-264.

Levine, P. B., D. Staiger, et al. (1999). "Roe v Wade and American fertility." American
Journal of Public Health 89(2): 199-203.

Mammen, K. and C. Paxson (2000). "Women's Work and Economic Development." The
Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4): 141-164.

Murray, M. P. (2006). Econometrics: A Modern Introduction. Boston, Addison-Wesley.

Nickell, S. (1981). "Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects." Econometrica 49(6):
1417-1426.

Rosenzweig, M. R. and K. I. Wolpin (1980). "Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility
Model: The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment." Econometrica 48(1): 227-240.

Ross, J. and J. Stover (2001). "The family planning program effort index: 1999 cycle."
International Family Planning Perspectives 27(3): 119-129.

Simon, J. L. (1989). "On Aggregate Empirical Studies Relating Population Variables to
Economic Development." Population and Development Review 15(2): 323-332.




                                           24
Smith, J. P. and M. P. Ward (1985). "Time-Series Growth in the Female Labor Force."
Journal of Labor Economics 3(1): 59-90.

United Nations (2004). World Population Prospects CD-ROM.

United Nations Population Division. (2002). "Abortion Policies: A Global Review."
2007, from http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/abortion/index.htm.

World Bank (2006). "World Bank Development Indicators CD-ROM."




                                          25
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable Name                                     Mean     Std. Dev.   Min      Max
Abortion: Pregnancy Life Threatening               0.95        0.21        0        1
Abortion: Pregnancy Threatening Physical Health    0.56        0.50        0        1
Abortion: Pregnancy Treatening Mental Health       0.52        0.50        0        1
Abortion: Rape                                     0.37        0.48        0        1
Abortion: Fetal Impairment                         0.32        0.47        0        1
Abortion: Economic Reasons                         0.22        0.42        0        1
Abortion: Request                                  0.17        0.37        0        1
Abortion Index                                     3.11        2.29        0        7
Total Fertility Rate                               4.35        2.04    1.18      8.50
Average years of schooling, male, age >15            5.4         2.8     0.3     12.2
Average years of schooling, female, age >15          4.5        3.0     0.0      12.0
Capital per Working Age Person                     23.2        27.4      0.3    138.2
Female Life Expectancy at birth                    64.1        12.6    33.4      84.6
Urban population (% of total)                      48.1        24.7     3.2       100
Real GDP per capita (Real 2004 $, PPP)            7,340       7,531     171    64,640
Female Participation Age 15-19                     39.0        19.0      3.6     89.0
Female Participation Age 20-24                     55.8        18.4    12.2     100.0
Female Participation Age 24-29                     55.7        19.8    10.9     100.0
Female Participation Age 30-34                     55.7        21.4    12.5     100.0
Female Participation Age 35-39                     56.5        22.4    11.9     100.0
Female Participation Age 40-44                     56.5        22.7    11.7     100.0
Female Participation Age 45-49                     54.7        23.0      8.7    100.0
Female Participation Age 50-54                     50.2        22.8      5.4     98.0
Female Participation Age 55-59                     43.3        22.7      3.1     94.2
Female Participation Age 60-64                     33.1        21.8      1.2     88.9
Notes: Based on the sample of 770 observations




                                                             26
Table 2: Correlation between Abortion Laws
                                        Mother's Mother's
                               Life                                    Fetal Economic           Abortion
                                        Physical Mental     Rape                        Request
                            Threatening                              Impairment Reasons          Index
                                         Health Health
Life Threatening                 1.000
Physical Health                  0.238    1.000
Mental Health                    0.221    0.932    1.000
Rape                             0.165    0.616    0.587     1.000
Fetal Impairment                 0.157    0.633    0.629     0.836       1.000
Economic Reasons                 0.135    0.542    0.578     0.745       0.813   1.000
Request                          0.120    0.505    0.542     0.715       0.754   0.875    1.000

Abortion Index                   0.273    0.828    0.834     0.870       0.900   0.873    0.839   1.000
First Principal Component        0.253    0.815    0.822     0.874       0.906   0.883    0.850   1.000

First Princ. Comp. Weight        0.136    0.399    0.395     0.402       0.430   0.410    0.389




                                                                   27
Table 3: Granger Causality Tests on the Abortion Index
                                                                       Dependent Variable: Abortion Index
Abortion Index (t - 5)                                          0.856***              0.483***       0.132***
                                                                 (0.032)               (0.080)        (0.042)
Abortion Index (t - 10)                                           0.035*              -0.069**      -0.231***
                                                                 (0.019)               (0.032)        (0.043)
Fertility (t - 5)                                               -0.274**               -0.162         -0.254
                                                                 (0.132)               (0.149)        (0.181)
Fertility (t - 10)                                                 0.172                0.237          0.151
                                                                 (0.124)               (0.158)        (0.189)
Participation Rate 25-29 (t - 5)                                  0.019*                0.010          0.020
                                                                 (0.010)               (0.011)        (0.014)
Participation Rate 25-29 (t - 10)                                -0.016*                0.002          -0.000
                                                                 (0.009)               (0.010)        (0.017)
Time Dummies                                                         Yes                Yes            Yes
Country Fixed Effects                                                No                 Yes            Yes
Country Time Trends                                                  No                 No             Yes
Observations                                                          576               576            576
R-squared                                                             0.84              0.90           0.95
F-stat p-value (Fertility)                                          0.00***             0.31           0.37
F-test p-value (Participation Rate)                                   0.18              0.22           0.28
F-test p-value (Fertility and Participation Rate)                   0.01***             0.41           0.19
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                 28
Table 4: Female Labor Force Participation, Fixed Effects Estimation
                                                                           Dependent Variable: Female Labor Force Participation, by Age Group
                                                      15-19          20-24     25-29     30-34     35-39      40-44      45-49       50-54    55-59                60-64
Total Fertility Rate                      0.703                     -2.359***   -3.094***   -2.386***      -1.570**     -1.291*       -0.203  0.202      0.859      -0.110
                                         (0.554)                      (0.613)     (0.643)    (0.684)        (0.707)     (0.682)      (0.642) (0.584)    (0.529)    (0.377)
Female life expectancy                  0.344***                     0.312***      0.117      0.136         0.275**      0.169*     0.214**   0.100    0.253***   0.175***
                                         (0.075)                      (0.089)     (0.084)    (0.091)        (0.113)     (0.098)      (0.096) (0.076)    (0.075)    (0.052)
Capital to Working age population      -0.198***                    0.144***    0.453***    0.413***      0.385***     0.379***    0.377*** 0.318***   0.214***     0.027
                                         (0.031)                      (0.033)     (0.041)    (0.055)        (0.057)     (0.053)      (0.050) (0.043)    (0.032)    (0.020)
Urban population (% of total)           -0.158**                       -0.064   -0.353***   -0.386***     -0.380***    -0.302***   -0.255*** -0.120      -0.023     0.068
                                         (0.075)                      (0.088)     (0.085)    (0.095)        (0.098)     (0.093)      (0.092) (0.084)    (0.074)    (0.069)
Average schooling years, male >15yrs      0.175                      -1.612**    -1.772**   -2.052***      -1.901**    -2.079***    -1.563**  -1.127     -1.001    -0.917*
                                         (0.592)                      (0.665)     (0.703)    (0.763)        (0.816)     (0.795)      (0.761) (0.701)    (0.631)    (0.486)
Average schooling years, female >15yrs    0.360                      2.942***    3.532***   3.942***      3.771***     3.520***    2.693*** 1.967**     1.814**    1.512**
                                         (0.713)                      (0.797)     (0.908)    (1.041)        (1.074)     (1.012)      (0.942) (0.878)    (0.764)    (0.606)
R-squared                                             0.93            0.91        0.91         0.90             0.91     0.92        0.93     0.94       0.95       0.96
Notes:
All regressions are based on a sample of 770 observations and include time dummies and country fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                             29
Table 5: Female Labor Force Participation, Fixed Effects, 2SLS Estimation
Second Stage                                                             Dependent Variable: Female Labor Force Participation, by Age Group
                                                    15-19       20-24        25-29      30-34       35-39      40-44       45-49     50-54    55-59   60-64
                      (i)
Total Fertility Rate                      0.616               -7.898** -16.111*** -17.056*** -15.392*** -13.424*** -9.460** -7.343*  -4.688 -1.858
                                         (3.251)               (3.161)   (4.439)    (5.359)    (5.427)    (5.033)   (4.372) (3.809) (3.285) (2.141)
Female life expectancy                  0.341**                 0.105     -0.370    -0.413      -0.242    -0.285    -0.132   -0.183  0.045   0.109
                                         (0.146)               (0.170)   (0.239)    (0.275)    (0.287)    (0.253)   (0.223) (0.177) (0.155) (0.093)
Capital to Working age population      -0.196***              0.255*** 0.713***    0.706***   0.661*** 0.621*** 0.562*** 0.469*** 0.325*** 0.062
                                         (0.073)               (0.071)   (0.094)    (0.114)    (0.116)    (0.110)   (0.096) (0.087) (0.074) (0.054)
Urban population (% of total)           -0.160*                -0.168* -0.597*** -0.662*** -0.639*** -0.530*** -0.429*** -0.261** -0.127     0.035
                                         (0.090)               (0.096)   (0.131)    (0.159)    (0.162)    (0.151)   (0.133) (0.115) (0.097) (0.065)
Average schooling years, male >15yrs      0.195                 -0.388    1.104      1.190      1.153      0.602     0.482   0.540   0.224  -0.531
                                         (0.850)               (1.007)   (1.440)    (1.587)    (1.577)    (1.419)   (1.225) (1.059) (0.881) (0.595)
Average schooling years, female >15yrs    0.310                 -0.249    -3.966    -4.508     -4.192     -3.469    -2.640   -2.379 -1.381   0.505
                                         (1.880)               (1.956)   (2.754)    (3.162)    (3.156)    (2.893)   (2.484) (2.187) (1.851) (1.238)

R-squared                                           0.93         0.90           0.83           0.82             0.84   0.86   0.90   0.92     0.94    0.96
FirstStage                                         Dependent Variable: Total Fertility Rate
Abortion Index                         -0.068***
                                         (0.017)
Female life expectancy                 -0.040***
                                         (0.009)
Capital to Working age population       0.022***
                                         (0.002)
Urban population (% of total)          -0.019***
                                         (0.006)
Average schooling years, male >15yrs    0.231***
                                         (0.059)
Average schooling years, female >15yrs -0.569***
                                         (0.059)

R-squared                                            0.96
Cragg-Donald F-stat                                 16.34
Notes:
All regressions are based on a sample of 770 observations and include time dummies and country fixed effects.
(i) TFR is instrumented for using the Abortion Index. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                           30
Table 6: Female Labor Force Participation, Fixed Effects, 2SLS Estimation, with country-specific time trend
                                                                              Dependent Variable: Female Labor Force Participation, by Age Group
                                                      15-19         20-24         25-29      30-34       35-39      40-44       45-49     50-54             55-59   60-64

Total Fertility Rate(i)                               1.373         -6.391*      -6.291*       -9.815**     -12.454*** -10.530** -7.143*  -6.288*   -4.753 -4.120
                                                    (3.732)         (3.366)       (3.269)       (3.866)        (4.396)   (4.138) (3.738)   (3.445) (3.138) (2.651)
Female life expectancy                                0.015          0.044         0.040         0.182       0.431***     0.205  0.289**    0.189 0.328*** 0.186*
                                                    (0.137)         (0.124)       (0.120)       (0.142)        (0.162)   (0.152) (0.138)   (0.127) (0.115) (0.098)
Capital to Working age population                   -0.261*           0.038      0.294**       0.368**        0.423**   0.402**  0.369** 0.369*** 0.257** 0.206**
                                                    (0.147)         (0.133)       (0.129)       (0.153)        (0.173)   (0.163) (0.147)   (0.136) (0.124) (0.105)
Urban population (% of total)                        -0.123          -0.147     -0.387***      -0.387**      -0.498*** -0.445**   -0.254    -0.189  -0.122 -0.148
                                                    (0.162)         (0.146)       (0.142)       (0.168)        (0.191)   (0.179) (0.162)   (0.149) (0.136) (0.115)
Average schooling years, male >15yrs                 -0.683           0.924        0.491         1.596         2.319*    2.259*   2.015*  2.272**    1.508   1.235
                                                    (1.151)         (1.038)       (1.008)       (1.193)        (1.356)   (1.277) (1.153)   (1.063) (0.968) (0.818)
Average schooling years, female >15yrs                0.214          -2.046       -1.531       -3.497**       -4.539** -4.481** -3.771** -4.308*** -3.144** -1.992*
                                                    (1.675)         (1.511)       (1.467)       (1.735)        (1.973)   (1.858) (1.678)   (1.546) (1.409) (1.190)


Cragg-Donald F-stat                                    8.26          8.26          8.26             8.26        8.26           8.26           8.26   8.26   8.26    8.26
R-squared                                              0.97          0.98          0.98             0.98        0.97           0.98           0.98   0.98   0.99    0.99
Notes:
All regressions are based on a sample of 770 observations and include time dummies, country fixed effects and country specific time trends.
(i) TFR is instrumented for using the Abortion Index. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                               31
Table 7: Female Labor Force Participation Fixed Effects, 2SLS Estimation with a Country Specific Trend and Lagged Female
Labor Force Participation Rate
                                                                           Dependent Variable: Female Labor Force Participation, by Age Group
                                                      15-19          20-24     25-29      30-34       35-39      40-44       45-49     50-54                      55-59   60-64

Total Fertility Rate(i)                               1.373          -7.779*    -3.227          -7.686*      -8.957**        -5.008             -3.348   -3.185  -2.416 -1.826
                                                     (3.732)         (4.133)    (4.228)         (3.975)       (4.057)        (3.533)           (3.167)  (3.094) (3.154) (2.759)
Lagged Participation                                                0.262***   0.460***        0.497***      0.527***       0.581***          0.627*** 0.529*** 0.396*** 0.325***
                                                                     (0.077)    (0.113)         (0.083)       (0.065)        (0.058)           (0.046)  (0.044) (0.046) (0.050)
Female life expectancy                                0.015           0.029     -0.014           0.165       0.355***         0.016           0.230**    0.089 0.267*** 0.097
                                                    (0.137)          (0.129)    (0.111)         (0.110)       (0.118)        (0.108)           (0.095)  (0.097) (0.099) (0.087)
Capital to Working age population                   -0.261*           0.104      0.182           0.201         0.210          0.154             0.138    0.178    0.097    0.077
                                                    (0.147)          (0.135)    (0.133)         (0.141)       (0.144)        (0.123)           (0.115)  (0.114) (0.117) (0.103)
Urban population (% of total)                        -0.123           -0.216     -0.316          -0.242      -0.411**         -0.236            -0.099   -0.134  -0.140 -0.184
                                                    (0.162)          (0.195)    (0.196)         (0.202)       (0.193)        (0.168)           (0.151)  (0.145) (0.146) (0.125)
Average schooling years, male >15yrs                 -0.683           1.223      -0.183          0.728         0.702          -0.004            0.050    0.454    0.212    0.376
                                                    (1.151)          (1.062)    (1.023)         (1.043)       (1.103)        (0.971)           (0.884)  (0.870) (0.894) (0.772)
Average schooling years, female >15yrs                0.214           -2.049     -0.007          -1.612        -1.455         -0.526            -0.491   -1.330  -1.019 -0.576
                                                    (1.675)          (1.525)    (1.495)         (1.483)       (1.564)        (1.373)           (1.237)  (1.216) (1.248) (1.088)

Cragg-Donald F-stat                                    8.26           5.96       4.53               5.71        5.76           5.53             6.40     6.62     6.75     6.12
R-squared                                              0.97           0.98       0.99               0.99        0.99           0.99             0.99     0.99     0.99     0.99
Number of Observations                                 770            673        673                673         673            673              673      673      673      673
Notes:
All regressions are based on a sample of 770 observations and include time dummies, country fixed effects and country specific time trends.
(i) TFR is instrumented for using the Abortion Index. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                               32
Table 8: Female Labor Force Participation 2SLS Estimation: First-Stage Results (country-specific time trend and lag)
                  First Stage                                                                 Dependent Variable: Total Fertility Rate
                 Age Group                            15-19         20-24        25-29         30-34          35-39         40-44         45-49       50-54       55-59       60-64
Abortion Index                         -0.045*** -0.036**                      -0.031**       -0.035**      -0.036**      -0.035**       -0.038**     -0.039**   -0.039***    -0.037**
                                         (0.016)  (0.015)                       (0.014)        (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)
Lagged Participation                             -0.016***                    -0.025***      -0.018***     -0.012***     -0.013***       -0.010**      -0.008*     -0.008*    -0.012**
                                                  (0.004)                       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Female life expectancy                  0.029*** 0.025***                     0.021***        0.021***      0.023***      0.025***       0.023***    0.024***    0.024***    0.025***
                                         (0.007)  (0.007)                       (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
Capital to Working age population      0.035*** 0.029***                      0.029***        0.032***      0.032***      0.032***       0.033***    0.033***    0.033***    0.034***
                                         (0.004)  (0.004)                       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)
Urban population (% of total)          -0.036*** -0.041***                    -0.042***      -0.045***     -0.042***     -0.042***      -0.041***    -0.040***   -0.039***   -0.039***
                                         (0.007)  (0.008)                       (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
Average schooling years, male >15yrs    0.262*** 0.222***                      0.216***       0.230***      0.239***      0.243***       0.243***     0.243***    0.245***    0.245***
                                         (0.053)  (0.050)                       (0.049)        (0.050)       (0.051)       (0.051)        (0.051)      (0.051)     (0.052)     (0.051)
Average schooling years, female >15yrs -0.415*** -0.339***                    -0.331***      -0.345***     -0.357***     -0.361***      -0.358***    -0.359***   -0.361***   -0.362***
                                         (0.058)  (0.057)                       (0.055)        (0.057)       (0.057)       (0.057)        (0.058)      (0.058)     (0.058)     (0.058)
Observations                                           770          673           673           673            673           673              673      673         673         673
R-squared                                              0.99         0.99          0.99          0.99           0.99          0.99             0.99     0.99        0.99        0.99
Notes:
All regressions are based on a sample of 770 observations and include time dummies, country fixed effects and country specific time trends.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                              33
Figure 1: Income per Capita and Female Labor Force Participation 2000

                                              100


                                               90             Tanzania
                                                                    Mozambique
                                               80
 Female Labor Force Participation Rate 2000




                                               70                                                                              Iceland
                                                                                                         Thailand
                                               60                                                                                    US


                                               50


                                               40


                                               30

                                                                  Sudan
                                               20                                              Egypt


                                               10


                                                0
                                                    6   6.5       7        7.5      8         8.5           9       9.5   10       10.5   11
                                                                                 Log (Real GDP per Capita 2000)




                                                                                                    34
Figure 2: Income per Capita 1980 and Change in Female Labor Force Participation 1980–2000


                                                          40


                                                                                                                       Ecuador
                                                          30
   Change in Female Labor Force Participation 1980-2000




                                                                                                                       Peru                                  Kuwait

                                                          20
                                                                                                                                         Ireland
                                                                                                                                                         Switzerland

                                                          10


                                                                    Guinea-Bissau
                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                   Sweden

                                                                                                                                     Hungary
                                                          -10                           Bangladesh



                                                          -20                                                 Turkey



                                                          -30
                                                                6                   7                  8                         9                  10                 11
                                                                                                     Log (Real GDP per Capita 1980)




                                                                                                                       35
Figure 3: Direct and Cumulative Effect of Fertility on Female Labor Force Participation

                         5.0



                         0.0



                         -5.0
 Participation Effect




                        -10.0



                        -15.0



                        -20.0

                                                                             Direct Effect           Total effect

                        -25.0
                            15-19   20-24   25-29   30-34   35-39   40-44        45-49       50-54   55-59          60-64
                                                              Age Group

Note: This graph corresponds to the results presented in Table 7.




                                                                            36
Figure 4: South Korea, Total Fertility Rates and Female Labor Market Participation 1960–2000

                       70                                                                                                          6.0



                       60
                                                                                                                                   5.0



                       50
                                                                                                                                   4.0




                                                                                                                                         Total Fertility Rate
 Participation Rates




                       40
                                                                                               Total Fertility Rate
                                                                                                                                   3.0
                                                                                               Female Labor Market Participation
                       30                                                                      Ages Group 25-39
                                                                                               Female Labor Market Participation
                                                                                               Ages 40-54
                                                                                                                                   2.0
                       20
                            Since 1953: Abortion        January 1973:
                            prohibited on any           Liberalization of
                            ground.                     abortion                                                                   1.0
                       10



                       0                                                                                                           0.0
                                1960           1965   1970          1975    1980        1985      1990          1995       2000




                                                                                   37
Figure 5: Simulation of the Economic Consequences of Fertility Reduction in South Korea
       (1960 Participation Rates, and Constant 1960 Life Expectancy)

                    300




                    250




                    200
        GDP Index




                    150




                    100

                                                                                          Baseline
                                                                                          Solow
                     50                                                                   Solow + Age Structure
                                                                                          Solow + Age Structure + Female Participation


                     0
                      1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020        2030     2040     2050   2060    2070   2080    2090   2100




                                                                              38
Appendix
Table A1: Variable Description
Age-Group-Specific        The labor force participation rate is the number of women in the
Female Labor Force        labor force in a given age group divided by the female
Participation             population of the same age group. Labor force participation data
                          are from the International Labor Organization (ILO 1997; ILO
                          Bureau of Statistics 2007). The data from 1960–1980 and from
                          1980–2000 are taken from two different data sets. To ensure
                          continuity in the data we take the growth of participation from
                          1960–1980 in one data set and extrapolate back from the 1980
                          participation rate in the 1980–2000 dataset.
Lagged Female Labor       The participation rate of the cohort of interest in period t-5. For
Force Participation       example, the lagged participation of 25–29 year old females in
                          2000, is the participation of the 20–24 year olds in 1995. For
                          data source see Age Group Specific Female Labor Participation
                          (ILO 1997; ILO Bureau of Statistics 2007).
Fertility (TFR)           The total fertility rate is the average number of children that
                          would be born to a woman over her fertile life if she were to
                          experience the current age-specific fertility rate through these
                          years. The data are taken from the World Development
                          Indicators (World Bank 2006). For the missing survey years
                          1965 and 1975, we take the linear averages of 1962 and 1967,
                          and 1972 and 1977 survey values, respectively.
Female Life Expectancy    Defined as female life expectancy at birth. Data are from the
                          World Development Indicators (World Bank 2006) and linearly
                          interpolated between survey years.
Capital per working-age   Total capital stock in 2004 US$ PPP from the Penn World
population                Tables 6.2 (Heston et. al., 2006) divided by the population in the
                          age groups 15 to 64. Population data come from the World
                          Population Prospects (United Nations 2004).

Urban Population           Percent of the total population living in an urban area. Source:
                           World Development Indicators (World Bank 2006).
Average years of schooling The average years of schooling among females and males above
in the female/male         the age of fifteen. Source: Barro and Lee (2000).
population >15
Abortion Index             Abortion Index is the sum of the 7 abortion law indicator
                           variables. In each abortion law category – life threatening,
                           physical health of the mother, mental health of the mother, rape,
                           fetal impairment, economic, request – a one indicates that an
                           abortion is legally available for the classified reason and a zero
                           that it is not. The Abortion Index ranges from zero, which
                           indicates that abortion is not legal under any classification, and
                           seven, which means that an abortion is available for all of the
                           seven reasons. Data Source: United Nations Population Division
                           (2002).


                                           39
Table A2: Country List
   1   Afghanistan                34   Guinea-Bissau        67   Panama
   2   Algeria                    35   Haiti                68   Papua New Guinea
   3   Argentina                  36   Honduras             69   Peru
   4   Australia                  37   Hungary              70   Philippines
   5   Austria                    38   Iceland              71   Poland
   6   Bahrain                    39   India                72   Portugal
   7   Bangladesh                 40   Indonesia            73   Rwanda
   8   Barbados                   41   Iran, Islamic Rep.   74   Senegal
   9   Belgium                    42   Iraq                 75   Sierra Leone
  10   Benin                      43   Ireland              76   Singapore
  11   Botswana                   44   Israel               77   South Africa
  12   Brazil                     45   Italy                78   Spain
  13   Cameroon                   46   Jamaica              79   Sri Lanka
  14   Canada                     47   Japan                80   Sudan
  15   Central African Republic   48   Jordan               81   Swaziland
  16   Chile                      49   Kenya                82   Sweden
  17   China                      50   Korea, Rep.          83   Switzerland
  18   Colombia                   51   Kuwait               84   Syrian Arab Republic
  19   Congo, Rep.                52   Lesotho              85   Tanzania
  20   Costa Rica                 53   Liberia              86   Thailand
  21   Cyprus                     54   Malawi               87   Togo
  22   Denmark                    55   Malaysia             88   Trinidad and Tobago
  23   Dominican Republic         56   Mali                 89   Tunisia
  24   Ecuador                    57   Mauritius            90   Turkey
  25   Egypt, Arab Rep.           58   Mexico               91   Uganda
  26   El Salvador                59   Mozambique           92   United Kingdom
  27   Fiji                       60   Nepal                93   United States
  28   Finland                    61   Netherlands          94   Uruguay
  29   France                     62   New Zealand          95   Venezuela, RB
  30   Gambia, The                63   Nicaragua            96   Zambia
  31   Ghana                      64   Niger                97   Zimbabwe
  32   Greece                     65   Norway
  33   Guatemala                  66   Pakistan




                                                40
Appendix A

We have
∂ 2V     k+β          α b2
     = −     −                     <0
∂n 2      n2   (1 − l − bn − ε ) 2
∂ 2V         w2              α
     = −              −                  <0
∂l 2
         ( wl + c0 ) (1 − l − bn − ε ) 2
                    2

                     2
d 2V d 2V ⎛ d 2V ⎞   ( k + β ) w2        α (k + β )                   α b 2 w2
         −⎜      ⎟ = 2            +                       +                                  >0.
dl 2 dn 2 ⎝ dndl ⎠  n (lw + c0 ) 2 n 2 (1 − l − bn − ε ) 2 (1 − l − bn − ε ) 2 ( wl + c0 ) 2

Hence the Hessian matrix of 2nd derivatives is negative semi-definite and the first-order
conditions give a local maximum.




                                                41
