                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          HOW THE WORLD ACHIEVED CONSENSUS ON MONETARY POLICY

                                         Marvin Goodfriend

                                        Working Paper 13580
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13580


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




The author would like to thank Al Broaddus, Spencer Dale, Robert King, Robert Hetzel, Bennett McCallum,
Allan Meltzer, Athanasios Orphanides, Marek Rozkrut, and Joachim Scheide for helpful comments.
Editorial advice from James Hines, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Timothy Taylor of the Journal
of Economic Perspectives is gratefully acknowledged. The paper benefited from seminars at The City
University of Hong Kong, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and The Kiel Institute for the
World Economy. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Marvin Goodfriend. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy
Marvin Goodfriend
NBER Working Paper No. 13580
November 2007
JEL No. E3,E4,E5

                                              ABSTRACT

This article tells how the world achieved a working consensus on the core principles of monetary policy.
The story begins with the muddled state of affairs in the late 1970s. It then asks: How did Federal
Reserve policy produce an understanding of the practical principles of monetary policy? How did
formal institutional support abroad for targeting low inflation follow from an international acceptance
of these ideas? And how did a consensus theoretical model develop in academia? The article tells how
the modern theoretical consensus known as the New Neoclassical Synthesis (aka, the New Keynesian
model) reinforces key advances: the priority for price stability, the targeting of core rather than headline
inflation, the importance of credibility for low inflation, and preemptive interest rate policy supported
by transparent objectives and procedures. The conclusion identifies important practical issues that
remain to be explored in theory.


Marvin Goodfriend
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
marvingd@andrew.cmu.edu
         In the 1970s, monetary policy was in disarray. The situation in the United States

was typical: inflation peaked above 10 percent in 1974 and again in 1980. Many central

bankers were pessimistic about the power of monetary policy to reduce inflation, at least

at any politically acceptable cost (Burns, 1979). A survey of six then-recent empirically

estimated short-run Phillips curves by Okun (1978) suggested that the Federal Reserve

would need to precipitate a 10 percent contraction of employment and output in the

United States for one year for each permanent percentage point reduction of inflation that

it wished to achieve. In other words, it appeared that it could take a modern Great

Depression—a 10 percent contraction of output and employment sustained for almost 10

years—to achieve price stability. Even then, there was no guarantee that inflation would

not begin to move higher again once restrictive monetary policy was relaxed.

         The arrival of Paul Volcker as chairman of the Federal Reserve in 1979 stands as

a turning point. The Volcker Fed brought the inflation rate down to 4 percent by 1984,

although it precipitated recessions in 1980 and 1981–82 to do so. Under Alan Greenspan,

the Fed gradually worked the inflation rate down by the early 2000s below 2 percent, a

range that Greenspan (2003) dubbed “effective price stability.”

         The improved inflationary picture in the United States was accompanied by

parallel developments around the world. Average inflation worldwide declined from 14

percent in the early 1980s to 4 percent in the early 2000s (Rogoff, 2003). 1 Industrial

economies achieved a reduction in inflation from 9 to 2 percent, while developing

economies brought inflation down from 31 to 6 percent.




1
 Rogoff (2003) reports that global inflation climbed in the first half of the 1990s and peaked at around 30
percent due to temporarily high inflation in the developing world, particularly, in transition economies.


                                                                                                              1
       Moreover, during the quarter century or so that inflation has been stabilized, the

United States experienced two of its longest economic expansions and two of its mildest

recessions in 1990–91 and 2001. In comparison, the United States experienced six

recessions in the 30 years from 1955 to 1985, culminating in the most severe U.S.

recession since the 1930s in 1981–82. The “great moderation” of output volatility

occurred worldwide. The volatility of annual output growth for OECD countries—for

example, as measured by decade-long standard deviations of annual output growth—has

fallen dramatically in the 1990s and 2000s relative to the 1970s (Rogoff, forthcoming).

Stock and Watson (2003) attribute 20 to 30 percent of reduced GDP volatility in the

United States to improved monetary policy and the rest to good luck in the form of

smaller shocks to productivity and commodity prices, and unexplained declines in the

volatility of residential investment, nonresidential construction, and durable goods

production. Of course, better monetary policy may be responsible indirectly for what

appears to be good luck, as Bernanke (2004) argues.

       This article tells how the world achieved a working consensus on the core

principles of monetary policy by the late 1990s. The story begins with a description of the

muddled state of affairs in the 1970s and follows with three sections that ask: What

happened in Federal Reserve policy to produce an understanding of the practical

principles of monetary policy? How did formal institutional support for targeting low

inflation abroad follow from an international acceptance of these ideas? And how did a

consensus theoretical model develop in academia? The article then turns to how the

modern theoretical consensus—known alternatively as the New Neoclassical Synthesis or

the New Keynesian model of monetary policy—reinforces key advances: the priority for




                                                                                            2
price stability; the targeting of core rather than headline inflation; the importance of

credibility for low inflation; and preemptive interest rate policy supported by transparent

objectives and procedures. Of course, a working consensus does not constitute complete

agreement, and there is ample room for disagreement about various important issues

regarding monetary policy. Accordingly, the conclusion identifies important issues that

remain to be explored.



Practical and Theoretical Disarray in the 1970s



        At the heart of the disarray in monetary policy practice in the 1970s was the

tendency for a central bank like the Federal Reserve to pursue “go-stop” monetary policy.

Go-stop policy was a consequence of a central bank’s inclination to be responsive to the

shifting balance of public concerns between inflation and unemployment. The central

bank would stimulate employment in the "go" phase of the cycle until the public became

concerned about rising inflation. Then aggressive interest rate policy initiated the "stop"

phase of the policy cycle to bring inflation down, while unemployment rates moved

higher with a lag. Public support for interest rate increases evaporated once the

unemployment rate began to rise, so it was politically difficult to reverse a higher

inflation rate. 2

        Wage and price setters learned to take advantage of tight labor and product

markets in the "go" phase of the policy cycle to make increasingly inflationary demands,

2
  Milton Friedman (1964) discussed the go-stop character of Federal Reserve policy. Romer and Romer
(1989) documented six occasions on which the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy decisively to
fight inflation, all of which were followed by sharply rising unemployment. King (2005) discusses go-stop
policy in the United Kingdom. See Batini and Nelson (2005) for a history of UK monetary policy from
1955 to 2004.


                                                                                                        3
which neutralized the monetary stimulus. As a result, central banks became ever more

expansionary in the pursuit of low unemployment. Lenders demanded ever-higher

inflation premia in bond rates which moved higher and fluctuated widely. By pursuing

low unemployment and fighting inflation only when it became the predominant public

concern, central banks then increased the volatility of both inflation and output.

        Other factors contributed to the disarray in monetary policy in the 1970s. In the

1960s, the widespread belief in a long-run Phillips curve trade-off between inflation and

unemployment inclined central banks to allow inflation to drift upward in the hope of

achieving a permanently lower level of unemployment. Also, the productivity growth

slowdown of the 1970s caused central banks like the Federal Reserve to overestimate

noninflationary potential output (Orphanides, 2003). Oil price shocks that occurred in

1973-74 and 1979–80 worsened the inflation problem, although neither of the oil price

shocks produced the 3 percentage point increase in U.S. inflation that occurred in the 18

months prior to Paul Volcker becoming Fed chairman in August 1979.

       The disarray was further reflected in the collapse of political institutions that had

served as the foundation of the international monetary system. Under the Bretton Woods

system of fixed exchange rates established after World War II, countries around the

world agreed to fix their exchange rates to the dollar, and the United States agreed to

maintain convertibility of the dollar into gold at $35 an ounce. Increasingly inflationary

go-stop policy in the United States was incompatible with the maintenance of gold

convertibility. The fixed exchange rate system limped along and finally collapsed




                                                                                               4
completely in 1971–1973 when the world’s major currencies introduced a permanent

float against the dollar and the United States severed the dollar’s link to gold. 3

           With the collapse of Bretton Woods, for the first time in modern history, all the

world’s major currencies were de-linked from gold or any other commodity. The lack of

any formal constraint on money creation contributed to the nervousness about inflation.

In the United States, an attempt to provide a new legislative framework for monetary

policy fell short. The U.S. Congress enacted the Humphrey–Hawkins Full Employment

Law in October 1978, which set national goals of 4 percent unemployment and 3 percent

inflation to be achieved by 1983 with a further reduction to zero inflation by 1988.

However, the law specified that the reduction in inflation was not to impede the reduction

in unemployment, and it authorized no programs to achieve its objectives. It is no

coincidence that shortly thereafter the dollar suffered a dramatic collapse on the foreign

exchange market that precipitated an unprecedented rescue package on November 1,

1978.

           The disarray in monetary policy practice was reflected in deep divisions within

the academic world. These divisions involved two key questions. First, did a central bank

have the power to control inflation? Second, could central bank credibility influence

inflation expectations? And how would the interaction between the two determine the

costs of disinflation?

           Well into the 1970s, there was widespread skepticism that monetary policy alone

could control inflation. Even the head of the Federal Reserve from 1970 to 1978, Arthur

Burns, was pessimistic (Burns, 1979; Hetzel, 1998) Inflation was commonly believed to

be driven primarily by factors other than monetary policy: fiscal deficits, commodity
3
    The forthcoming second volume of Allan Meltzer's history of the Federal Reserve tells this story in detail.


                                                                                                              5
price shocks, inflation psychology, aggressive labor unions, or monopolistically

competitive firms.

       Monetarist economists led by Milton Friedman, Karl Brunner, and Allan Meltzer

worked beginning in the 1960s to show that a central bank had the monetary policy tools

to act decisively against inflation. They did so in three ways: First, monetarists assembled

international evidence that even if short-term inflation can be affected by many factors,

long-term sustained inflation is always associated with excessive money growth. Second,

they developed the theory of money demand and supporting econometric evidence to

show that control of money is both necessary and sufficient to control the trend rate of

inflation. Third, they argued that a central bank could exercise sufficient control over

money to control inflation through its monopoly on currency and bank reserves, even if

fluctuations in the demand for money were hard to predict. These arguments may now

seem self-evident, but they were highly controversial at the time.

       Macroeconomists had long realized that inflation expectations play a central role

in propagating wage and price inflation. However, they divided sharply over whether

monetary policy could manage inflation expectations in practice. For example, leading

Keynesian economist James Tobin (1980, p. 64) thought that “the price- and wage-setting

institutions of the economy have an inflationary bias. Consequently, demand management

cannot stabilize the price trend without chronic sacrifice of output and employment

unless assisted, occasionally or permanently, by direct incomes policies of some kind.”

       On the other side, rational expectations monetary theory explored the link

between “inflation psychology” and monetary policy. Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent

showed that in theory, inflation expectations could be made to conform to a central




                                                                                            6
bank’s desired low rate of inflation if a central bank was credibly committed to following

a noninflationary money growth rule (Lucas, 1976; Lucas and Sargent, 1981). In a

credible disinflation, money growth, expected inflation, and actual inflation could all

slow together with little adverse effect on employment. In a noncredible disinflation,

wage and price inflation would continue as before, and the public would drive interest

rates and unemployment up as it competed for increasingly scarce real money balances.

       The question was whether and how soon a central bank could acquire credibility

for a transition to low inflation. On one side, Keynesians like Tobin (or Okun, as

mentioned earlier) tended to believe that credibility would be hard to acquire, inflationary

expectations would be slow to change, and the costs of disinflation would be high.

Monetarists were divided over how readily a central bank could acquire credibility for

low inflation. Kydland and Prescott (1977) showed that optimal monetary policy was not

“time consistent,” meaning that a central bank free to make policy choices on a

discretionary basis had an incentive to promise to pursue low inflation, and then to run an

expansionary monetary policy aimed at lower unemployment, unless that promise was

backed by a credible “commitment mechanism.” It appeared that central bank

independence alone was not enough to overcome the commitment problem: after all, the

Federal Reserve had long been an independent central bank. Kydland and Prescott’s logic

suggested that a central bank might be foolish to attempt a disinflation without a

legislative mandate for low inflation, because it might be unable to acquire the credibility

needed for the disinflation to succeed.

       Most monetarists acknowledged that the short-run unemployment costs of

deliberate disinflation would be substantial. But they believed that determined




                                                                                           7
disinflationary monetary policy could reduce expected inflation relatively quickly, so that

the costs of disinflation would be much lower than commonly believed. This academic

controversy would soon be resolved by empirical evidence that Paul Volcker was to

provide as leader of the Federal Reserve.



Federal Reserve Contributions to Monetary Policy Practice



       When Paul Volcker became Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in August

1979, he was determined to take aggressive action against inflation. After a severe crisis

of confidence in commodity markets, on October 6, 1979, the Fed broke sharply with its

tradition of saying little in public about its actions and grabbed the headlines with a

dramatic, high-profile announcement that it planned to place greater emphasis on

controlling money to fight inflation (Lindsey, Orphanides, and Rasche, 2005). By

associating itself more closely with key monetarist ideas, the Volcker Fed implicitly took

responsibility for inflation and created an expectation that the Fed was willing to let

short-term interest rates rise dramatically to bring inflation down (Volcker, 1978).

       After letting the federal funds rate rise by 3 percentage points in the fall of 1979,

the Fed paused in its tightening as evidence accumulated that the U.S. economy was

moving into recession. Then, in January and February 1980, the 30-year government

bond rate jumped by 2 percentage points despite a weakening economy, reflecting an

unprecedented "inflation scare" in the bond market. This 2 percentage point jump in

inflation expectations had a number of contributing causes: the spike in underlying

inflation in connection with the ongoing oil price shock, the run-up in the dollar price of




                                                                                               8
gold to $850 per ounce in January, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In addition,

the Fed's hesitation to tighten monetary policy further in light of the looming recession

probably contributed to the inflation scare (Goodfriend, 1993). The inflation scare forced

the Fed to choose between fighting unemployment and fighting inflation; it had

effectively lost “room to maneuver” between go and stop policy.

       The Federal Reserve reacted aggressively—letting the federal funds rate rise by

another 3 percentage points to 17 percent in March 1980 alone! Real GDP declined at an

extraordinary 10 percent annual rate in the second quarter of 1980 in response to the

monetary tightening, in conjunction with the unfortunate imposition of credit controls

(Schreft, 1990). The recession ended quickly with the lifting of credit controls in June

1980 and an aggressive easing of monetary policy that brought the federal funds rate

down to 8 percent by July. Real GDP growth bounced back in the fourth quarter of 1980.

       In retrospect, 1980 was a disaster from a monetary policy point of view. The U.S.

economy suffered a recession along with a destabilizing inflation scare and policy

reaction, and yet at the end of the year, inflation remained above 10 percent. The events

of 1980 heightened public unhappiness with inflation. Public support for inflation control

and the support of the incoming Reagan administration encouraged the Volcker Fed to

seize the window of opportunity that presented itself during the strong rebound in the

second half of 1980 to move the federal funds rate up to 19 percent by early 1981. With a

19 percent nominal funds rate, and a historically high 9 percent real funds rate (the

historical average is 1 to 2 percent), the Fed was positioned to let the economy disinflate

without having to tighten interest rates further as the unemployment rate began to rise.




                                                                                              9
        Nonetheless, the bond market experienced a second inflation scare in 1981. In

spite of extraordinarily tight monetary policy, the 30-year bond rate actually rose by 3

percentage points from January to October 1981 even as the economy weakened,

reflecting another 3 percentage point increase in inflation expectations. However, as the

U.S. economy entered another recession in July 1981, the Fed responded differently than

it had in early 1980. Volcker explained why at the July 1981 Federal Open Market

Committee (FOMC) meeting (Federal Open Market Committee, 1981, p. 36):



        I haven’t much doubt in my mind that it’s appropriate . . . to take the risk of more

        softness in the economy in the short run than we might ideally like in order to

        capitalize on the anti-inflationary momentum . . . That is much more likely to give

        a more satisfactory economic as well as inflationary outlook over a period of time

        as compared to the opposite scenario of heading off . . . sluggishness or even a

        downturn at the expense of rapidly getting back into the kind of situation we were

        in last fall where we had some retreat on inflationary psychology . . . Then we

        would look forward to another prolonged period of high interest rates and strain

        and face the same dilemmas over and over again.



        The second inflation scare was pivotal because it convinced the Fed to pursue

deliberate disinflation in 1981–82 rather than face costly inflation scares and associated

recessions in the future by failing to bring inflation down. Thus, the Volcker Fed

persisted with extraordinarily tight monetary policy even as the recession deepened. 4 The


4
 Effective M1 grew around 4.6 percentage points slower in 1981 than its average annual growth over the
preceding four years, actually undershooting its target range in 1981 (Broaddus and Goodfriend, 1984).


                                                                                                     10
inflation break came surprisingly fast; inflation fell to 5 percent by the first quarter of

1982. But the Fed persisted with a 9 percent real federal funds rate until the interest rate

on long-term bonds began to fall from its peak of 14 percent in the summer of 1982,

indicating that the Fed had begun to acquire credibility for its disinflation. 5 At that point

the Fed eased monetary policy sharply and the recession ended in November 1982 with

the unemployment rate at 10 percent, inflation at 4 percent, and the interest rate on long-

term bonds near 10 percent.

         In its opening phase, the Volcker disinflation had a recent precedent. Inflation

declined from over 10 percent after the first oil shock to the 5 percent range in 1976,

before it rose again. Perhaps with that recent precedent in mind, the bond market suffered

a third inflation scare which took the 30-year bond rate from 10 percent in mid-1983 to

over 13 percent in the summer of 1984—the bond rate was then only 1 percentage point

below its peak in 1981 even though actual inflation was 6 percentage points lower!

Determined to protect its gains against inflation, the Volcker Fed responded to the third

inflation scare with an aggressive policy tightening that took the federal funds rate to 11

percent in summer 1984. For the first time in its history, the Fed successfully employed

interest rate policy to hold the line on inflation (at 4 percent) without creating a recession.

         The bond rate subsequently fell by 6 percentage points to the 7 percent range by

early 1986, indicating that the Volcker Fed had acquired credibility for 4 percent trend

inflation. Remarkably, in light of its demonstrated determination to act against inflation

earlier in the decade, the Volcker Fed suffered a fourth inflation scare when the 30-year

5
  In Goodfriend and King (2005), my coauthor and I study FOMC transcripts from 1980–83 recently
released to the public and find, surprisingly, that Volcker and other FOMC members regarded long-term
interest rates as indicative of inflation expectations and of the credibility of their disinflationary policy.
Using a modern consensus model of monetary policy, we argue that the real contractionary effects of the
Volcker disinflation were mainly due to its imperfect credibility.


                                                                                                                 11
bond rate rose by 2 percentage points between March and October of 1987. As discussed

below, the reversal of this inflation scare under Alan Greenspan took several years.

       The Volcker disinflation taught several lessons that are among the founding

practical principles of the new consensus on monetary policy. First, the main monetarist

message was vindicated: monetary policy alone—without wage, price, or credit controls,

and without supportive fiscal policy—could reduce inflation permanently at a cost to

output and employment that, while substantial, was far less than in common Keynesian

scenarios. Second, a determined independent central bank can acquire credibility for low

inflation without an institutional mandate from the government, although this “stand

alone” central bank credibility for low inflation may be fragile and periodically tested by

potentially destabilizing inflation scares. Third, a well-timed aggressive interest rate

tightening can reduce inflation expectations and preempt a resurgence of inflation

without creating a recession.

       Alan Greenspan served as Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board from 1987 to

2006. Under Greenspan's leadership, the Fed demonstrated additional practical principles

of monetary policy that have become part of the new consensus. The most important is

that monetary policy could sustain low inflation with low unemployment on average, and

with infrequent, mild recessions. The Greenspan Fed declined to announce an explicit

target for inflation or a particular rule to describe its approach to monetary policy. But its

monetary policy was characterized by a consistent focus on keeping inflation so low as to

be negligible, which can be viewed as a form of implicit inflation targeting.

       The Greenspan Fed's implicit inflation target emerged over time. Near the start of

his term, Greenspan (1990, p. 6) sought to reinforce the Fed’s “stand-alone” credibility




                                                                                            12
for low inflation with 1989 congressional testimony in which he defined the desirable

rate of inflation as one in which “the expected rate of change of the general level of

prices ceases to be a factor in individual and business decision-making.” By the mid-

1990s, this general desire for low inflation became more specific. The Federal Open

Market Committee declined to adopt a formal inflation target when it debated doing so in

January 1995 and again in July 1996. Nevertheless, there was agreement within the

FOMC that core inflation as measured by the personal consumption expenditure deflator

remain near 2 percent over time (Federal Open Market Committee, 1995 and 1996,

especially, pp. 11, 63–4, 66–7, and 72). The FOMC acknowledged a lower bound on its

implicit inflation target in May 2003 when it announced that significant further

disinflation below the prevailing 1 percent rate of inflation would be “unwelcome.”

Indeed, the Greenspan Fed maintained a 1 percent federal funds rate until the deflationary

pressure passed (Broaddus and Goodfriend, 2004, p. 14, see also sections 2 and 4).

       The Federal Reserve under Greenspan was patient in moving toward its implicit

inflation target. In so doing, the Greenspan Fed demonstrated another practical principle

of the new consensus: flexibility in moving inflation back to target after a shock.

Greenspan took over as chairman during the above-mentioned inflation scare of 1987,

when long-term interest rates on bonds were rising. However, the October 1987 stock

market crash prevented the Fed from fighting inflation at the time and instead caused the

Fed to supply liquidity to the banking and financial system in its role as lender of last

resort. As a result, inflation rose to 6 percent by 1990 and the interest rate on long-term

bonds peaked around 9 percent. Tight monetary policy in conjunction with the shock of

the first Gulf War brought on a mild recession in 1990–91, and the inflation rate declined




                                                                                              13
gradually to 3 percent in 1992. The long-term interest rate on bonds fell below 6 percent

by the end of 1993. The loss of credibility for low inflation dating from the 1987 inflation

scare was reversed at some cost in unemployment—the unemployment rate peaked at 7.8

percent in June 1992 following the recession in 1990–91 before falling back to 6.5

percent in early 1994.

       Having nearly achieved price stability, the Greenspan Fed moved aggressively to

defend its gains on inflation when yet another inflation scare between October 1993 and

November 1994 lifted the 30-year bond rate by 2.5 percentage points to 8.2 percent. The

Fed responded with a 3 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate in 1994 that

held inflation at 3 percent with little increase in unemployment. The 1994 tightening, like

Volcker's 1984 tightening, showed once again that aggressive, countercyclical interest

rate policy actions can confront an inflation scare without creating a recession. The

interest rate on long-term bonds fell back to 6 percent by January 1996. Low inflation has

been sustained and inflation expectations have remained anchored in the United States

since then, even though the economy grew in the 4 percent range and the unemployment

rate fell to 4 percent during the long boom in the late 1990s.

       The 1994 tightening brought with it a revolutionary change in how the Federal

Reserve communicates with the public. In February 1994, the Fed began to announce its

current federal funds rate target immediately after each Federal Open Market Committee

Meeting, the first in a series of steps to improve communication. The Fed had managed

interest rates secretly for most of its history (Meltzer, 2003, pp. 13, 112–16; Goodfriend,

2003). In part, this was because the Fed earlier had lacked a coherent monetary policy

strategy, but by 1994 it had developed a set of practical strategic and tactical monetary




                                                                                            14
policy principles based on targeting low inflation. And it was increasingly difficult for the

Fed to obfuscate interest rate policy because academics had begun to discuss Fed

monetary policy in terms of interest rates. Expecting great scrutiny for its first tightening

of monetary policy since 1989, the FOMC decided that it would be counterproductive to

try to hide its current federal funds rate target from the public. In time, the public would

come to see monetary policy through management of the federal funds rate as a

stabilizing force for inflation, employment, and long term interest rates.

       When a recession arrived in 2001, the Greenspan Fed illustrated yet another

principle of the new consensus: that credibility for low inflation strengthens the power of

monetary policy to counteract recessions. The fact that inflation and inflation

expectations were well-anchored enabled the Fed to cut the federal funds rate

aggressively in 2001 from 6.5 to 1.75 percent to cushion the fall in aggregate demand and

employment. The recession from March to November 2001 was short and mild, and

might not have been denoted a recession at all in the absence of the severe contraction in

economic activity caused by the September 2001 attacks.



International Aspects of the Consensus



       Not long after the Federal Reserve under Paul Volcker demonstrated its power

over inflation, other countries began to focus on reducing inflation. For instance, New

Zealand and Canada famously adopted “inflation targets” in 1990 and 1991, respectively,

as a way of bringing inflation down from previously high levels. Sweden and the United




                                                                                           15
Kingdom adopted inflation targets in autumn 1992 after being forced off the European

system of fixed exchange rates (Liederman and Svensson, 1995).

       Emerging market economies began to adopt inflation targeting at the end of the

decade, often following the collapse of fixed exchange rates. (Blejer, Ize, Leone, and

Werlang, 2000) For example, Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines did so in 1998, 2000,

and 2002, respectively, after the East Asian currency crisis of 1997. The International

Monetary Fund accepted an inflation target as the new nominal anchor in its financial

assistance program for Brazil in 1999 after that country's dollar peg collapsed. The IMF

has utilized inflation targets in many of its assistance programs. Inflation targeting is

employed today in over twenty emerging market and industrial countries (Batini and

Laxton, 2006).

       Most countries moved to target low inflation in an explicit, formal way. Inflation

targeting regimes, such as those mentioned above, differ in important respects but most

involve the following characteristics: 1) the announcement of an explicit numerical

inflation target by the central bank, 2) patience in reversing an inflationary shock to

minimize adverse effects on employment, 3) transparency of central bank concerns and

intentions about the economy and interest rate policy, and 4) formal governance

mechanisms designed to hold a central bank accountable for inflation outcomes

(Bernanke and Mishkin, 1997; King, 2005; Svensson, forthcoming).

       Perhaps the most prominent and economically important example of a central

bank that relies on explicit, institutional support to sustain low inflation is the Eurosystem,

which includes both the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the

countries that have adopted the euro. It was launched in January 1999 to manage




                                                                                            16
monetary policy in the euro area, originally composed of 11 European countries. The

Eurosystem does not consider its policy regime as pure inflation targeting, in part because

it also monitors money growth rates in the implementation of monetary policy. Yet, the

Eurosystem operates under the guidance of the Maastricht Treaty of 1992, which

mandates that “the primary objective of the European System of Central Banks shall be to

maintain price stability.” The Eurosystem defines price stability as a rate of inflation

below 2 percent but aims to maintain inflation close to 2 percent over the medium term

(Issing, Gaspar, Angeloni, and Tristani, 2001). The Eurosystem inherited its priority for

price stability and an operational role for money in part from the German Bundesbank,

which had sustained relatively low inflation consistently with the help of monetary

targets after the collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system in the early

1970s. In fact, the Bank of Japan, the Bundesbank, and the Swiss National Bank all

utilized monetary targets successfully against inflation in the 1970s, helping to encourage

the Volcker Fed to do so a few years later (Rich, 1997; Suzuki, 1985; von Hagen, 1999).

        Institutional support is designed to anchor inflation expectations at the inflation

target to secure the credibility of a central bank’s commitment to low inflation

(Gurkaynak, Levin, and Swanson, 2006). Credibility is widely regarded around the world

as the key to effective monetary policy because it guards against inflation scares and

improves the flexibility for monetary policy to stabilize employment over the business

cycle. The spread of explicit or implicit inflation targeting has demonstrated its virtues.

The new working consensus on monetary policy has helped to reduce the volatility of

both inflation and output. In any case, there is little alternative to inflation targeting: gold

and monetary targets have lost favor as nominal anchors for monetary policy. Obstfeld




                                                                                              17
and Rogoff (1995) emphasize that a fixed exchange rate is no longer a viable nominal

anchor in an era of increasingly mobile international capital.

        Yet the shift to inflation targeting has not been free of challenges. A central bank

could follow mechanically the rules of the gold standard or a money growth rule with

relatively little knowledge of the economy. Under a fixed exchange rate, a central bank

simply follows the interest rate policy of a trading partner. In contrast, for inflation

targeting to work well, countries must build credible domestic institutions. Moreover,

central banks must pursue an activist interest rate policy to sustain low inflation.

Structural monetary models based on the modern theoretical consensus discussed below

play an increasingly important role in this. 6 In fact, a robust international exchange of

ideas, practices, and experiences has grown up to disseminate the required knowledge.



Academic Advances Contributing to the Consensus



        Academic advances supported the evolving consensus in monetary policy in two

ways. Early academic work from the 1970s helped to encourage the Volcker Fed to act

against inflation. Then, academic economists built on earlier work in the light of evidence

generated by the Volcker disinflation to forge the components of what would become the

consensus theoretical framework for monetary policy analysis in the 1990s. The story is

one of mutually reinforcing advances in theory and practice.

        The monetarist and rational expectations economists of the 1970s were influential

not because they directly convinced Fed officials and others, but rather because they


6
 The Federal Reserve Board’s FRB/US model is an example. Dynamic-stochastic general equilibrium
monetary models are employed widely for policy analysis at central banks around the world.


                                                                                                  18
offered a way out of the inflationary chaos of the 1970s by building a plausible case that

inflation could be tamed by monetary policy alone. As a variety of nonmonetary options

for controlling inflation failed—including wage and price controls, credit controls, and

fiscal policy—the monetarist option looked increasingly attractive. Thus, when the crisis

came, the Volcker Fed implemented monetarist advice by targeting money growth more

tightly in October 1979 and especially in 1981 to deliberately disinflate the economy

when it judged continuing inflationary policy to involve higher long-term costs.

       The drama and ultimate success of the Volcker era at the Federal Reserve

stimulated ground-breaking academic advances in the analysis of money and business

cycles. There were important advances in rational expectations econometrics, the analysis

of real business cycles, the modeling of interest rate policy, and the modeling of the

dynamic relationship between inflation and unemployment. Much of this progress was

made possible by the increasing use of computers in dynamic-stochastic macroeconomic

analysis. Although many of these advances had little practical impact at the time, they

subsequently became the building blocks of the consensus model that emerged in the mid

to late 1990s.

       The foundations of the current consensus theory of monetary policy already

reflected a degree of convergence in 1980. As reviewed by Tobin (1980), these

foundations included the ideas that prices are marked up over costs (mainly wages); that

price trends depend on expectations; that there is a natural rate of unemployment (where

output equals its potential) at which wage and price setters perpetuate the going rate of

inflation; that inflation accelerates when output is expected to exceed potential; and that

inflation decelerates when output is expected to fall short of potential. Nevertheless, the




                                                                                            19
unresolved problems were crucial ones involving how to model 1) the price and wage-

setting process, 2) expectations, 3) the transmission of monetary policy, and 4) real

factors influencing business cycles, all in a dynamic way suitable for analyzing monetary

stabilization policy. These problems were addressed one by one.

         In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Stanley Fischer, John Taylor, and Guillermo

Calvo pioneered models of dynamic forward-looking wage and price setting. The model

of staggered sticky price setting most widely used in today’s consensus models of

monetary policy is a direct descendant of the one presented in Calvo (1983). 7

         In his influential paper, Lucas (1976) persuaded monetary economists that it is

critically important in modeling monetary policy to let expectations rationally reflect the

way that monetary policy is imagined to be conducted. One key question was how to

incorporate rational expectations so as to estimate and simulate a macroeconomic model

suitable for policy evaluation and optimization. Taylor (1979) showed the way. In so

doing, he quantified econometrically the inefficiency of go-stop monetary policy in terms

of the excess volatility of output and inflation relative to his estimated efficient policy

frontier.

         The transmission of monetary policy was controversial in the late 1970s. Taylor’s

(1979) model assumed that a central bank used a monetary aggregate as its policy

instrument, which was plausible given the Volcker Fed’s focus on the monetary

aggregates. Yet ordinarily, central banks implemented monetary policy with an adjustable

short-term interest rate—the federal funds rate in the Federal Reserve’s case. Many

observers, monetarists prominent among them, believed that the use of interest rate policy


7
 Walsh (1998, pp. 218–20) provides an accessible derivation of the discrete-time “inflation equation”
implied by Calvo's model that relates current inflation to expectations of future inflation and current output.


                                                                                                            20
in practice was in large part responsible for rising and volatile inflation and inflation

expectations. Sargent and Wallace (1975) argued that the price level was indeterminate

within a rational expectations macro model if the central bank employed a short-term

interest rate as its policy instrument.

        Bennett McCallum (1981) opened the door to the modern analysis of interest rate

rules by showing that a short-term interest rate could be used as the monetary policy

instrument if it is part of a rule which provides a nominal anchor, so that the price level is

determinate. McCallum’s paper would lead eventually to the discussion and analysis of

practical monetary policy in terms of interest rates in papers like Goodfriend (1991,

1993) and Taylor (1993). In my papers, I presented some stylized facts about interest rate

policy—that the Federal Reserve ordinarily prefers a “continuity of the short rate” and

that federal funds rate target changes are ordinarily “highly persistent and seldom quickly

reversed” to exert maximum leverage over longer-term rates (Woodford, 2003b). My

1993 paper documented aggressive federal funds rate actions in response to what I

identified as "inflation scares." The famous Taylor Rule described how the Federal

Reserve moved the real short-term interest rate in response to the output gap and the gap

between actual and targeted inflation. The Taylor Rule became the most common way to

model monetary policy (Orphanides, 2007). 8 One reason the Federal Reserve began to

talk openly about interest rate policy in 1994 was that academic economists had begun to

do so. Indeed, thinking about monetary policy as interest rate policy is one of the

hallmarks of the new consensus that has made possible increasingly fruitful interaction

between academics and central bankers.


8
 Previously, several writers including McCallum (1988) had discussed the merits of operational activist
policy rules using the monetary base as the policy instrument.


                                                                                                          21
       The monetary chaos of the 1970s persuaded academic macroeconomists led by

Kydland and Prescott (1982) and King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988) to ignore money and

monetary policy altogether in order to focus on purely real factors influencing business

cycles such as productivity shocks, fiscal policy shocks, and international terms-of-trade

shocks. These papers initiated a huge, highly productive literature that revolutionized the

way that academics do macroeconomics and demonstrated, among other findings, that

productivity shocks born of the process of economic growth cause “real business cycles”

in models with no role for money (Prescott, 2006). Not only were such fluctuations in

output and employment to be expected, but they were also efficient responses to

fluctuations in productivity growth.

       Real business cycles were studied initially in models with perfectly competitive,

flexible prices and wages. Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987) provided an important bridge

from earlier work to the modern monetary policy consensus by analyzing what can be

interpreted as an imperfectly competitive real business cycle model with sticky nominal

prices and wages. Rotemberg and Woodford (1991, 1992) extended the bridge by

exploring endogenous countercyclical markups for real business cycles in a fully

dynamic context.

       Much of the disarray reflected earlier in disputes between monetarist and

Keynesian economists has been resolved in the consensus benchmark model of monetary

policy referred to as the New Neoclassical Synthesis or New Keynesian model, the two

names reflecting the two directions from which the convergence came. The consensus

model incorporates classical features such as intertemporal optimization, rational

expectations, and a real business cycle core, together with Keynesian features such as




                                                                                           22
monopolistically competitive firms, staggered sticky nominal price setting, and a central

role for monetary stabilization policy. The consensus model and its implications for

monetary policy were presented initially in Goodfriend and King (1997) and in Clarida,

Galí, and Gertler (1999). 9 Woodford (2003a) provides an extensive theoretical treatment,

and my 2002 paper provides an introductory exposition of the consensus model.

        In an intellectual irony, real business cycle models that were originally developed

to study aggregate fluctuations independently of money and monetary policy have

become the benchmark against which to judge optimal monetary policy in models with

sticky prices. The idea is that optimal monetary policy should make the New Neoclassical

Synthesis model perform as if prices were perfectly flexible, which is to say that optimal

monetary policy should make the economy perform like its imperfectly competitive real

business cycle core (Goodfriend and King 1997, 2001). Below, we will see how this

important theoretical principle reinforces the priority given to price stability in practice.

        Academic thinking also played a role in the transition from central bank secrecy

to transparency during the past quarter century. From the perspective of monetary

economics, a central bank had little need to communicate with the public under a gold

standard, as long as it faithfully maintained a fixed currency price of gold. Central banks

remained secretive after the gold standard collapsed, in part out of habit and in part

because they lacked a coherent monetary policy strategy within which they could

communicate productively. Today, central banks have an incentive to utilize transparency




9
 Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) provide evidence consistent with the consensus model. Brayton, Levin,
Tryon, and Williams (1997), King and Wolman (1996), and Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) contain early
examples of the consensus model. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), and Smets and Wouters
(2007) are recent examples of work that embodies elements of the new consensus.


                                                                                                 23
and communications to facilitate an understanding of their interest rate policy actions to

strengthen the credibility of their commitment to low inflation.

       A large academic literature has explored the welfare effects of central bank

information policy and generally found that transparency dominates secrecy, especially

when a central bank operates under a credible commitment to pursue low inflation

(Goodfriend,1986). Blinder (1996) emphasized that in a democracy, a central bank

should be fully accountable for the policies it pursues and that transparency is necessary

for accountability. For these and related reasons, Svensson (forthcoming) and Woodford

(2005) emphasize that a high degree of transparency is central to the effective functioning

of formal “inflation targeting” regimes widely employed around the world today.



How Consensus Theory Supports Monetary Policy Practice



       The consensus model of monetary policy reinforces four main advances in

monetary policy arrived at in practice: the priority for price stability; the targeting of core

rather than headline inflation; the importance of credibility for low inflation; and

preemptive interest rate policy supported by transparent objectives and procedures. The

theoretical support for these four features of monetary policy practice is explained below.



The Priority for Low Inflation

       The consensus theory of monetary policy has at its core, monopolistically

competitive firms that set product prices at a markup over the marginal cost of production

(which depends on productivity and the cost of labor and materials). Because price




                                                                                            24
adjustment is costly, firms consider changing their product prices only if demand and cost

conditions threaten to compress or elevate actual markups significantly and persistently

relative to flexible-price profit-maximizing levels. An excessively high markup yields too

much market share to competitors, and a markup that is too low fails to exploit market

power enough to maximize profits.

       Firms consider raising product prices if marginal cost moves above trend because

labor productivity (output per hour) falls below its trend, or if strong aggregate demand

increases the intensity of resource utilization and thereby causes wage or materials costs

to rise relative to trend. Conversely, firms consider cutting product prices if labor

productivity rises relative to trend, or if weak aggregate demand relaxes resource

utilization and thereby causes wage or materials costs to fall relative to trend. To sustain

low inflation, monetary policy must manage aggregate demand taking aggregate

productivity into account, so that marginal cost rises at the targeted rate of inflation—

then firms will raise product prices at the targeted rate of inflation because they are

confident that doing so will keep actual markups at flexible-price profit-maximizing

markups.

       According to this “inflation targeting principle,” monetary policy that targets

inflation makes the best contribution to the stabilization of output. The reasoning is this:

1) an economy with stable inflation is one in which firms maintain their profit-

maximizing markups on average; 2) an economy in which monetary policy sustains

profit-maximizing markups operates as if firms sustained profit-maximizing markups

themselves by adjusting their own product prices flexibly and continuously; 3) targeting

inflation thus makes actual output conform to potential output, where potential output is




                                                                                            25
defined as the fluctuating level of aggregate output that would be determined by supply

factors in the flexible-price, imperfectly competitive real business cycle core of the

economy.

         This line of argument implies that inflation targeting yields the best cyclical

behavior of employment and output that monetary policy alone can deliver. Thus, and

here is a revolutionary point delivered by the modern theoretical consensus—even those

who care mainly about stabilization of the real economy can support a low-inflation

objective for monetary policy. This point has two corollaries. First, monetary policy

should not try to counteract fluctuations in employment and output due to real business

cycles. Second, as an operational matter, a central bank can make the economy conform

to its underlying real business cycle core by stabilizing inflation. The above reasoning

suggests that if nominal wages were sufficiently flexible, there would be little if any

short-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment because monetary policy could

stabilize marginal cost fully by acting on wages through its influence on aggregate

demand for goods and labor. On the other hand, monetary policy might face a trade-off in

the presence of temporary wage rigidity, especially if a large negative productivity shock

required an outright fall in wages (as opposed to slower wage growth) to bring marginal

cost back down. 10 That said, ordinarily the targeted rate of inflation should be sustainable

with positive wage growth since nominal wages grow on average at the sum of inflation

and productivity growth.




10
   In the context of a long-term employment relationship, a firm has the scope and incentive to utilize its
workers efficiently, irrespective of the infrequent adjustment of nominal wages. To the extent that this is
the case, an economy with temporarily rigid nominal wages would behave as if nominal wages were fully
flexible (Goodfriend and King, 2001, pp. 88–91).


                                                                                                          26
        The above argument says nothing about why low inflation should be targeted, as

opposed to steady inflation, but other features of the monetary economy bear on this

point. First, inflation is inefficient because it is a tax on the use of money that causes the

socially inefficient substitution of “shopping time” and “costly credit” for money

balances in managing transactions. Second, given that price changes are not “indexed” to

trend inflation when it is low, zero inflation is called for to minimize relative price

distortions that misallocate output across goods due to staggered price adjustment among

firms. Third, the nonindexation of the tax system causes inflation to produce additional

distortions (Feldstein, 1997). Fourth, on the other hand, the fact that nominal interest

rates cannot fall below zero has the potential to create problems for monetary policy that

call for a little inflation to put a small inflation expectations premium in nominal interest

rates. Taken together, these considerations argue for an inflation objective in the 1 to 2

percent range found in practice.



Targeting Core Rather than Headline Inflation

        Central banks such as the Federal Reserve choose implicitly or explicitly to target

a core index of inflation that excludes volatile prices of such goods as food and oil.

Consensus theory explains why targeting core rather than headline inflation makes sense.

        Imagine that the economy experienced an inflationary shock to highly flexible

prices like food or oil. If the goal was to stabilize a headline (overall) index of inflation

that included these prices, then monetary policy would depress aggregate demand in the

sticky-price sector and relax resource utilization there to depress wages and other costs,

elevate markups, and induce monopolistically competitive firms to cut their prices.




                                                                                                27
According to the consensus theory, that would be unnecessarily inefficient. As much as

possible, monetary policy should make the economy operate as if all prices were fully

flexible. That principle is achieved best by targeting core rather than headline inflation,

and letting the economy adjust to changes in the relative prices of goods like food and oil,

while core inflation and employment are both stabilized. Moreover, core inflation would

be a more stable nominal anchor than overall inflation, and it would serve as a better

anchor for inflation expectations.



The Importance of Credibility for Low Inflation

       The consensus theory of monetary policy confirms in a number of ways the

importance that central bankers attach to credibility for low inflation. First, costly price-

setting implies that firms care about expected future wage and materials costs in setting

current prices. When an inflation-targeting regime is fully credible, firms are confident

that inevitable departures of actual markups from flexible-price profit-maximizing

markups will be temporary because monetary policy is expected to make them so. In

effect, credibility for low core inflation makes beliefs of future costs in the sticky-price

sector invariant to current shocks so that beliefs themselves anchor current pricing

decisions to the targeted core rate of inflation.

       Second, the absence of credibility exposes the economy to “inflation scares” by

subjecting expectations of future marginal cost to shocks and beliefs beyond a central

bank's control. Inflation scares create a dilemma for monetary policy. To prevent firms

from passing higher inflation expectations through to actual inflation, a central bank must

engineer an offsetting deflationary force by contracting demand relative to potential




                                                                                               28
output, to weaken labor markets, depress wages, and elevate markups. Thus, we see why

go-stop policy increased the volatility of both unemployment and inflation and why it is

critical for monetary policy to preempt rising inflation. In the “go” phase of the policy

cycle, the central bank was reluctant to act against inflation until rising inflation became

the predominant public concern. But by then, pricing decisions embodied higher inflation

expectations, which could only be reversed with contractionary interest rate policy.

        Third, credibility must anchor inflation expectations so that a central bank can

manipulate real interest rates reliably with a nominal interest rate policy instrument to

manage aggregate demand. Furthermore, real interest rates govern only the price of

current relative to future spending. Expected future income prospects must be anchored

independently of monetary policy to give interest rate policy the leverage to manage

current spending. Credibility does this by anchoring expected future markups to flexible-

price profit-maximizing markups, thereby anchoring expected future income prospects to

productivity growth and other real business cycle factors independent of monetary policy.

For all these reasons, credibility for targeted inflation is absolutely essential for effective

interest rate policy. That is why it is a good idea for central banks to have strong

institutional support to reinforce the credibility of their commitment to low inflation.



Preemptive Interest Rate Policy Supported by Transparent Objectives and

Procedures

        Consensus theory says that to stabilize inflation, interest rate policy must shadow

the fluctuating “real natural rate of interest” that keeps actual markups at flexible-price

profit-maximizing markups and makes aggregate demand support real business cycles.




                                                                                              29
One reason why inflation targeting is technically demanding is that the natural rate of

interest is not directly observable in markets and must be tracked with the help of a

structural theoretical monetary model. Saying that interest rate policy should track the

fluctuating natural rate of interest is to support the idea arrived at in practice that interest

rate policy should preempt rising inflation, which it can do without increasing

unemployment. From this perspective, we can understand the positive correlation

observed in the go-stop period between higher interest rates and higher unemployment as

an artifact of the misunderstood and mismanaged interest rate policy of the time, rather

than as a structural feature of monetary policy.

        Short-term interest rate policy, like moving the federal funds rate, must exert its

leverage over current aggregate demand through its leverage over longer-term interest

rates. According to the expectations theory of the term structure, longer-term interest

rates move with an average of expected future short rates. Thus, to predict accurately the

effect of an interest rate policy action on longer-term interest rates and aggregate demand,

a central bank must create an understanding in markets as to what a given short-term

interest rate action implies for future short rates. For this task, communication is central

to effective interest rate policy. Rational expectations reasoning teaches that ad hoc

announcements can reinforce but not substitute for a genuine mutual understanding

between markets and the central bank created on the basis of an explicit, credible low-

inflation objective supported by a policy rule—a systematic articulation of how a central

bank intends to move its short-term interest rate instrument in response to

macroeconomic news to achieve that objective. Hence, the consensus model of monetary

policy supports the worldwide drive to improve transparency in monetary policy practice.




                                                                                              30
Conclusion



       The working consensus on monetary policy still leaves plenty of unfinished

business and scope for controversy. For instance, there is little consensus agreement

about the nature of Japan’s deflationary monetary policy problems in the 1990s. The

potential for deflation and the capacity of monetary policy to act against deflation—given

that nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero—are important matters still in dispute

(Svensson, 2003). A closely related matter is that the benchmark consensus model of

interest rate policy has no role for “money and banking” and only a single interest rate.

There is much to learn about how monetary policy is transmitted from the interbank

interest rate policy instrument through the banking sector to various other interest rates

and rates of return in the economy and on to employment and output (Goodfriend and

McCallum, 2007). Another controversial matter involves extreme price fluctuations in

markets for credit, equity, foreign exchange, and other assets. The benchmark consensus

model says that asset prices should be allowed to adjust flexibly relative to targeted

inflation. Yet the nature of extreme asset price fluctuations and the scope for monetary

policy to deal with them are of great interest to monetary policy theorists and

policymakers alike (Hunter, Kaufman, and Pomerleano, 2003).

       The quantitative significance of sticky nominal price and wage adjustments for

monetary policy are hotly debated. Extensive international evidence on sticky prices and

wages is surveyed in this journal in Dhyne et al. (2006) and in Dickens et al. (2007). On

one side, Golosov and Lucas (2007) argue that since monetary policy shocks cannot

induce large or persistent real responses in their calibrated model of costly price




                                                                                             31
adjustment, sticky prices are relatively unimportant. On the other side, Blanchard and

Galí (2007) argue that the rigidity of real wages in the real business cycle core of the

economy implies a quantitatively significant short-run trade-off between unemployment

and inflation.

       Among other things, no fully satisfactory theory exists to explain the loss or

acquisition of credibility for low inflation or, similarly, how inflation scares occur, and

the sensitivity of such phenomena to fiscal policy concerns. Models typically assume that

a central bank follows a fully credible policy rule or that policy is purely discretionary,

although models with learning are a prominent exception (Orphanides and Williams,

2005). There is plenty of opportunity to improve the statistical indicators that must guide

monetary policy, especially real-time estimates and indicators of the “natural rate of

interest.” Finally, there is plenty of room for debate about the design of institutional

mechanisms to support credibility for targeted inflation.

       The worldwide progress in monetary policy is a great achievement that, especially

when viewed from the perspective of 30 years ago, is a remarkable success story. Today,

academics, central bank economists, and policymakers around the world work together

on monetary policy as never before (McCallum, 2002). The worldwide working

consensus provides a foundation for future work because it was forged out of hard

practical lessons from diverse national experiences over decades, and because it provides

common ground upon which academics and central bankers can work to improve

monetary policy in the future.




                                                                                              32
References

       Batini, Nicoletta, and Douglas Laxton. 2006. “Under What Conditions Can

Inflation Targeting Be Adopted? The Experience of Emerging Markets.” Central Bank of

Chile Working Paper 406. (Forthcoming in K. Schmidt-Hebbel and F. Mishkin, eds.,

Monetary Policy Under Inflation Targeting. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.)

        Batini, Nicoletta, and Edward Nelson. 2005. “The U.K.'s Rocky Road to

Stability.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2005-020.

http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=762565.

       Bernanke, Ben S. 2004. “The Great Moderation.” Remarks made at the meeting

of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, DC. February 20.

       Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1997. “Inflation Targeting: A New

Framework for Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2): 97–116.

       Blanchard, Olivier, and Jordi Galí. 2007. “Real Wage Rigidities and the New

Keynesian Model.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 39(s1): 35–65

       Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 1987. “Monopolistic

Competition and the Effects of Aggregate Demand.” American Economic Review, 77(4):

647–66.

       Blejer, Mario, Alain Ize, Alfredo M. Leone, and Sergio Werlang, eds. 2000.

Inflation Targeting in Practice: Strategic and Operational Issues and Application to

Emerging Market Economies. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

       Blinder, Alan S. 1996. “Central Banking in a Democracy.” Federal Reserve Bank

of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 82(4): 1–14.




                                                                                       33
       Brayton, Flint, Andrew Levin, Ralph Tryon, and John Williams. 1997. “The

Evolution of Macro Models at the Federal Reserve Board.” Carnegie-Rochester

Conference Series on Public Policy, 47(December): 43–81.

       Broaddus, J. Alfred, and Marvin Goodfriend. 1984. “Base Drift and the

Longer Run Growth of M1: Experience from a Decade of Monetary Targeting.” Federal

Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, 70(6): 3–14.

       Broaddus, J. Alfred, and Marvin Goodfriend. 2004. “Sustaining Price

Stability.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 90(3): 3–20.

       Burns, Arthur F. 1979. The Anguish of Central Banking. Per Jacobsson Lecture,

Sava Centar Complex, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, September 30, 1979. Belgrade: Per

Jacobsson Foundation.

       Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing

Framework.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(3): 383–98.

       Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005.

“Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of

Political Economy, 113(1): 1–45.

       Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of

Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4):

1661–1707.

       Dhyne, Emmanuel, et al. 2006. “Price Changes in the Euro Area and the United

States: Some Facts from Individual Consumer Price Data.” Journal of Economic

Perspectives, 20(2): 171–92.




                                                                                    34
       Dickens, William T., Lorenz Goette, Erica L. Groshen, Steinar Holden,

Julian Messina, Mark E. Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie E. Ward. 2007.

“How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the International Wage Flexibility Project.”

Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 195–214.

       Federal Open Market Committee. 1995. Minutes of the Federal Open Market

Committee Meeting of January 31–February 1, 1995.

http://www.federalreserve.gov/fomc/minutes/1995/19950201min.htm.

       Federal Open Market Committee. 1996. Minutes of the Federal Open Market

Committee Meeting of July 2–3, 1996.

http://www.federalreserve.gov/fomc/minutes/19960702.htm.

        Federal Open Market Committee. 1981. Transcript of the Federal Open

Market Committee Meeting, July 6–7, 1981.

http://www.federalreserve.gov/fomc/transcripts/1981/810707meeting.pdf

       Feldstein, Martin. 1997. “The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation

to Price Stability.” In Monetary Policy and Inflation, ed. Christina Romer and David

Romer, 123–56. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Friedman, Milton. 1964. “Statement and Testimony (March 3, 1964).” Statement

before the U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Banking and

Currency. In The Federal Reserve System after Fifty Years, ed. U.S. Congress, House of

Representatives, Committee on Banking and Currency, 1133–78. Washington, DC: U.S.

Government Printing Office.

       Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips

Curves.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(2): 171–99.




                                                                                       35
        Goodfriend, Marvin. 1986. “Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking.”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 17(1): 63–92.

        Goodfriend, Marvin. 1991. “Interest Rates and the Conduct of Monetary

Policy.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, ed. Allan H. Meltzer

and Charles I. Plosser, 34(Spring): 7–30.

        Goodfriend, Marvin. 1993. “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare

Problem: 1979–1992.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 79(1):

1–24.

        Goodfriend, Marvin. 2002. “Monetary Policy in the New Neoclassical

Synthesis: A Primer.” International Finance, 5(2): 165–91. (Reprinted in 2004 in Federal

Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 90(3): 21–45.)

        Goodfriend, Marvin. 2003. A book review of Allan H. Meltzer’s “A History of

the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913–1951." Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis The

Region, December, pp, 82–89.

        Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 1997. “The New Neoclassical

Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, ed.

Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, 231–83. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

        Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 2001. “The Case for Price Stability.”

In The First ECB Central Banking Conference: Why Price Stability? ed. Alicia G.

Herrero, Vitor Gaspar, Lex Hoogduin, Julian Morgan, and Bernhard Winkler, 53–94.

Frankfurt am Main: European Central Bank.

        Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 2005. “The Incredible Volcker

Disinflation.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(5): 981–1015.




                                                                                       36
         Goodfriend, Marvin, and Bennett T. McCallum. 2007. “Banking and Interest

Rates in Monetary Policy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration.” Journal of Monetary

Economics, 54(5): 1480-1507.

         Greenspan, Alan. 1990. Statement before the U.S. Congress, House of

Representatives, Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy of the Committee on

Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs. Hearing, 101 Congress 1st Session. In Zero

Inflation. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

         Greenspan, Alan. 2003. Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing,

and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on July 16, 2003. In Federal Reserve Board's

Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. Washington, DC: Federal Reserve

Board.

         Gurkaynak, Refet S., Andrew T. Levin, and Eric T. Swanson. 2006. “Does

Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term

Bond Yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,

Working Paper 2006-09.

http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2006/wp06-09bk.pdf.

         Hetzel, Robert L. 1998. “Arthur Burns and Inflation.” Federal Reserve Bank of

Richmond Economic Quarterly, 84(1): 21–44.

         Hunter, William C., George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano. 2003.

Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International

Policies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                                                                      37
       Issing, Otmar, Vitor Gaspar, Ignazio Angeloni, and Oreste Tristani. 2001.

Monetary Policy in the Euro Area: Strategy and Decision Making at the European

Central Bank. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

       King, Mervyn. 2005. “What Has Inflation Targeting Achieved?” In The Inflation

Targeting Debate, ed. Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, 11–16. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

       King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo. 1988. “Production,

Growth and Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model.” Journal of Monetary

Economics, 21(2–3): 195–232.

       King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman. 1996. “Inflation Targeting in a St.

Louis Model of the 21st Century.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 78(3): 83–

107.

       Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. 1977. “Rules Rather Than

Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans.” Journal of Political Economy, 85(3):

473–91.

       Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and

Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica, 50(6): 1345–70.

       Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E. O. Svensson, ed. 1995. Inflation Targets.

London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.

       Lindsey, David E., Athanasios Orphanides, and Robert H. Rasche. 2005.

“The Reform of October 1979: How It Happened and Why.” In Conference on

Reflections on Monetary Policy 25 Years after October 1979. Federal Reserve Bank of St.

Louis Review, 87(2(Part 2)): 187–236




                                                                                        38
       Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.”

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, ed. Karl Brunner and Allan H.

Meltzer, vol.1, pp. 19–46.

       Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Thomas J. Sargent, ed. 1981. Rational Expectations

and Econometric Practice. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

       McCallum, Bennett T. 1981. “Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate

Policy Rule and Rational Expectations.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 8(3): 319–29.

       McCallum, Bennett T. 1988. “Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary

Policy.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, ed. Karl Brunner and

Allan H. Meltzer, vol. 29, pp. 173–203.

       McCallum, Bennett T. 2002. “Recent Developments in Monetary Policy

Analysis: The Roles of Theory and Evidence.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

Economic Quarterly, 88(1): 67–96.

       Meltzer, Allan H. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve. Vol 1, 1913–1951.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Meltzer, Allan H. Forthcoming. A History of the Federal Reserve. Vol. 2.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange

Rates.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4): 73–96.

       Okun, Arthur M. 1978. “Efficient Disinflationary Policies.” American Economic

Review, 68(2): 348–52.

       Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003. “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation.”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(3): 633–63.




                                                                                       39
       Orphanides, Athanasios. Forthcoming. “Taylor Rules.” In The New Palgrave: A

Dictionary of Economics, 2nd ed. Edited by Larry Blum and Steven Durlauf,

       Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2005. “Inflation Scares and

Forecast-Based Monetary Policy." Review of Economic Dynamics 8(April): 498-527.

       Prescott, Edward C. 2006. “Nobel Lecture: The Transformation of

Macroeconomic Policy and Research.” Journal of Political Economy, 114(2): 203–35.

       Rich, Georg. 1997. “Monetary Targets as a Policy Rule: Lessons from the Swiss

Experience.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 39(1): 113–41.

       Rogoff, Kenneth. 2003. “Globalization and Global Disinflation.” In Monetary

Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, ed. Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

       Rogoff, Kenneth. Forthcoming. “The Impact of Globalization on Monetary

Policy.” In The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, ed. Federal

Reserve Board of Kansas City. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

       Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1989. “Does Monetary Policy

Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz.” In NBER Macroeconomics

Annual 1989, ed. Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, 121–70. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press.

       Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1991. “Markups and the Business

Cycle.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1991, ed. Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley

Fischer, 63–129. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                                                                     40
       Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1992. “Oligopolistic Pricing and

the Effects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity.” Journal of Political Economy,

100(6): 1153–1207.

       Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1997. “An Optimization-Based

Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” In NBER

Macroeconomics Annual 1997, ed. Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, 297–346.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

       Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1999. “The Cyclical Behavior of

Prices and Costs.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 1B. Edited by John B. Taylor

and Michael Woodford, 1051–1135. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.

       Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace. 1975. “‘Rational’ Expectations, the

Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule.” Journal of

Political Economy, 83(2): 241–54.

       Schreft, Stacy L. 1990. “Credit Controls: 1980.” Federal Reserve Bank of

Richmond Economic Review, 76(6): 25–55.

       Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters. 2007. "Shocks and Frictions in US Business

Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach." American Economic Review 97(3): 586-606.

       Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2003. “Has the Business Cycle

Changed and Why?” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002, ed. Mark Gertler and

Kenneth Rogoff, 159–218. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

       Suzuki, Yoshio. 1985. “Japan's Monetary Policy over the Past 10 Years.” Bank

of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, 3(2): 1–9.




                                                                                      41
       Svensson, Lars E. O. 2003. “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The

Foolproof Way and Others.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(4): 145–66.

       Svensson, Lars E. O. Forthcoming. “Inflation Targeting.” In The New Palgrave:

A Dictionary of Economics, 2nd ed. Edited by. L. Blum and S. Durlauf.

       Taylor, John B. 1979. “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with

Rational Expectations.” Econometrica, 47(5): 1267–86.

       Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-

Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, ed. Allan H. Meltzer and Charles I.

Plosser, 39(December): 195–214.

       Tobin, James. 1980. “Stabilization Policy Ten Years After.” Brookings Papers

on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp 19–71.

       Volcker, Paul A. 1978. “The Role of Monetary Targets in an Age of Inflation.”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 4(2): 329–39.

       von Hagen, Jurgen. 1999. “Money Growth Targeting by the Bundesbank.”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 43(3): 681–701.

       Walsh, Carl E. 1998. Monetary Theory and Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

       Woodford, Michael. 2003a. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of

Monetary Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

       Woodford, Michael. 2003b. “Optimal Interest-Rate Smoothing.” Review of

Economic Studies, 70(4): 861–86.

       Woodford, Michael. 2005. “Central Bank Communication and Policy

Effectiveness.” In The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, ed. Federal Reserve Bank

of Kansas City, 399–474. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.




                                                                                       42
