                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  FACTOR ENDOWMENTS AND THE RETURNS TO SKILL:
                      NEW EVIDENCE FROM THE AMERICAN PAST

                                           Joseph Kaboski
                                           Trevon D. Logan

                                         Working Paper 13589
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13589


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




This paper previously circulated under the title "The Returns to Education in the Early Twentieth Century:
New Historical Evidence." We thank Audrey Light, Peter Meyer, Rick Steckel, Robert Whaples, and
participants at the NBER Summer Institute, 2006 Economic History Association Annual Meetings,
and the 2006 Social Science History Association Annual Meetings for comments on a previous version
of this paper. We thank Joshua Cepluch, Sharmistha Dey, and Britney Williams for excellent research
assistance. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the OSU Economics fund for Junior
Faculty Research. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Joseph Kaboski and Trevon D. Logan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Factor Endowments and the Returns to Skill: New Evidence from the American Past
Joseph Kaboski and Trevon D. Logan
NBER Working Paper No. 13589
November 2007
JEL No. I2,J2,J3,N3

                                              ABSTRACT

The existing literature on skill-biased technical change has not considered how the technological endowment
itself plays a role in the returns to skill. This paper constructs a simple model of skill biased technical
change which highlights the role that resource endowments play in the returns to education. The model
predicts variation in returns to education with skill biased technological change if there is significant
heterogeneity in resource endowments before the technological change. Using a variety of historical
sources, we document the heterogeneous technology levels by region in the American past. We then
estimate the returns to education of high school teachers in the early twentieth century using a new
data source. a report from the U.S. Commissioner of Education in 1909. Overall, we find significant
regional variation in the returns to education that match differences in resource endowments, with
large (within-occupation) returns for the Midwest and Southwest (7%), but much lower returns in
the South (3%) and West (0.5%). We also show that our results are generalizable to returns to education
in the United States and that returns to education for teachers tracked quite closely with the overall
returns to education from 1940 onward.


Joseph Kaboski
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
kaboski.1@osu.edu

Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu
1    Introduction


Research on skill biased technical change (SBTC) has given rise to a new literature linking educa-

tion, technology, and economic growth. The consensus now is that high rates of return to education

at the beginning of the century signaled the end of the period of early industrialization where raw

materials and unskilled labor substituted easily for skilled labor (Goldin and Katz 1998). With

the use of new large-scale processing technologies and the increasing electri…cation of the industrial

workplace, the returns to education increased dramatically in the early years of the last century.

Goldin and Katz (1999, 2000) used the Iowa state Census of 1915 to sketch out the returns to

education in the early twentieth century, and a new view of U-shaped returns to education over the

twentieth century has emerged. Returns declined with the advent of the high school movement in

the 1920s and 1930s (Goldin and Katz 1995), perhaps intensi…ed by the wage controls used in the

second World War (Goldin and Margo 1992), and rose again in the second half of the century.

    At the same time, there is a growing body of contemporary evidence that factor endowments

play a role in the returns to skill. Comin, Hobijn, and Rovito (2007) have shown that technological

lags between countries are large and they are correlated across technologies, consistent with the

idea that regions are at the forefront or backwater of technological change broadly and not only in

selected areas. Autor, Levy and Murname (2003) show that adoption of PCs increased the skill

demands for the same occupations over time, leading to increasing returns to education. Abowd,

et al. (2007) have shown that …rms that use the most sophisticated technology employ more skilled

workers, and this also suggest that the geographic location of …rms will not be uniform but itself

may be a function of the level of skill in the local labor market. Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2006)

show that cities with larger supplies of skilled labor adopted PCs more quickly than others, and

that this caused the increase in returns to skill to be greatest for cities that adopted PC more

aggressively. Overall, there is now strong evidence that technological di¤erences and di¤erences

in factor endowments such as capital and skilled labor play a large role in how SBTC e¤ects the

labor market and technology adoption (Caselli and Coleman 2006). The open question is how (or

if) these endowments played a role in previous waves of SBTC, such as the United States at the

turn of the last century.

    When one takes regional heterogeneity of factor endowments into account there are very good

                                                  1
reasons to believe that the Northeast and Midwest had U-shaped returns to education but that

other regions of the country had steadily increasing returns to education over the twentieth century.

First, available large-scale processing technologies that led to the rise in the returns to education did

not di¤use evenly across the United States. The industrial states of the Northeast and Midwest had

larger concentrations of such industries than the South and West. The South and West employed

older-technology industries for the most part (including traditional agriculture), and it is therefore

unlikely that the returns to education in those regions would be large in the early twentieth century.

Similarly, the increasing technological sophistication of agriculture, which led states like Iowa to

invest heavily in education, was largely a phenomena of the Midwest and Northeast. The South

was still able to exploit its large supply of unskilled labor, and the West had a relative abundance of

raw materials but a scarcity of labor. In general, potential correlates and precursors of high rates

of return to education were not evenly distributed across the U.S. at the start of the last century.

   Not only would changes in demand for skill have varied across regions, but the relative supply

of skilled workers was also variable across regions. Investment in education and infrastructure more

generally varied considerably, and the high school movement that came later di¤used unevenly as

well. In the South and Southwest in 1910, high school graduation rates were only four percent, while

they were triple that in the Midwest and Paci…c Coast, and still higher in New England (Goldin

1999). Finally, the transportation and information technologies at the beginning of the twentieth

century were not uniform, and as such the …rst half of the twentieth century saw a signi…cant

integration of regional and local labor markets into a national market, spurred not only by wage

controls, but also by the national minimum wage, which spurred capital investment in Southern

agriculture (Wright 1987, Mitchener and McLean 1999, 2003).

   In light of the historical fact of regional heterogeneity and the contemporary evidence about

the role of factor endowments in SBTC, this paper asks the following question: To what extent

did di¤erences in factor endowments e¤ect the return to skill during the …rst era of skill biased

technical change? Indeed, it may well be true that existing factor endowments played a large role

in the adoption of new technology, and as such SBTC would have been a function of pre-existing

conditions. Even more, any discussion of the technology-skill complementarity in American history

should take into account the regional di¤erences in the American economy in the early twentieth

century.   Doing so highlights the importance of the educational and capital endowments in the

                                                   2
early stages of SBTC, and provides a strong link between the SBTC literature and contempo-

rary studies of local and regional labor markets. This is especially important for policies in both

large cities and for developing countries since di¤erences in factor endowments may require dif-

ferent short-term responses to skill-biased technological change. We formally develop the idea of

capital-complementing skill-biased technical change in a simple two-sector model and show that

the initial level of capital is an important piece of the returns to education relationship. The model

shows that capital-rich markets should experience the largest increase in returns to education and

complementing this, skill-rich markets will have the largest increases in the returns to capital.

       In describing the origins of SBTC, the rates of return to education in the early twentieth century

reported by Goldin and Katz has been limited to a single state, which may have been a relative

outlier for that time. What was lacking was a data source that would allow us to estimate the returns

to education by region, to see if signi…cant di¤erences existed and to measure the magnitude of

those di¤erences. In this paper we use a new data source, a report from the U.S. Commissioner of

Education in 1909, to estimate the returns to education of high school teachers in the early twentieth

century. Our data list not only the education and earnings of the teachers individually for a number

of di¤erent states, but also includes actual years of experience in the teaching profession, allowing

us to estimate the returns to schooling while controlling for experience directly.1 More importantly,

the data was gathered in a systematic fashion, allowing us to estimate the returns to education

by region without the additional complication of di¤erences in data quality and reliability. These

returns are for a single occupation –the absolute levels may understate returns generally, since one

of the important gains of schooling comes from enabling workers to choose higher paid occupations.

Nonetheless, secondary teachers returns are of interest since they likely re‡ect the rising demand

for high school education relative to the current stock of high school educated workers (the pool of

potential teachers). That is, rising demand for high school education creates a derived demand for

educated teachers. Overall, we …nd signi…cant regional variation in the returns to education, with

large returns congruent to Goldin and Katz’s estimates for the Midwest (7%), but substantially

lower returns in the South (3%) and West (0.5%).
   1
     Note that the requirements to teach at the secondary level varied greatly in the past, and the professionalization
of the teaching profession, in terms of certi…cation and degree requirements, did not begin until after the high school
movement. For example, from 1909 to 1919 only eleven states began requiring a high school diploma for the lowest
level of teacher certi…cation; Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Illinois, Indiana, New Jersey, Utah, Vermont,
New Hampshire, and Maine (Law and Marks 2007).


                                                          3
    In considering the generalizability of our main …nding, we uncover several facts which strengthen

our conclusion. The geographical patterns we …nd hold for male teachers and for less experienced

teachers, for whom outside options may be more relevant and may therefore be more closely con-

nected to the wider labor market. We further …nd that teachers’returns to education are indicative

of overall returns to education. We use IPUMS returns to show that the returns to education for

teachers track quite closely with the overall returns to education from 1940 onward. We also show

that the returns to education for the states in our historical data track well with national returns

over this later period.

    The paper proceeds as follows.    The next section reviews the facts about regional economic

heterogeneity at the beginning of the twentieth century and presents our two sector model which

highlights variation in returns to education at the start of skill biased technical change. The third

section presents the empirical results, which are based on the 1909 Commissioner of Education

Report.    They show that there was signi…cant regional variation in the returns to education in

the early twentieth century.   The fourth section addresses the robustness and extensions of the

empirical results. The …nal section concludes.



2    Skill, Technology, and the Returns to Education

The existing explanation for the trend in returns to education has not acknowledged, for the most

part, the substantial variation in the preconditions for the rise in the returns to education. There

are two ways in which the existing theory should be modi…ed to …t the regional histories of the

United States. First, the di¤erences in the resource and capital endowments in di¤erent regions of

the country must be accounted for. Second, the preconditions for increasing returns to education,

as required by the theory, must be reconciled with the historical record. Below, we sketch out these

two issues, presenting evidence of signi…cant variation in education and other factor endowments

by region and augmenting the theory of skill biased technical change to yield predictions of the

returns to education for di¤erent regions of the United States at the beginning of the twentieth

century.




                                                  4
2.1   The Historical Record

The di¤erences in the factor endowments in di¤erent regions of the U.S. in the early twentieth

century is well known. Capital development in South, from the end of the Civil War to at least

World War I, was rather ine¢ cient (Davis 1965, Sylla 1969, Wright 1987, Ransom and Sutch 2001),

and …nancial institutions in the South were not structured in the same way as those in the Northeast

and Midwest, with Southern banks much smaller than the national average and with higher interest

rates in the South. This is important to the extent that capital markets in the U.S. were segmented

in the early twentieth century. The South did not have as many capital intensive industries as the

Northeast and Midwest at the beginning of the twentieth century, and North (1961) has argued

that the South did not re-invest the gains made from its productive agricultural sector. Similarly,

the South, with its sharecropping system and Jim Crow legislation, had a large supply of unskilled

labor of both races (Ransom and Sutch 2001, Collins 1997). Furthermore, black unskilled labor

was locked in the South by the large ‡ows of immigrants from Europe and racial discrimination in

non-farm employment in the U.S. in general (Collins 1997). The West, with its relatively sparse

population, had an abundant resource endowment that was only beginning to be exploited in the

early twentieth century (Nelson and Wright 1992). In general, this implies that the trade o¤s where

raw materials and unskilled labor substituted for skilled labor would have been more prevalent in

the South and West since they had an abundance of the former.

   The historical record also tells us that the processes that led to the increasing returns to educa-

tion were less prevalent in the South and West. Given the South’s low levels of capital intensity and

warm climate, there were relatively few of the new large-scale processing technologies highlighted

by Goldin and Katz (1998) in the South and West at the end of the nineteenth century. As Wright

(1987) has shown, the South was simply not in a position to industrialize (beyond the harvesting

of raw materials) in any large extent before the …rst World War. A possible exception would be

textiles, an older industry that had permeated the South before the early twentieth century, which

was bolstered by cheap Southern (low-skilled) labor, and would later exceed its northern com-

petition (Carlson 1981, Wright 1981). Similarly, the South’s agriculture, with its dependence on

labor-intensive work, was not as sophisticated as the agriculture of the Northeast and Midwest, nor

the cattle ranching seen in the West. Indeed, Goldin and Sokolo¤ (1984) have argued that indus-



                                                  5
trialization …rst appeared in the Northeast and Midwest because of the crops grown there, which

led to agricultural technology that made women relatively less productive than men in agriculture.

In terms of the educational structures necessary to see large returns to education develop, Goldin

and Katz (1998) have shown that large investments in education took place most successfully in

homogeneous populations. As such, racial diversity in the South would have caused lower invest-

ments in schooling, and it is certainly true that low investments in education left large portions of

the southern workforce relatively unskilled at the turn of the last century (Margo 1990).2

       There is also research that details the extent to which the labor market in the United States

was fragmented in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Rosenbloom (1990, 1996) has

shown that the labor market in the early years of the twentieth century was fragmented, and North-

South di¤erentials in wages suggest that a national labor market did not exist before the …rst World

War. While it is not true that every locality had its own independent labor market, it is true that

the South and North had di¤erent labor markets that were not fully integrated to any large degree

until after the …rst World War. Wright (1987) contends that the Southern labor market was not

integrated until the New Deal forced the South to invest in capital for the agricultural sector, and

that the South was …nally brought into the rest of the national labor market by the end of the

second World War.


2.2      Measuring the Historical Factor Endowments

The literature suggest that there are educational and technological factors related to the returns to

education in the early twentieth century.3          Skill-biased technologies were associated with capital

intensity. If a region had a relatively high educational levels and small amounts of capital, we would

expect relatively low returns to education.          If a region had low educational levels and relatively

large amounts of capital, we would expect for the returns to education to be high.4 But how can

we measure the factor endowment, and was there heterogeneity in the factor endowment by region

in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century?             To answer these questions we …rst look at

estimates of labor productivity and then assemble evidence from the Historical Statistics of the
   2
     Bleakley (2007) notes that the eradication of hookworm in the South, begun in 1910, raised the lifetime return
to education in the region.
   3
     Intuitively, one could think of eductaional factors as supply and technological factors as demand.
   4
     A priori, we cannot form …rm hypotheses about the returns to education in regions that had large levels of both
education and capital or small levels of both education and technology.


                                                         6
United States, historical Statistical Abstracts of the United States, and the Census of Manufactures

to measure di¤erences in factor endowments by region from the late nineteenth to early twentieth

century. Educational factors include the general education level of the population in a particular

region, investments in education, and school enrollment rates as they would be evidence that a

particular region would have the skill in the workforce to readily adopt to new technologies. We

also measure proxies for the importance of new skill-intensive technologies, including the capital

stock, both in manufacturing and agriculture, the use of various sources of power, the share of the

labor force employed in manufacturing, and evidence of technology adoption more generally.

       Beginning with estimates of labor productivity, Table 1 shows estimates of price adjusted income

per worker by region and for individual states from 1880 to 1920.5 The regional heterogeneity in

labor productivity was large, with the West far ahead of the rest of the nation while the South

lagged behind.      In the bottom panel of Table 1 we show estimates of labor productivity for the

states in our historical data and their geographic neighbors. The results show that estimates for

individual states are fairly representative for their region; they are close to the estimates for their

neighbors and the growth over the 1880 to 1920 period for individual states varies at the regional

level.

       While these labor productivity estimates establish regional heterogeneity in labor productivity,

and support the assertion that regional labor markets were substantially segmented, they do not

tell us about regional heterogeneity in factor endowments themselves. For example, states with a

signi…cant percentage of the labor force in mining have a higher level of labor productivity. Mitch-

ener and McLean (2003) note that this is likely due to both the large natural resource endowment

in the West and its relative labor scarcity. A priori, returns to education in the West may have

been particularly low due to the high wages commanded by unskilled workers, or they could be

high because of the technology used to extract these resources.             Similarly, these trends in labor

productivity tell us little about how labor productivity (price-adjusted income per worker) varied

with changes in the educational, capital and resource endowments. Since these estimates of labor

productivity are themselves a function of the factor endowments, we must turn to more direct

measures to gauge the extent of heterogeneity in educational and non-labor endowments in the
   5
    Following Mitchener and McLean (1999, 2003) we take price adjusted income per worker as the measure of labor
productivity.



                                                       7
American past.

   Tables 2 and 3 summarize these educational and non-labor factors.           Table 2 lists measures

associated with both the level and growth of education, listing the literacy rate, school expenditures,

and school enrollment for the high school aged population in the early twentieth century. California,

Illinois, Iowa, Ohio, and Wisconsin all have high literacy rates, each above 95% by 1910 and all but

California above 95% in 1900, suggesting a large endowment of relatively skilled workers.        Both

Georgia and Texas have relatively low literacy rates, suggesting a smaller endowment of skilled

workers. The second panel shows school expenditures, both per capita and per capita of the school

aged population. Although all states saw signi…cant growth in school expenditures per capita from

1900 to 1920, Georgia was spending less than one quarter of what the Midwestern states were, and

Texas only slightly more than half. California, by contrast, was spending more than 150% of what

the Midwestern states were.     The last panel of Table 2 shows school attendance rates for high

school age students. In 1910, Georgia is the only state in which less than three quarters of 14 or

15 year olds are not attending school. Texas’attendance rates were approaching the rates for the

Midwestern states and show a particularly high attendance rate for 16 to 17 year olds. By 1930,

California has the highest attendance …gures for 1910 to 1930 for 14 and 15 year olds, and very

high rates for 16 to 20 year olds.

   Table 3A presents some growth in factors associated with the spread of skill-intensive production

methods. The manufacturing share of the labor force in Illinois, Ohio, and Wisconsin grows by

an average of 95% from 1900 to 1910. In Iowa the manufacturing share of the labor force grows

by 124% between 1900 and 1910, and in Texas the percentage employed in manufacturing nearly

doubles between 1900 and 1910, increasing by 99%.         Similarly, the value of machinery per the

agricultural workforce increases substantially between 1900 and 1910 in Texas.         The growth of

Georgia’s labor force in manufacturing was relatively modest (only 68%), suggesting a relatively

less in‡uential spread of skill-intensive technologies in Georgia, and the manufacturing sector grows

the least in California between 1900 and 1910 (only 64%). Table 3A also shows that the growth

in agricultural factors associated with high-skill production such as machinery value and livestock

value grow relatively modestly from 1900 to 1910 for all states. There were di¤erences in capital

deepening, however, the level of capital per establishment in 1905 was much greater than in 1900

for all states, partly driven by a decrease in the number of establishments, but an outlier in this

                                                  8
factor is Texas, which sees a signi…cant increase in the amount of capital per establishment.

   As we noted earlier, the story of skill biased technical change supposes a displacement of the

old technology for the new, skill complementing technology, and Table 3B presents evidence of

the prevalence of capital-intensive technologies by state in the beginning of the twentieth century.

There was marked variation in the importance of these technologies by region in the early 20th

century.   The number of technological …rms and the value added by manufacturing varied con-

siderably. There were many more technological …rms in the Midwestern states than in the South

or the West.    California and Texas, states with signi…cant natural resource endowments, have

relatively low levels of value added in manufacturing. This carries over into more direct measures

of technology, such as the number of internal combustion engines and electric motors, which were

much more prominent in the Midwest than in the South or West. California and Texas do increase

the number of electric motors by the beginning of the twentieth century, but Georgia still lags well

behind the other states in the use of this new technology.

   These di¤erences carried over into the early twentieth century. Table 3C presents evidence from

the …rst three decades of the twentieth century. Internal combustion horsepower shows the marked

variation in how intensively these technologies were used. Both Georgia and Texas have less than

1,000 internal combustion horsepower in 1900, although they do increase horsepower signi…cantly

by 1910.   Further inferences can be drawn from the number of internal combustion engines and

electric motors per establishment in 1919 and the amount of horsepower from both sources in 1929.

While Texas leads in internal combustion power in 1929 and has relatively high amounts of electric

power, California, and Georgia lag behind the other states both in the number of electric motors

and in horsepower generated by them.      Even with the gains made by California, Georgia, and

Texas, they continue to lag behind the Midwestern states in the number of electric motors per

establishment in 1919, and in the amount of electric horsepower per establishment in 1929.

   All told, the evidence in Tables 1 and 2 show that there were marked di¤erences in the factors

related to the returns to education in the early twentieth century. Although we argue that these

di¤erences can allow us to crudely group states by their factor endowments and use of technologies,

it is important to note that this evidence is suggestive. We do not argue here that every measure

should agree with our general assertions about the regional di¤erences in the supply and demand

for skill, and we would be surprised if they did. For example, Lamoreaux and Sokolo¤ (2000) show

                                                 9
that during the late nineteenth century there began to be a divide geographic divide between the

centers of invention and the centers of production in some respects. All of the evidence presented

here, however, is more consistent with the proposition of regional heterogeneity than homogene-

ity, and agrees with our general point about signi…cant regional variation in the educational and

technological endowments.

    These regional di¤erences do not …t well into a monolithic model of skill-biased technical change

and U-shaped returns to education over the twentieth century. The Midwestern states appear to

have large endowments of capital and education, and prominent use of capital-intensive, frontier

technologies, while Georgia has a relatively little capital for frontier technologies and low levels of

education. California and Texas, however, are more di¢ cult to classify. Relative to each other,

California has a larger educational endowment than Texas (and every other state, for that matter),

but technologically the two states are roughly similar and are close to one another on most ordinal

ranking of the technology indicators in Table 3.               While some regions fall easily into a set that

would yield predictions about the returns to education, direct estimates of the returns to education

are necessary for regions with indeterminate predictions for the returns to education based on their

endowments.6

    Overall, there is striking heterogeneity in the factors and proxies related to the return to educa-

tion. A movement towards new capital and skill-intensive processing technologies would not have

the same e¤ect on the relatively unindustrialized South as it would on the Midwest. Similarly, one

would predict that, given di¤erences in their educational endowments, skill-biased technological

change would have a di¤erent impact in California as opposed to Texas.7 Given these regional

di¤erences in factor endowments at the beginning of the twentieth century, we would expect skill

biased technical change to produce regional di¤erences in returns to education in the early twenti-

eth century. Below, we present a simple model that captures features of the technology-skill story

in a two-sector model, to highlight the importance of factor endowments in explaining returns to

education with SBTC.
   6
     We also note that, generally, supply of skill is slow to adjust to technology-based demand for skill. As such,
levels of skill at a point in time will be exogenous, and returns in the short run would re‡ect primarily technological
factors while long run returns would re‡ect the endogenous nature of the supply and demand for skill.
   7
     Although we can form predictions about the returns to education in California versus Texas, it is more di¢ cult
to predict what the returns would be relative to returns in the Midwest or South.




                                                          10
2.3    A Model of Skill Biased Technical Change with Heterogeneous Endowments

Assume initially that there are two sectors of production, a land-dependent sector, t (for traditional

agriculture) and a capital-dependent sector o (for old capital-dependent sector).8 The two sectors

use skilled and unskilled labor together with either capital K or land T to produce output:


                                               Yi = Ko Ho L1o

                                               Yt = T Ht L1t

                                        H t + Ho = H

                                         Lt + Lo = L

                                              Ko = K


    We model each region as a small open economy that takes the relative price of output in each

sector as given, but has its own factor markets. We normalize this relative price of output to

one. High- and low-skilled labor are mobile across sectors, and so in equilibrium they each get

paid their marginal product and these wages are equalized across sectors. Solving the equilibrium

labor allocation and wages is straightforward: in equilibrium, the fraction of high-skilled workers

employed in the capital-dependent sector is increasing in the capital/land ratio, and equal to the

fraction of low-skilled workers employed:

                                       K             ~o
                                                     H    ~o
                                                          L
                                                 =      =
                                      K +T           H    L
                                                                          1
                                        w
                                        ~H                          H
                                                 =
                                        w~L          1              L

The expressions show that the fraction of workers employed in industry is increasing in the capi-

tal/land ratio, and the relative wage of high-skilled workers is decreasing in their relative abundance.

(The tildas signify the initial equilibrium.) Assumption (A1) assures that high-skilled workers are

scarce enough to earn a premium over low-skilled workers:

                                                H
                                                  <                                                         (A1)
                                                L   1
   8
     Here t could represent any sector that is natural resource intensive, but not capital intensive. T would then
represent all natural resources.


                                                         11
      Now consider the introduction of a new capital-dependent sector (n):


                                        Yi = AKn Hn L1n


      Since capital is now mobile across the two capital-dependent sectors, the capital constraint

becomes:

                                            Ko + Kn = K

The new capital intensive sector di¤ers from the old sector in that it is more skilled labor-intensive.

Mathematically, this assumption is expressed:



                                                  >                                               (A2)

      This assumption captures the skill-biased nature of the new technology.

      We show that if the new capital-intensive technology is a large enough improvement over the

old technology, the new equilibrium has the following characteristics.


Proposition 1 Given (A1)-(A2), if the productivity of the new technology is su¢ ciently large, the

new capital-intensive sector displaces the old capital-intensive sector, and the new capital-intensive

technology sector employs a higher fraction of high-skilled workers than low-skilled workers. That

is,


                                       9A s.t. for A > A

                                                  Kn = K
                                                  Hn        Ln
                                                        >
                                                  H         L

Proposition 2 Given (A1)-(A2), given the same level of productivity, the number of high-skilled

employed in the new capital-intensive technology exceeds the number of high skilled previously em-

ployed in the old capital-intensive technology. The relative wage of high-skilled workers also exceeds




                                                  12
the previous relative wage. That is,


                                            for A > A

                                                    ~o
                                               Hn > H
                                              wH          w
                                                          ~H
                                                      >
                                              wL          w
                                                          ~L

Furthermore, if the productivity is even larger, the number of low-skilled workers in the new capital-

intensive technology exceeds the number employed in the old capital-intensive technology. In partic-

ular,


                                       9A^ > A s.t. for A > A^

                                            ~o
                                       Ln > L


Proposition 3 Given (A1)-(A2), the higher the capital/land ratio, the higher the fraction of high-

skilled and low-skilled workers employed in the new capital-intensive technology and the higher the

relative wage of high-skilled workers. That is,


                                                   for A > A
                                               dHn
                                                          > 0
                                             d (K=T )
                                                dLn
                                                          > 0
                                             d (K=T )
                                          d (wH =wL )
                                                          > 0
                                           d (K=T )

Proposition 4 Given (A1)-(A2), the introduction of the new technology raises the return to capital

relative to land. Furthermore, the higher the high-skilled/low-skilled labor ratio, the larger is this

increase in the relative rental rate of capital.


                                                   for A > A
                                                     RK    ~K
                                                           R
                                                         >
                                                     RT    R~T
                                         d (RK =RT )
                                                          > 0
                                           d (H=L)


                                                     13
Proof. See appendix.

      Together Propositions 1 and 2 show that the model replicates the story of Goldin and Katz

(1998). That is, the new capital-dependent sector expands, increasing the relative demand for

skilled workers and also their relative wage. If the new technology is a dramatic enough advance it

furthers industrialization–displacing the old technology and even employing more unskilled workers

than the old technology.9 This is the standard skill-biased technical change story.

      Proposition 3 has strong implications that predict higher returns and more labor employed in

the new technology in areas with high relative endowments of capital. Thus, there will be variation

in the returns to education that go hand-in-hand with the nature and extent of industrialization

before the technological change. The result is entirely intuitive– the region that is technologically

backward sees little increase in the returns to education because the technological change is skill

intensive, but the backwards region has little of either the old or new capital-intensive technologies.

In order for batch processing and electri…cation to induce high returns to education, there had to

be industries that could implement and successfully take advantage of the new technologies.                In

other words, displacement of old technology will not result in increased returns to education if

there is not a signi…cant amount of old technology to be replaced.            Proposition 3 highlights the

role that the technological endowment has with the return to education. If a region did not have

the infrastructure or extensive industry before the di¤usion of skill intensive technologies, it would

not lead to large returns to education in that region. Proposition 3 therefore provides us with the

central test of the theory in the next section.

      Finally, Proposition 4 shows how the new technologies increased the incentives to invest in

physical capital, especially in areas with high levels of human capital. The new technology increases

the return to capital, and the increases will be larger the larger the educational endowment. The

model therefore o¤ers an explanation for increased levels of industrialization experienced in the

…rst half of the century, but faster industrialization in the Northeast, Midwest and West (where

schooling levels were high) than in the South, where they were lower.
  9
    Given the static nature of the problem, Proposition 1 implies extreme displacement. In the real world, the
changeover of capital from the old to new technology is clearly a slower process.




                                                     14
2.4    Derived Demand and Teachers’Relative Wages

Ideally, we would like to test these implications directly using economy wide wage data. Unfor-

tunately, such data is not readily available. We show that reasonable assumptions translate the

relative wages of workers overall into relative wages of high- and low-skilled teachers through the

derived demand for education and ultimately teachers. We model a schooling sector, and allow

students to decide whether to become high- or low-skilled. Let h and l denote the number who

become high- and low-skilled, respectively, which are produced using high- and low-skilled workers:


                                                 h = Fh (Hh ; Lh )

                                                 l = Fl (Hl ; Ll )

                                      H h + Hl = Hs

                                       Lh + Ll = Ls


   The following proposition delineates three assumptions for the above predictions regarding

relative wages in the economy overall to also hold for relative wages in the schooling sector.


Proposition 5 Assume:

(i) the relative supply of high-skilled teachers is increasing in the relative supply of high-skilled
                                            @(Hs =Ls )
workers in the overall labor force, i.e.,    @(H=L)      > 0; (ii) the relative student demand for high- vs.
                                                                                               @(h=l)
low-skilled educations is increasing in the relative wage to high-skilled workers, i.e.,      @(wh =wl )   > 0;

(iii) the production of high-skilled education is more intensive in high-skilled teachers than the low-

skilled education, i.e., Hh =Lh > Hl =Ll . Then the relative wage of high-skilled teachers increases,

and increases more the higher the capital to land ratio:

                                                   wh             w
                                                                  ~h
                                                              >
                                                   wl             wl
                                                                  ~
                                            d (wh =wl )
                                                              > 0
                                             d (K=T )

Proof. See appendix.

   Given the assumptions in Proposition 5, the predictions for relative wage overall in Propositions

2 and 3 also hold for the relative wage of teachers. Intuitively, increasing returns to skill (which


                                                         15
are a function of the factor endowments) lead to increasing demand for education. Since the type

of education demanded is intensive in high-skilled individuals, the returns to education for teachers

of high level skills will mirror the returns to skill more generally.           We turn now to the data on

teacher’s earnings.



3     The Returns to Education in the Early 20th Century


3.1    Data

We estimate the returns to education with a new and unique data source, a 1909 report from the

U.S. Commissioner of Education which allows us to estimate the returns to education of secondary

teachers in the early twentieth century by region. The data come from a report prepared for then

U.S. Commissioner of Education Elmer Ellsworth Brown on the labor force of teachers. The report,

entitled “The Teaching Sta¤ of Secondary Schools in the United States” by Edward L. Thorndike

was the …rst report in a …ve-year, …ve-report plan to collect data on secondary education (the

other four focused on the student body, curriculum, …nances, and special education, respectively).

Thorndike spent a large part of his professional life researching features of secondary education,

many of which have implications for the issues analyzed here.

    As noted elsewhere (Goldin and Katz 1995) the rise of the high school movement in the United

States was changing the relationship between schooling and wages in the early twentieth century.

Thorndike (1922) notes that the number of students enrolled in high school in 1918 was more than

six times greater than the number enrolled in 1890. Similarly, while only ten percent of teenagers

continued on to high school in 1890, more than thirty percent did by 1920. These changes in high

school enrollment changed the high school curriculum and the requirements one had to meet to

become a teacher.10 Thorndike and Robinson (1923) show that the homogenized training of high

school students that was the norm in the late nineteenth century had given way to a curriculum that

emphasized science and mathematics at the expense of English literature and Latin. In addition

to a di¤erent focus, the high school curriculum was now highly specialized, the expansion of the

curriculum meant that students were rarely taking identical courses of study, a common feature in
  10
     Only beginning in 1909, after our survey, did any states begin to require a high school diploma for the lowest
level of teacher certi…cation.


                                                        16
modern high school education. Thorndike and Symonds (1922) saw these changes as altering the

returns to skill for high school graduates, but that demand for high school education would remain

strong.


     It seems unlikely that the enviable status shown for graduates in 1892 to 1901 in respect
     to occupations can be fully maintained now and in the future. To maintain it would re-
     quire that the favored occupations be practically closed to all but high school graduates.
     This may perhaps be taking place. The supply of high school graduates is increasing
     so fast that any profession or reputable semi-profession may demand such. Even if it is
     not fully maintained— indeed, even if there is a considerable movement downward— the
     high school graduates will still have noteably high occupation status; the correlation
     between amount of education and dignity of occupation will still be close. (Thorndike
     and Symonds, p. 451)


   These changes in the function and curriculum of high schools had implications for teachers,

and they mirrored the changes in the larger labor market.      Teachers themselves were now more

specialized than before.   Thorndike (1923) found that in a survey of teachers own interest in

academic subjects that teachers themselves preferred courses with "modern" content such as science

and mathematics to literature. He also noted that there were signi…cant age di¤erences in these

academic interests. Older teachers, who themselves had been trained in "traditional" high schools,

were more interested in Latin and English literature, while young teachers expressed strong interest

in physical and biological sciences. As students in high schools sought out these "modern" subjects

more than "traditional" ones, the returns to education for teachers will re‡ect both derived demand

for skill and the same market forces that were operating in the labor market more generally.

   The report we use was designed to uncover the relationship between experience, education, and

wages among high school teachers. It presents tabulated data on the (i) income, (ii) experience,

(iii) education, and (iv) gender of U.S. secondary school teachers in 1908, which was collected from

a survey corresponding to the 1906-1907 academic year. The data were collected via survey for

approximately …ve thousand teachers, chosen to be a representative sample of the nation’s secondary

teaching workforce at the time and to be directly comparable across regions. While there are several

sources of data that list the education and experience of teachers in speci…c localities and school

districts, Thorndike’s goal of a nationally representative picture of the relationship makes his data

unique – and it is the only source we know of that allows us to address the issue of geographic

heterogeneity in returns to education at this time. Indeed, Thorndike took great care to consider

                                                 17
and eliminate the regional and idiosyncratic biases in the data, and the report which accompanies

the data used here details many of the potential sources of error that he attempted to eliminate with

his survey. The Thorndike report’s systematic and consistent measures of education, experience,

and wages across space allows us to estimate geographic variation in the returns to education before

the 1940 Census.

       The data were collected using a two-part survey sent by the O¢ ce of Education to administrators

for a sample of secondary schools. The …rst survey collected the salaries, years of secondary and

post-secondary education, and actual years of experience of all teachers in the schools surveyed.

The fact that years of experience are directly reported is a major strength of the data, since

imputed “potential years of experience” (i.e., the traditional age          years of schooling       6) can

diverge strongly from actual experience. This is particularly true for women, who are not as closely

tied to the labor force and who constituted a signi…cant share of secondary school teachers at the

time.11 The second survey was a follow up survey sent with the intent of measuring any biases or

measurement error in years of education (e.g., adding in primary schooling) and experience (e.g.,

reporting years of service at the particular school surveyed). Thorndike spent a great deal of e¤ort

discussing potential sources of measurement error and trying to quantify or minimize them. The

second survey showed that the larger initial survey did not su¤er from any aggregate biases. The

data we use comes from the …rst survey.

       In general, the data appear to be of extremely high quality. For example, Thorndike mentions

that income may vary somewhat due to varying lengths of the school year, such that low salaries

in the South are partially explained by shorter school years. The data would nonetheless re‡ect

the actual income received. Thorndike also mentioned that private schools who underpay may feel

pressure to overestimate their incomes. For years of education, the distinction between secondary

and post-secondary education was not always clear, but this will not a¤ect our results since we look

only at the sum of these two. For experience, Thorndike mentioned a tendency to report roughly

and to include the current year of service.

       Unfortunately, we do not have the original survey returns, only the processed data from the

report. We focus on two sets of tables (Tables 7-10 in the original Thorndike Report) for our
  11
   On the other hand, this does introduce a discrepancy between our estimates and estimates based on the more
common potential experience.



                                                     18
purposes. The …rst is individual public school teacher data tabulated separately for California,

Georgia, and Texas, and tabulated together for Illinois, Ohio and Wisconsin.12 These states cover

the West Coast (California), Southwest (Texas), Southeast (Georgia), and Midwest (Illinois, Ohio

and Wisconsin). These tables allowed creation of a dataset of teachers including their state, gender,

income, experience, and education levels. The second set of tables gives separate details on Illinois,

Ohio and Wisconsin teachers, but only provides the median income level for each experience-

education-gender cell. This allows creation of a dataset of median incomes by gender, experience,

education and state for all six states separately.13 We combine this data with IPUMS data on the

industrial composition of the workforce in 1910, 1920 and 1930, and later information on teachers

and workers earnings in Census records from 1940 on.


3.2      Summary Analysis

Table 4 presents summary statistics for the individual data by state and gender. Several interesting

observations can be gleaned from these. First, secondary teachers averaged 12.6 to 13.8 years of

education, having completed not much beyond high school education themselves. These low levels of

education are of particular interest because they indicate that increased demand for more, and more

modern schooling might have immediate e¤ects on the derived demand for teachers education. Men

and women had similar levels of education with women having slightly more education on average

in the Midwestern states, and men having a slight advantage in the other states. Education levels

are also fairly similar across states, with the exception of California, whose secondary teachers had

an additional year of education on average.

       Second, average salary levels vary greatly, both between men and women and across states.

For example, men in California earn about three times what women in Georgia earn.                           Salaries

in California are substantially higher (roughly $300/year or 35% higher) than in Georgia and the

Midwest states, while those in Texas are signi…cantly lower (about $100/year or 12%).                         Again,

these wage patterns are in line with the patterns in output per worker, indicating that schooling

wages re‡ected broader labor market conditions. As expected, women earn lower salaries in all
  12
    Thorndike explained that the data were calculated together because the data were similar.
  13
    All data from the tables was entered twice, in separate …les, to assure accurtate data entry. The use of tabulated
data does introduce additional sources of measurement error in the data as both income and experience are grouped
into small ranges. Neither of these should substantially change our estimates of the returns to education, and indeed
replicating the corresponding groupings in the U.S. census data does not alter the results substantially.


                                                         19
states with the largest di¤erence in Georgia and the smallest di¤erences in the Midwestern states.

Beyond gender discrimination, a possible reason for this male wage premium is that a signi…cant

number of male secondary teachers performed a dual role of teacher and administrator. Thorndike

notes this fact in his report, although we cannot distinguish in the data which teachers were also

administrators.

       Third, teachers average between 8.2 and 9.6 years of experience, with male teachers having

on average 2.0 to 3.6 more years of experience. The additional years of experience may also be

related to the previously-mentioned dual teacher-administrator role that males often play. Thus,

experience levels were not particularly high, and there were likely many teachers with limited

occupation speci…c on-the-job training, who may have entertained options in the broader labor

market. Finally, it should be noted that secondary teaching is a mixed-gender occupation. For

the sample overall about half (…fty …ve percent) of the teachers are men. In the Southern states

of Georgia and Texas, this is closer to 2/3 of teachers, while in California women constitute 2/3

of secondary school teachers in the data. Again, male teachers likely had more options for work

outside of teaching.


3.3      Regional Variation in the Returns to Education

We estimate the returns to education using a standard Mincerian regression



                                log (w) =     +                       2
                                                  1s   +   2x   +   3x    +   4g   +"


       where w is the wage of a person with s years of schooling, x years of experience, and gender

g. Table 5 presents the regression results for each of the states. The estimates show considerable

geographic variation in the Mincerian return to schooling.14 The three Midwestern states and Texas

had high returns, 7.0 and 7.1 percent, respectively. Recall that the Midwestern states had high

levels of industry, and so likely rapidly rising demand for skill, while Texas had a small educational

endowment relative to its technological endowment. In contrast, the returns are much lower in

Georgia and especially California. The return in Georgia is just 3.3 percent which is signi…cantly
  14
    We formally tested for di¤erences in the regional returns to education in a pooled regression (unreported), in
which we rejected the hypothesis of equal returns between the Midwest and South. As the purpose of this study is
to document the extent of the variation and to estimate the returns by region, we present the separate regressions
throughout.


                                                       20
di¤erent from the returns in Texas and the Midwest states, despite the smaller sample size in

Georgia and the consequently larger standard error. This suggest that the low supply of educated

labor and low demand for skill in Georgia combined to yield low returns to education. The return in

California is a miniscule 0.5 percent and not statistically signi…cant. Recall that California teachers

averaged 1.2 more years of education than teachers in the other states, and that California had a

large educational endowment relative to its technological endowment.

    As described in the previous section, the individual data for Illinois, Ohio and Wisconsin is

pooled together. We do, however, have data on median incomes (by sex, education, and experience)

separately for each of these three states. Regressions can therefore be run separately using median-

level data for these three as a way to disaggregate the returns to education estimates. A key

question in interpreting this data is the extent to which estimates from median-level regressions are

comparable to individual-level regression results. To answer this question, we construct comparable

median-level data for the states that have individual data and compare regression results. If

the estimates for the returns to education are similar in the median and individual regressions,

then we would surmise that median regressions for the individual Midwestern states will give us

reliable estimates of the returns to education for each Midwestern state.                     Table 6 shows that

median regressions do in fact express much of the same information about returns to schooling

that individual-regressions do and the qualitative interpretations remain the same. Focusing on

the schooling coe¢ cients, Mincerian returns are low in California and Georgia, and relatively high

elsewhere.15 We conclude that the qualitative patterns in the median-level estimates are strongly

indicative of patterns in the individual-level estimates. As such, we believe that estimates for the

return to education for each Midwestern sate will not be biased by the median representation of

the data.

    The median level estimates are presented separately for Illinois, Ohio and Wisconsin in Table

7. The main lesson from Table 7 are that wage returns to schooling found in the Midwest using the

individual-level data do not appear to be at the same high level across all three states. Mincerian

returns are high in Illinois and Ohio, but much lower in Wisconsin. These lower Mincerian returns
   15
      Focusing on the constant term results, we see that constant terms are somewhat higher in the median regres-
sions. The di¤erence in levels is not surprising since the individual- and median-level regressions weight individuals
di¤erently; the median regressions give each experience-education cell equal weight, while the individual data use the
weights in the sample population. The patterns by sex across states also match up well. The one exception is that
returns are typically lower for women in the median-level estimates and slightly higher for men.


                                                         21
are accompanied by higher wage levels in Wisconsin, as evidence by the signi…cantly larger intercept.

Thus, even amongst similar states in the same geographic region, there appear to be important

di¤erences in the returns to schooling.

    Overall, there is substantial variation in the returns to education for these secondary teachers in

1909. The variation is consistent with the theory described in the previous section. As predicted,

the returns to education vary with the factor endowments. The Midwest, with its large endowment

of education, but also large and growing levels of capital and capital-intensive, skill-complementary

technologies, had high returns to education.           The South, with its small factor endowments, had

low returns to education. California and Texas had similar levels of capital and capital-intensive

technologies, but California had a much larger educational endowment. Consistent with a relative

oversupply of skill, the relatively large educational endowment in California yields low returns to

education, and the small educational endowment yields higher returns in Texas.16 If these returns

to education are indicative of general returns to education for these regions the theory of U-shaped

returns to education over the twentieth century would have to be augmented to re‡ect this regional

heterogeneity.     In the next section we consider the generalizability and robustness of the results

presented in this section.



4     Extensions and Implications


4.1    Robustness

It is important to establish, …rst, that the returns reported above re‡ect the return to education

across region and not another measure that varies by region such as teacher salary. While Goldin

and Katz (2003) have ruled out compulsory schooling and child labor laws as sources of such

di¤erences, we must address the question of whether the returns to education for teachers re‡ect

broader market conditions and not only the market for teachers. If the returns simply re‡ected

salary di¤erences by region for teachers, we would not predict the very low returns in California

given the substantially higher salaries in that state. Similarly, the high returns in Texas would not

be consistent with the low salaries in that state and the similar years of schooling in Texas and in
  16
     Given the estimates of income per worker in the previous section, low returns in California could also partly be
due to labor scarcity, which would raise the wages of the unskilled relative to the skilled.


                                                         22
the Midwestern states. We believe that the extent to which the returns to education vary across

regions in ways that are not predicted by the summary statistics in Table 4 establishes that the

returns reported here are indeed estimates of the return to education and not simply teacher salary

variation across states.

   We have argued that the geographic variation uncovered in teacher’s returns to schooling is

indicative of variation in returns in the overall labor force. We use two checks to test the robustness

of this assumption. First, we estimate the returns for men only. We divide the sample by gender

for two reasons. First, women teachers may have had fewer outside options in the broader labor

market. Competition for their services may not have been strong enough for teacher’s returns to

re‡ect returns overall. Men would have been more integrated into the market, however, and would

have had fewer restrictions placed on their supply of labor. Secondly, Carter and Savoca (1991)

have suggested that di¤erent levels of education and wages by gender were due to the fact that

women were expected to be less attached to the labor market than males, making it unwise to invest

heavily in education and lowering the wages that they received in the labor market. Although this

point is related to the …rst, it also suggest that the education of women in teaching occupations

would be di¤erent from those of men, which was shown earlier.         To the extent that variation in

schooling identi…es the returns to education in a Mincerian regression, separating the sample by

gender would tell us if the total returns were biased.

   Second, we estimate the returns for teachers with few years of experience. We focus on teachers

with little experience because these teachers would presumably have invested less in teacher-speci…c

human capital, and so would hold relatively more general human capital for potential use in the

broader labor market. As we noted earlier, younger teachers were more likely to be skilled in

science and mathematics, and thus were di¤erent in training and orientation than older teachers.

The general idea is that the returns to education for teachers with more experience in teaching

may not re‡ect labor market conditions as much as they would re‡ect occupation or …rm-speci…c

investments or skills. We also posit that teachers with less experience also have more and varied

outside options.   We take “little experience” to be …ve years or less in the teaching profession.

Considering that teachers in the sample averaged more than eight years of experience, this cut-

o¤ certainly captures the less experienced teachers while at the same time being a large enough

sample to yield robust estimates of the returns to education for the group of teachers with the least

                                                  23
attachment to the profession.

      Table 8 shows that the pattern in overall returns shows up in men’s returns as well (despite

the fact that women were an important fraction of teachers) and in returns for the young. The

returns in California and Georgia are low, while those in the Midwest and Texas were high. These

results further support the contention that our estimates of the return to education do not simply

re‡ect regional salary di¤erentials.         The returns for men in Georgia would be higher than those

in Table 8 if their high salaries and the same average schooling, as reported in Table 4, were used

to predict the return to education. Overall, the results of Table 8 give us further con…dence that

the geographic variation in teachers’returns to schooling re‡ect geographic variation in schooling

returns of the workforce overall.


4.2      Generalizability and Secular Implications

Applying the evidence for secondary teachers to our story of relative endowments in the overall

economy raises the question of whether these estimated returns to education are informative about

the returns to education in the labor force overall. Speci…cally, does variation in teachers’returns

to education track with the variation in returns to education of the overall labor force? What can

these data tell us about the overall returns to schooling in 1909 relative to 1940? To answer these

questions we must look at comparisons of teachers with workers more generally in the U.S. We

use IPUMS census data to con…rm the relationship between teacher’s returns and overall returns

over time, and then compare our 1909 results with later results. One caveat is that the census

occupational code for teachers includes all teachers (except for professors/instructors and music,

dance or art teachers), and not just secondary teachers. To the extent that education selects people

into higher paying secondary school teaching, the IPUMS data will overstate the return to schooling

within secondary education and thus exceed our estimates.

      Figure 1 answers the question about secular variation, showing that the relationship between

teachers’returns and overall returns is strong over time. The four di¤erent series represent teachers’

returns for the states we examine, teachers’returns for all states, overall returns for the states we

examine, and overall returns for the nation as a whole. Again the number of teachers in the sample

states is relatively few (especially in the 1950 census), so we present robust regression results.17 All
 17
      Robust regressions incorporate a recursive algorithm for reweighting observations that downweights outliers that


                                                          24
four series move substantially together with a mid-century decline followed by rising returns. Indeed,

the results for all workers across the nation and all workers in the sample states are nearly identical.

While the estimates of teachers’returns in the sample states have perhaps the weakest relationship

with overall returns across the nation, the relationship is still quite strong. The correlation between

the two series is 0.81 and a regression of overall returns on teachers’returns in the sample states

explains 66 percent of the variation in overall returns. We therefore again conclude that comparing

teachers’returns over time can give us a strong indication of patterns in overall returns over time.

    Table 9 does precisely this, comparing the 1909 return to several benchmarks from the 1940

census. The 1909 return is based on a weighted regression of the individual data in 1909. Since the

sample sizes varied greatly over region and were not entirely representative, the weights were chosen

to make the sample representative of the sample of teachers in 1940. This required weighting the

California sample by a factor of 1.92, the Georgia sample by a factor of 1.94, and the Texas sample

by a factor of 1.74, and weighting the Midwest sample by a factor of 0.59. The resulting estimate

for the return to education was 8.3 percent in 1909. At …rst glance, the returns seem quite high for

a within-occupation return to schooling. Comparing with 1940, however, the return is not overly

high. Indeed it is slightly less than the Mincerian return of 9.1 percent estimated for teachers in

these same states in 1940 though not signi…cantly di¤erent. The returns for all workers in these

states were somewhat higher at 9.6 percent per year in 1940, while those for the nation overall were

slightly lower at 8.9 percent.

    Using 1940 as a benchmark, we would surmise that since the return to schooling for teachers

in the sample states was representative of the returns to workers for the nation overall, that the

same is true for 1909. In this case, returns in 1909 would be relatively high (since 1940 preceded

the Great Compression and was a year of relatively high returns to schooling), but lower than the

most comparable evidence, the returns in Iowa in 1914. Recall the caveat that the returns from

1940 are for all teachers, not just secondary teachers. The 1940 teachers’regressions include both

primary and secondary teachers, while the 1909 estimates are based on only secondary teachers.

Secondary teachers tend to be more educated and substantially better paid. To the extent that

schooling enables teachers to sort into higher paying secondary education jobs, the 1940 estimates
have too strong an in‡uence on regression results. Robust regressions produced substantially lower estimates than
OLS in 1950 (0.075 vs. 0.096), but otherwise similar results. Robust regression also has little e¤ect on the 1909
sample estimates.


                                                       25
would be biased upward as an estimate of the return to education of secondary teachers.



5    Conclusion

We have presented evidence that di¤erential factor endowments and prevalence of technologies are

important parts of the story of how skill biased technical change the returns to education.          In

our model of skill biased technical change, we showed how returns to education vary with factor

endowments. We have argued that the shape of these changes over time will be related to factor

endowments before the skill-biased technical change.         Our model predicted that regions with

greater degrees of capital intensity would experience higher returns to education than those with

less capital intensive endowments. With skill biased technical change, we should expect U-shaped

returns in regions with large capital endowments, but steadily increasing returns in regions with

relatively small capital endowments.

    We have shown, using historical evidence on the returns to education for secondary teachers

in the U.S., that the returns to education showed marked geographic variation. Our data on the

returns to skill for secondary teachers in the very earliest part of the twentieth century is consistent

with our theoretical predictions. Teachers in the Midwest had greater returns to education than

those in the South.     Furthermore, we found that this result is robust – the returns to teachers

tracks with the returns to skill more generally, and our result was robust to considering only men

and younger teachers.     In sum, we …nd strong evidence that returns to education were large in

1909 in the Midwest, consistent with Goldin and Katz, but that they may have varied considerably

across states. As such, the study of U-shaped returns to education should be modi…ed to re‡ect

the fact that returns for some regions would rise continuously throughout the twentieth century.

    The variation in returns to education has important implications for the study of the returns

to skill more generally, and for education and immigration policies in many developing nations in

particular. Rather than states or regions of one nation, our model easily generalizes up to di¤erent

nations or down to individual cities with su¢ ciently segmented factor markets, where locations

with large capital endowments will see large returns to education, while those with relatively small

capital endowments will see small returns initially. For example, Uwaifo (2006) notes considerable

debate over the size and shape of returns to education in Sub-Saharan Africa, with most anecdotal


                                                  26
evidence pointing to low returns. Her estimates of the return to education in Nigeria in the 1990s

(3.6%) are similar to the returns we found in Georgia in 1909. Our results suggest that while skill

biased technological change will eventually lead to universal large returns to skill in the long run

as markets integrate and capital intensity di¤uses, in the short run locations with relatively small

capital endowments may see negligible returns to education. This has important implications for

immigration, emigration, and urban policies in locations with small factor endowments –to create

incentives for the high-skilled workforce to remain when the returns to education are low at home,

but large in other parts of the world.




                                                27
References
 [1] Abowd, John M., et. al. (2007). "Technology and the Demand for Skill: An Analysis of Within
     and Between Firm Di¤erences." NBER Working Paper No. 13043.

 [2] Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard J. Murname (2003). "The Skill Content of Recent
     Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4):
     1279-1333.

 [3] Beaudry, Paul, Mark Doms and Ethan Lewis (2006). "Endogenous Skill Bias in Technology
     Adoption: City-Level Evidence from the IT Revolution." NBER Working Paper No. 12521.

 [4] Bleakley, Hoyt (2007). "Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in
     the American South." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1) 73-117.

 [5] Carlson, Leonard (1981). "Labor Supply, the Acquisition of Skills and the Location of Southern
     Textile Mills, 1880-1900," Journal of Economic History 41 (1): 65-71.

 [6] Carter, Susan and Elizabeth Savoca (1988). "Labor Mobility and Lengthy Jobs in 19th Century
     America." Journal of Economic History 50 (1): 1-16.

 [7] Carter, Susan and Elizabeth Savoca (1991). "Gender Di¤erences in Learning and Earning in
     Nineteenth Century America: The Role of Expected Job and Career Attachment." Explo-
     rations in Economic History 28 (3): 323-343.

 [8] Caselli, Francesco and Wilbur John Coleman (2006). "The World Technology Frontier." Amer-
     ican Economic Review 96: 499-522.

 [9] Collins, William J. (1997). "When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great
     Black Migration." Journal of Economic History 57 (3): 607-632.

[10] Comin, Diego A., Bart Hobijn and Emilie Rovito (2007). "World Technology Usage Lags."
     NBER Working Paper No. 12677.

[11] Davis, Lance (1965). "The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National Mar-
     ket." Journal of Economic History 25 (3): 355-393.

[12] Goldin, Claudia D. (1999). "A Brief History of Education in the United States." NBER
     Working Paper No. h119.

[13] Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz (1995). "The Decline of Non-Competing Groups:
     Changes in the Premium to Education, 1890 to 1940." NBER Working Paper No. 5202.

[14] Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz (1998). "The Origins of the Technology-Skill Com-
     plementarity." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3): 693-732.

[15] Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz (1999). "The Returns to Skill in the United States
     across the Twentieth Century." NBER Working Paper No. 7126.

[16] Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz (2000). "Education and Income in the Early Twen-
     tieth Century: Evidence from the Prairies." Journal of Economic History 60 (3): 782-818.

[17] Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz (2003). "Mass Schooling and the State." NBER
     Working Paper No. 10075.

                                                28
[18] Goldin, Claudia D. and Robert A. Margo (1992). "The Great Compression: The Wage Struc-
     ture in the United States at Mid-Century." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1):
     1-34.

[19] Goldin, Claudia D. and Kenneth Sokolo¤ (1984). "The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of
     Industrialization: The American Case 1820 to 1850." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 99
     (3): 461-488.

[20] Lamoreaux, Naomi R. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤ (2000). "Location and Technological Change
     in the American Glass Industry During the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries."
     Journal of Economic History 60 (3): 700-729.

[21] Law, Marc T. and Mindy S. Marks (2007). "E¤ects of Occupational Licensing Laws on Min-
     roities: Evidence from the Progressive Era." Working Paper, University of California.

[22] Margo, Robert A. (1990). Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[23] Mitchener, Kris J. and Ian W. McLean (1999). "U.S. Regional Growth and Convergence."
     Journal of Economic History 59 (4): 1016-1042.

[24] Mitchener, Kris J. and Ian W. McLean (2003). "The Productivity of U.S. States Since 1880."
     Journal of Economic Growth 8 (1): 73-114.

[25] Nelson, Richard R. and Gavin Wright (1992). “The Rise and Fall of American Technological
     Leadership: The Postwar Era in Historical Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 30
     (4):1931-1964.

[26] North, Douglass C. (1961). The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790-1860. New York:
     Prentice Hall.

[27] Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch (2001). One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Conse-
     quences of Emancipation. New York: Cambridge.

[28] Rosenbloom, Joshua L. (1990). "One Market or Many? Labor Market Integration in the Late
     Nineteenth-Century United States." Journal of Economic History 50 (1): 85-108.

[29] Rosenbloom, Joshua L. (1996). "Was there a National Labor Market at the End of the Nine-
     teenth Century? New Evidence on Earnings in Manufacturing." Journal of Economic History
     56 (3): 626-656.

[30] Ruggles, Steven and Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
     Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public Use Microdata Se-
     ries: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center
     [producer and distributor], 2004.

[31] Sylla, Richard (1969). "Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization
     in the United States, 1863-1913." Journal of Economic History 39 (4): 657-86.

[32] Thorndike, Edward L. (1909). "The Teaching Sta¤ of Secondary Schools in the United States"
     United States Bureau of Education Bulletin No. 4. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
     O¢ ce.


                                              29
[33] Thorndike, Edward L. (1922). "Changes in the Quality of the Pupils Entering High School."
     The School Review: A Journal of Secondary Education 30 (5): 355-359.

[34] Thorndike, Edward L. (1923). "The Interests of Teachers in Studies During their High-School
     Course." School and Society 17 (443): 419-420.

[35] Thorndike, Edward L. and Eleanor Robinson (1923). "The Diversity of High School Students’
     Programs." Teachers College Record 24 (2): 111-121.

[36] Thorndike, Edward L. and P.M. Symonds (1922). "The Occupations of High School Graduates
     and Non-Graduates." The School Review: A Journal of Secondary Education 30 (6): 443-451.

[37] United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the
     United States. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing O¢ ce. Various Years.

[38] United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Census of Manufactures.
     Washington, D.C.: Government Printing O¢ ce. Various Years.

[39] Uwaifo, Ruth (2006). "Africa’s Education Enigma? The Nigerian Story." Working Paper,
     Georgia Tech.

[40] Wright, Gavin (1981). "Cheap Labor and Southern Textiles, 1880-1930." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 96 (4): 605-629.

[41] Wright, Gavin (1987). "The Economic Revolution in the American South." Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives 1 (1): 161-178.

[42] Wright, Gavin (1990). "The Origins of American Industrial Success." American Economic
     Review 80 (4): 651-668.




                                              30
6     Appendix

6.1    Proof of Proposition 1:
A) Proving Kn = K
    Since the land-intensive technology and the old capital-intensive technologies have the same
factor shares, it can be readily shown that they will always employ the same ratio of inputs. It is
also trivial to show that Kn; Hn and Ln are increasing in A: Thus, A can be derived as the level
that equates the marginal return to capital in the new capital-intensive technology when all capital
is employed in that sector (i.e., Kn = K) to the marginal return to land in the land-intensive sector
(which equals the potential marginal return to capital in the old capital-intensive sector):

                                         RK;n (A ) = RK;o (A )
              A   K   1
                          (fH H) (fL L)1                =        T     1
                                                                           ((1     fH ) H) ((1         fL ) L)1

Solving for
                           (1             )1                 H              (1       ) (T + K)
                  A =                                                                                  1
                           (1             )1                 L                    ( T + K)
                                                ~ K;o (A ) and so Kn = K.
     For all levels higher than A , RK;n (A ) = R
                  Hn Ln
     B. Proving H > L
                                                   Hn             Ln                                        Hn    Ln
     We prove by contradiction. De…ning fH         H and fL        L we assume                              H     L ,   which is
fH   < fL .Optimality again requires

                                                                              1
                                                  K             fH H
                           wH        =    A
                                                 fL L           fL L
                                                                                              1
                                                  T                (1       fH ) H
                                     =                                                                                       (1)
                                               (1 fL ) L            (1      fL ) L
                                                                  K           fH H
                            wL = (1                     )A
                                                                 fL L          fL L
                                                                     T              (1        fH ) H
                                     = (1               )                                                                    (2)
                                                            (1       fL ) L          (1       fL ) L

     Dividing the two equations by each other yields:

                                                 (1     fH )               fH
                                                                 =
                                (1             ) (1     fL )               fL      (1              )

                                            (1              )          (1                 )


     But   > , by assumption.

6.2    Proof of Proposition 2
A) Proof of Hn > Ho



                                                                31
   Again, one can trivially show that Hn is increasing in A, so it su¢ ces to show that at A = A ,
Hn > Ho . We prove equivalently that fH > f~H . Consider the …rst order conditions above. Dividing
the top by the bottom yields and expression for which we de…ne an implicit function:
                                          "          (1 f )
                                                               #
                                                                                                  H
                                                                          (1      ) fH
                                     g1 (fH ; fL ) =                       (1 fL )                          =0
                                                                             fL (1                    )

     It is trivial to show that @g1 =@fH < 0 and @g1 =@fL < 0. Since fL < fH , it su¢ ces to show that
g1 (fH ,f~L ) > 0. Substituting in f~H = f~L = K=(T + K) yields
    ~

                                                T
                              g1 (f~H ; f~L ) =                                                                              <0
                                                K                   (1                   )    (1                    )

   since > .
   B) Proof of wwHL > ww~~HL
   We prove by contradiction assume:
                                                                         wH                  w
                                                                                             ~H
                                                                                        <
                                                                         wL                  w
                                                                                             ~L
                                                                                                                                  !   1
                                                                            1
                                              (1          fH ) H                                                        f~H H
                                                                                        <
                    (1               )         (1         fL ) L                             (1                 )        f~L L
                                                                            1
                                                          1     fH
                                                                                        < 1
                                                          1     fL
                                                                          fH            < fL

    which contradicts Proposition 1.     /
    C) Proof of Ln > L   ~ o for 8A for A^ > A
    It is trivial to show that both Hn and Ln are increasing in A: We show that Hn + Ln < H      ~o + L
                                                                                                      ~o
for A = A and then derive A.     ^
    Assume A = A and Ln > L        ~ o . By construction at A ; the marginal product of capital and land
are equated, as are the marginal product of low skilled workers:

                                                                A K             1
                                                                                    (fH H) (fL L)1                            =
                                                      1                                                    1
                                          T               ((1        fH ) H) ((1                  fL ) L)

                                                                                    1
                                         (1                     )A K                    (fH H) (fL L)                         =
                                                          1
                         (1               )T                  ((1        fH ) H) ((1                  fL ) L)

   Dividing these two expressions by each other yields:

                                                  1              fL L                                 1                 (1    fL ) L
                                                                                    =
                                     (1                        ) K                           (1             )                 T
                                              T                                                       K
                                                               (1        fL ) =                                 fL
                                   (1       )                                                (1             )
                                (1         )K
                                                                                    = fL
                   (1              ) K + (1                              )T



                                                                            32
   The expressions can be solved for fL and fH: . Now we start with the assumption:

                                         (1           )K                       K
                                                                       >
                               (1             ) K + (1           )T          T +K
                                                                       <

which contradicts (A2)
   We now derive A^ by assuming:
                                                                 K
                                                 f^L = f~L =                                       (3)
                                                               T +K
                            ^ The …rst order conditions for high and low skilled labor again yield
and solving for the implied A.
the following expression:

                   1                1     f^L             1              1     f^H
                                                   =
                                        f^L                                  f^H
                        1                 T ^             1
                                            fH     =                   (1     fH )
                                          K
                                                                      (1            )K
                                           f^H     =
                                                        [ (1            )K +       (1    )T]

   Substituting f^L and f^H into the …rst order condition on high-skilled labor, we solve for A:
                                                                                              ^

                                                 (1         ) (T + K)            H
                        A^ =
                                    [ (1               ) K + (1              )T] L

6.3       Proof of Proposition 3
The relative wage equals the ratio of the marginal products in agriculture, which can be simpli…ed
to:
                                                                     La L
                                    wH =wL =                           =
                                                       1             La H
                            d log (wH =wL )            d log(1 fL ) d log(1 fH )
                                                 =
                             d log (K=T )               d log (K=T )     d log (K=T )
                                      d log(1 fH )    d log(1 fL )                     dHn
   so we proceed by showing that       d log(K=T ) < d log(K=T ) < 0, which implies d(K=T ) > 0 and
  dLn
d(K=T )> 0, and,  by the above equation, d(w  H =wL )
                                            d(K=T ) > 0. To simplify presentation, we change notation
to work directly  with the fractions of labor in agriculture, a fL 1 fL and a fH         1 fH , and
use the implicit function de…ned by the log of the …rst-order conditions for comparative statics




                                                          33
                                         log                  + log A + ( +                            1) loga fL +
                                                                      a
                                  (1                   ) log (1            fL ) + (1                   ) loga fH +
                                             a                            K                                    H
                   (    1) log (1                fH ) +        log             +(                      ) log       = 0
                                                                          T                                    L
                                             1
                                 log                                + log A + ( + ) loga fL +
                                             1
                                                  (              ) log (1 a fL )                         loga fH +
                                             a                       K                                         H
                            log (1               fH ) +        log        +(                           ) log       = 0
                                                                      T                                        L

Now solving the …rst order conditions for the change d loga fH and d loga fL as log (K=T ) yields the
following system of equations:
               "                   # "                         #
                     (1    )+                ( +      1)
                                 af                                                      af
                  (1    )          H
                                                          (1                )              L                d loga fH
                             1    af                                                1     af
                   "                 H   #                "                                    L   #       d log(K=T )
                                                                                                            d loga fL    =
                                                                    ( + )+                                 d log(K=T )
                            af                                                      af
                              H                                                       L
                        1    af
                                H
                                                              ( + )             1    af
                                                                                          L

    De…ning the 2 by 2 matrix as M . Given                     af    >a
                                                   fH (which follows immediately from Proposition
                                                                 L
1), we show after algebraic simpli…cation that that the determinant of M is positive:

                                                                    af                        af
                                                                      H                         L
                             jM j =                   +              af
                                                                                +              af
                                                                                                           +
                                                                1       H       1                 L
                                                              af               af
                                                                H                L
                                                               af               a
                                                                                                       +
                                                          1       H          1    fL
                                                                          af                       af
                                                                            L                        H
                                                   (            )          af                       af
                                                                                                               >0
                                                                      1       L               1        H

Applying Cramer’s rule, we show that the resulting solutions are therefore negative:
                                                 h         af
                                                                i
                                                              L
                                   a
                             d log fH              1 +  1 a fL
                                         =                        <0
                            d log (K=T )             jM j
                                                 h         af
                                                                i
                                                              H
                                   a
                              d log fL             1 +  1 fHa
                                         =                        <0
                            d log (K=T )              jM j

and the di¤erence between the …rst exceeds the second:




                                                                      34
                                                                                 af                     af
                                                                                      L                   H
                  d loga fL         d loga fH                                1       af
                                                                                          L         1    af
                                                                                                            H
                                                       =    2                            af                  af
                                                                                                                         3
                d log (K=T )       d log (K=T )                          +                 L
                                                                                          af       +           H
                                                                                                              af
                                                            6                        1         L         1       H       7
                                                            6                    af                     af               7
                                                            6        +       1
                                                                                   L
                                                                                  af                1
                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                         af          +   7
                                                            4                             L
                                                                                              af
                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                             af
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                L                  H
                                                                    ((           )        1    af
                                                                                                    L        1    af
                                                                                                                     H

                                                       > 0

6.4   Proof of Proposition 4
                     ~                                                                                               ~
The fact that RRT > R
                K    RK                                                     RK
                      ~ T follows directly from Proposition 1: We know that R
                                                                            ~ T = 1, and from the
proof in Proposition 1, we show that RK > RT . We show now that the relative return to capital
and labor is increasing in H=L:

                         RK                   AK       1 (f H)
                                                           H             (fL L)1
                               =
                         RT           T    1 ((1       fH ) H) ((1               fL ) L)1
                                                   1
                                          K                fH            1   fL                    H
                               = A
                                          T                fL            1   fH                    L

                               1              fH            1                     1           fH
                                                       =
                                              fL                                  1           fL

                                                                                      1
                               RK             (1                )        K                    fH H
                                     = A
                               RT             (1                )        T                    fL L
                                                            1                        1
                     d (RK =RT )               K                Hn                        d (Hn =Ln )
                                     = C                                                              >0
                       d (K=L)                 T                Ln                         d (K=L)

   where
                                                                (1                    )
                                      C = A(                )
                                                                (1                    )

6.5   Proof of Proposition 5
Given condition (iii), the e¤ect of (h=l) on wh =wl follows from the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem.
Condition 1 connects the e¤ects on wh;s =wl;s to wH =wL . Similarly, given condition (iii), the e¤ect
of Hs =Ls on wh =wl follows from the Rybcynski Theorem, while Condition (ii) connects these e¤ects
on wh;s =wl;s to wH =wL .




                                                           35
                                                  Table 1
                     Summary of Productivity Estimates by Region and State, 1880-1920

                     Nominal Personal Inomce per Capita             Price Adjusted Income per Worker
                         Relative to the US Average                       Relative to US Average
     Region           1880           1900         1920            1880             1900          1920

West                   190            153           124            131              126             117
Midwest                97             103           101            110              114             102
South                  54             54            64             56               56               67
Northeast              114            139           132            133              128             125

                                                                               Percent Cotton Growth Rate of
                      Price Adjusted Income per Worker         Percent of       Mechanically Income / Worker
      State           1880          1900         1920        Labor in Mining     Harvested      1880 - 1920

California            777.1          754.9        2223.0           13.1            87.0           1.14%
Georgia               213.5          206.8        857.2            0.1             14.0           1.51%
Illinois              669.6          729.2        2042.1           1.7             0.0            1.21%
Iowa                  565.0          625.4        1585.7           0.9              0.0           1.12%
Ohio                  593.4          624.8        1842.0           0.8              0.0           1.23%
Texas                 289.0          389.6        1371.3            0.0            58.0           1.69%
Wisconsin             508.1          523.7        1537.4           0.4             0.0            1.20%

Alabama                  214.1        212.5          796.9          0.3            8.0             1.43%
Arizona                  650.1        689.8         1747.5          30.0           73.0            1.07%
Colorado                 638.6        733.5         1817.6          32.2           0.0             1.14%
Indiana                  498.4        545.5         1610.2          0.9            0.0             1.27%
Maine                    413.1        464.5         1558.5          0.6            0.0             1.44%
Massachusetts            693.1        677.6         1891.2          0.2            0.0             1.09%
Michigan                 536.2        528.0         1641.0          1.6            0.0             1.21%
Minnesota                590.2        619.9         1522.0          0.0            0.0             1.03%
Montana                  647.9        738.7         1643.2          27.8           0.0             1.01%
Nevada                  1034.6        776.8         1976.0          28.6           0.0             0.70%
New York                 750.7        778.5         2438.5          0.3            0.0             1.28%
New Mexico               275.8        408.7         1370.5          6.6            64.0            1.74%
Oregon                   550.5        570.0         1920.4          7.1            0.0             1.36%
Pennsylvania             644.2        635.2         1935.8          7.3            0.0             1.19%
South Carolina           190.6        176.4          805.7          0.1            6.0             1.57%
South Dakota             433.9        559.8         1596.5          14.0           0.0             1.41%
Tennessee                285.9        284.3         1000.1          0.4            19.0            1.36%
Washington               508.1        523.7         1537.4          4.0            0.0             1.20%
Utah                     431.8        558.9         1629.5          9.5            0.0             1.44%
Wyoming                  638.3        574.7         2093.6          4.5            0.0             1.29%
Sources:
Regional Estimates (Top Panel) come from Mitchener and McLean (1999) Table 1 (p. 1019)
State Estimates (Bottom Panel) come from Mitchener and McLean (2003) Appendix Table 1
The relative income estimates are population weighted and take the US average as 100 (e.g. a region estimate
of 50 implies that region had income per worker that was 50% of the US average).
For the methodology used to estimate Personal Income per Capita and Price Adjusted Income per Worker
see Mitchener and McLean (1999). For the methodology used to estimate the percent of the labor force in
mining and the percent of cotton mechanicaly harvested see the appendix of Mitchener and McLean (2003).
                                                                  Table 2
                                Summary of Educational Endowment Factors for the Returns to Education, 1900-1930
                                            State          1900 Literacy Rate 1910 Literacy Rate
                                         California              94.47              95.48
                                          Georgia                66.94              76.74
                                           Illinois               95.9              95.73
                                            Iowa                 97.59              97.98
                                            Ohio                 95.84              96.46
                                           Texas                 83.95              87.77
                                         Wisconsin               95.12              96.34
Literacy Rate Calculated for those above the age of 10 based on IPUMS 1900 and 1910 5% samples.

                                           Public Elementary and Secondary School Expenditures 1900-1930
             Total Expenditures (thousands of Dollars)       Per capita of state population (in Dollars)    Per capita of population 5-17, ( in Dollars)
     State
                 1900         1910        1920       1930        1900       1910        1920         1930       1900       1910        1920         1930
California      6,909       18,211      48,980 146,943            4.65       7.66       14.29       25.88      19.61       39.40       72.12      128.99
Georgia         1,980        4,420       9,076     18,677         0.89       1.70        3.13         6.42       2.52       5.30        9.72        20.87
Illinois       17,757       34,036      69,358 154,142            8.08       6.04       10.69       20.20      13.03       24.53       44.32        87.07
Iowa            8,496       12,767      37,334     50,737         3.81       5.76       15.53       20.53      12.04       21.85       62.44        82.53
Ohio           13,335       25,500      67,427 145,910            3.21       5.35       11.71       21.95      11.30       22.63       50.63        91.22
Texas           4,465       11,777      33,606     78,150         1.46       3.02        7.21       13.42        4.18       9.65       23.81        48.01
Wisconsin       5,493       10,789      27,255     54,088         2.65       4.64       10.36       18.40        8.88      16.84       39.93        72.71
Sources: 1900: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1925, 1910-1930: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1935


                         School Attendance as Percentage of Eligible Population 14-20 Years of Age 1910-1930
                              14 to 15 Year Olds                16 to 17 Year Olds                18 to 20 Year Olds
                  State
                            1910        1920      1930       1910        1920       1930       1910         1920       1930
             California      83.6        89.1      97.2       50.1        54.7       82.1        17.3        21.9       32.7
             Georgia         59.3        67.7      73.7       37.3        39.7       43.6        12.1        11.7       14.3
             Illinois        75.4        79.0      92.4       36.8        37.1       57.1        11.7        12.3       19.9
             Iowa            81.8        85.8      89.8       50.5        51.4       63.9        17.9        19.4       25.1
             Ohio            79.0        87.8      96.6       42.4        44.4       67.7        14.1        14.4       22.8
             Texas           76.7        79.1      84.6       51.0        48.8       57.2        15.2        14.2       19.8
             Wisconsin       75.4        77.8      86.3       36.2        42.2       63.4        13.1        14.6       21.5
             Sources: 1910-1920:Abstract of the 14th Census of the United States, 1930: Abstract of the 15th Census of the United States
                                                                    Table 3A
                                 Summary of Technological Endowment Factors for the Returns to Education, 1900-1910

    1900
                 Percent of Labor     Value of Livestock Value of Machinery Value of Livestock Value of Machinery Capital per Establishment 1900/
    State      Force in Manufacturing    Per Capita          per Capita     per Ag Workforce Per Ag Workforce Capital per Establishment 1905

California             14.73                 45.3                 14.4                306.0                96.9                         2.5
Georgia                7.62                  15.9                 4.4                 53.2                 14.8                         3.5
Illinois               20.49                 40.2                 9.3                 279.1                64.8                         3.2
Iowa                   7.87                  124.9                26.0                482.5                100.3                        3.4
Ohio                   25.28                 30.3                 8.7                 190.1                54.9                         3.3
Texas                  4.86                  78.9                 9.9                 251.6                31.5                         5.0
Wisconsin              19.42                 46.6                 14.1                237.8                72.2                         2.4

    1910
                 Percent of Labor     Value of Livestock Value of Machinery Value of Livestock Value of Machinery
    State      Force in Manufacturing    Per Capita          per Capita     per Ag Workforce Per Ag Workforce

California             24.13                 53.6                 15.4                367.8                105.3
Georgia                12.79                 31.0                 8.0                 99.2                 25.7
Illinois               39.05                 54.8                 14.0                449.4                114.6
Iowa                   17.69                 176.6                42.9                751.9                182.7
Ohio                   47.05                 41.4                 10.7                300.9                78.1
Texas                  9.69                  81.8                 14.6                269.6                48.1
Wisconsin              39.61                 67.9                 22.7                357.3                119.4

Sources:
Value of Machinery and Value of Livestock: 1916 Statistical Abstract of the United States
Percent of the Labor force in Manufacturing: Percent of labor force in Broad, Large and Speical Manufacturing and Electrification Industries
as given by the 1924 Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Population Size, and Agricultural Workforce Size: 1924 Statistical Abstract of the United States
Capital per Establishment in 1900: 1905 Statistical Abstract of the United States
Capital per Establishment in 1905: 1910 Statistical Abstract of the United States
                                                              Table 3B
                           Summary of Technological Endowment Factors for the Returns to Education, 1890 - 1910


                     Number of Tech.          Value Added per            Internal Combustion       Electric Motors        Horsepower per
     State         Industry Firms, 1890    Man. Establishment, 1904          Engines, 1904              1899            Establishment, 1899

California                1,540                      20.67                         --                    281                   25.41
Georgia                   1,673                      49.20                        118                    45                    45.27
Illinois                  5,459                      53.01                       1,447                  1,839                  38.91
Iowa                      2,613                      30.35                        922                    211                   22.09
Ohio                      7,997                      46.12                       2,004                  1,721                  56.51
Texas                     2,503                      25.68                        403                    54                    37.39
Wisconsin                 4,512                      45.21                       1,037                   551                   46.47


                     Number of Tech           Value Added per            Internal Combustion       Electric Motors        Horsepower per
     State         Industry Firms, 1900    Man. Establishment, 1909          Engines, 1909              1909            Establishment, 1904

California                2,184                      22.78                        765                  1,591                   30.76
Georgia                   3,301                      48.20                        418                   829                    68.47
Illinois                  8,209                      58.93                       1,755                 17,432                  49.70
Iowa                      3,821                      38.25                       1,336                 1,448                   24.67
Ohio                      9,557                      64.78                       3,354                 21,279                  81.03
Texas                     5,793                      29.88                        802                  1,011                   52.13
Wisconsin                 4,512                      57.97                       1,578                 7,501                   51.44

Sources:
12th, 13th, and 14th Census of Manufactures, General Report and Analytical Tables (various Tables).
Technical Industry firms are defined as the following: Aluminum Manufactures, Automobile bodies and parts, Automobile repairing, Automobiles,
brick, tile, and fire-clay products, bronze and brass products, Copper products, Shop construction and repairs, chemicals, Coke, Electrical
machinery, Electroplating, Steam gas and water engines, Explosives, Foundry products, glass, iron and steel, Lithographing,
Patent medicines and compounds, Rubber, Steam fittings, Stoves and furnaces, Structural ironwork, Sulfuric, Nitric and mixed Acids,
Wire and Wirework. Oil and Petroleum firms are not listed until 1919, and therefore are not included here.
                                                    Table 3C
                  Summary of Technological Endowment Factors for the Returns to Education, 1900-1930


                   Internal Combustion       Horsepower Per        Internal Combustion Engines        Electric Motors
     State          Horsepower, 1900        Establishment 1904        per Establishment, 1919     per Establishment, 1919

California               3744                      30.76                       0.09                        0.33
Georgia                   365                      68.47                       0.13                        0.42
Illinois                 8758                      49.70                       0.06                        2.34
Iowa                     4524                      24.67                       0.14                        0.69
Ohio                     14230                     81.03                       0.17                        2.87
Texas                     968                      52.13                       0.19                        0.54
Wisconsin                4358                      51.44                       0.16                        2.08


                   Internal Combustion       Horsepower Per        Internal Combustion Engines     Electric Horsepower
     State          Horsepower, 1910        Establishment 1914        per Establishment, 1929     per Establishment, 1929

California               10115                    48.82                        2.7                         14.1
Georgia                   3780                    77.04                        2.5                         12.2
Illinois                 37025                    71.02                        6.9                         55.7
Iowa                      8025                    34.04                        1.6                         33.5
Ohio                     103801                   127.91                       10.1                        127.1
Texas                    15745                    66.05                        11.7                        32.2
Wisconsin                19531                    74.95                        1.3                         57.6

Sources:
Establishment counts from the 1925 Statistical Abstract of the United States
Internal Combustion Horsepower: Abstract of the 14th Census of the United States
Horsepower per Establishment: 1916 Statistical Abstract of the United States
Internal Combustion and Electric Motors per Establishment: Abstract of the 14th Census of the United States
Internal Combustion and Electric Motors Horsepower per Establishment: Abstract of the 15th Census of the United States
                                      Table 4
                      Summary Statistics from Thorndike Report

                                                              Ohio, Illinois,
                                     California   Georgia     & Wisconsin       Texas
Mean Annual Salary (Overall)           1142           828          848          733
                                       (316)          (377)       (379)         (278)

Mean Annual Salary (Men)               1375           1001         918          823
                                       (344)          (331)       (403)         (290)

Mean Annual Salary (Women)             1020           474          757          575
                                       (219)          (145)       (323)         (159)

Mean Years Schooling (Overall)         13.8           12.6        12.6          12.6
                                       (1.4)          (1.7)       (1.9)         (1.9)

Mean Years Schooling (Men)             13.9           12.9        12.4          12.8
                                       (1.6)          (1.6)       (2.1)         (2.0)

Mean Years Schooling (Women)           13.7           11.9        12.9          12.2
                                       (1.4)          (1.6)       (1.6)         (1.6)

Mean Years Experience (Overall)         8.3            8.2         9.1           9.6
                                       (7.0)          (5.8)       (7.2)         (7.1)

Mean Years Experience (Men)            10.6            9.2        10.0          10.3
                                       (7.3)          (6.1)       (7.1)         (7.3)

Mean Years Experience (Women)           7.1            6.2         8.0           8.3
                                       (6.5)          (4.6)       (7.1)         (6.6)

Fraction Male                          0.34           0.67        0.57          0.64

Number of Observations                  658           137         3141          381

Source: Authors' Calculations from Thorndike Report
Standard errors are listed in parentheses.
                                         Table 5
            Mincerian Regressions for the Returns to Education by State, 1909

                                                           Ohio, Illinois,
                         California         Georgia        & Wisconsin           Texas
Schooling                  0.005             0.033            0.070              0.071
                          (0.006)           (0.016)          (0.003)            (0.009)
Experience                 0.034             0.012               0.048           0.034
                          (0.004)           (0.013)             (0.004)         (0.007)
Exper. Squared            -0.0007           0.0004               -0.0008      -0.0009
                         (0.0001)          (0.0006)             (0.0001)     (0.0003)
Male Dummy                 0.22               0.64                0.16           0.27
                          (0.02)             (0.06)              (0.01)         (0.03)
Intercept                  6.67               5.63                5.35           5.26
                          (0.08)             (0.20)              (0.04)         (0.10)

R2                         0.45               0.61               0.39            0.42

N                           658               137                3141            381
Source: Authors' Calculations from Thorndike Report
Dependent variable is the log of the wage in all regressions.
Robust Standard errors are listed in parentheses.
                                                    Table 6
              Comparing Mincerian Regression Estimates From Individual- and Median-Level Regressions
                                   Schooling Coefficient           Male Coefficient                Intercept
                                  Individual      Median        Individual    Median     Individual        Median
             State                  Data           Data           Data         Data        Data             Data
           California               0.005          0.013          0.22         0.22         6.67               6.59
            Georgia                 0.033          0.026          0.64         0.64         5.63               5.70
   Ohio, Illinois, & Wisconsin      0.070          0.058          0.17         0.17         5.35               5.52
             Texas                  0.071          0.071          0.27         0.28         5.26               5.24
Source: Author's Calculations from Thorndike Report.
Dependent variable is the log of the wage in all regressions.
                             Table 7
        Median Mincerian Regression Results for Illinois, Ohio,
                       and Wisconsin, 1909

                            Illinois       Ohio        Wisconsin
Schooling                   0.073          0.080         0.034
                           (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.010)
Experience                  0.026          0.030         0.042
                           (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.010)
Exper. Squared             0.0001         -0.0003        -0.0006
                          (0.0003)       (0.0003)       (0.0003)
Male Dummy                  0.192          0.079         0.274
                           (0.048)        (0.047)       (0.051)
Intercept                   5.819          5.766         6.029
                           (0.078)        (0.104)       (0.085)

N                            122           133             99
    2
R                       0.69            0.59           55.00
Source: Authors' calculations from Thorndike Report
Dependent variable is the log of the wage in all regressions.
Robust standard errors listed in parentheses.
                                                Table 8
               Mincerian Regressions for Men, Women, and Less Experienced Teachers, 1909

                                      Individual Data                                 Median Data
                     California     Georgia     OH, WI, IL      Texas      Illinois      Ohio       Wisconsin
                                                              Men Only
Schooling                0.004        0.020         0.075         0.085     0.084          0.088      0.044
                       (0.010)       (0.021)      (0.004)       (0.009)    (0.013)       (0.011)     (0.015)
Experience               0.041        0.006         0.048         0.035     0.020          0.033      0.040
                       (0.007)       (0.017)      (0.004)       (0.009)    (0.013)       (0.124)     (0.014)
Exper. Squared          -0.001        0.001        -0.001        -0.001     0.000         -0.001      0.000
                      (0.0002)      (0.0007)     (0.0001)      (0.0003)   (0.0004)      (0.0004)    (0.0005)
Intercept                6.890        6.470         5.480         5.360     5.979          5.816      6.221
                        (0.13)        (0.26)       (0.05)        (0.13)    (0.114)       (0.104)     (0.124)
N                       226           92           1776          243          60          67           47
R2                      0.22          0.15         0.33         0.34          0.69       0.61         0.58

                                                             Women Only
Schooling               0.007         0.067         0.063         0.035     0.064         0.072        0.023
                       (0.007)       (0.026)      (0.005)       (0.013)    (0.012)       (0.013)     (0.014)
Experience              0.028         0.014         0.046         0.029     0.033         0.027        0.047
                       (0.004)       (0.030)      (0.004)       (0.011)    (0.014)       (0.013)     (0.014)
Exper. Squared          0.000         0.001        -0.001        -0.001     0.000         0.000       -0.001
                      (-0.0002)     (0.0019)     (0.0001)      (0.0005)   (0.0005)      (0.0004)    (0.0005)
Intercept               6.640         5.190         5.420         5.730     5.834         5.798        6.111
                        (0.10)        (0.32)       (0.07)        (0.18)    (0.104)       (0.109)     (0.109)
N                       432           45           1365          138          62          66           52
R2                      0.30          0.29         0.41         0.14          0.62       0.57         0.43


                                                 Less Experienced Teachers Only
Schooling               0.020        0.012         0.052        0.071      0.047         0.059        0.032
                       (0.010)      (0.030)        (0.04)      (0.010)    (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.010)
Male Dummy              0.231        0.769         0.201        0.280      0.224         0.152        0.254
                       (0.027)      (0.091)       (0.014)      (0.037)    (0.063)       (0.053)      (0.052)
Intercept               6.538        5.884         5.690        5.355      5.799         5.602        6.013
                       (0.134)      (0.362)       (0.053)      (0.130)    (0.137)       (0.119)      (0.123)
N                       298           54           1278          155          51          54           50
    2
R                       0.20          0.59         0.20         0.43          0.42       0.48         0.43
Source: Authors' calculations from Thorndike Report.
Dependent variable is log of the wage in each regression.
Robust standard errors listed in parentheses.
Less experienced teachers are those with less than five years of experience
                                                       Table 9
                              Comparing Mincerian Regression Estimates from 1909 and 1940

                                                        Teachers Only,
                 Weighted Teachers,   Teachers Only,    Sample States,
                 Sample States, OLS Sample States, OLS Robust Regression All Workers, Sample  All Workers, All
    Variable           (1909)            (1940)             (1940)       States, OLS (1940) States, OLS (1940)
                        0.083             0.091              0.089              0.096              0.090
   Schooling
                        (0.003)              (0.010)              (0.008)           (0.001)       (0.000)

                        -0.145               -0.162               -0.125            -0.452        -0.459
    Female
                        (0.010)              (.056)               (0.044)           (0.007)       (0.004)
                         0.034               0.035                0.039              0.047         0.516
   Experience
                        (0.002)              (0.007)              (0.005)           (0.001)       (0.005)
                         -0.001               -0.001               -0.001            -0.001        -0.058
Exper. Squared
                        (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.001)
Source: Author's calculation from IPUMS (1940) and Thorndike Report (1909)
Dependent variable is the log of the wage in each regression.
Robust standard errors are listed in parentheses.
                                                     Figure 1: Comparison of Mincerian Returns to Skill Over Time


                                0.14



                                0.12



                                 0.1
Mincerian Return to Education




                                0.08



                                0.06



                                0.04



                                0.02



                                  0
                                       1940            1950              1960       1970                1980              1990        2000
                                                                                    Year                                            Source: IPUMS
                                         Just Teachers, All States, Sex Dummy              All Workers, All States, Sex Dummy
                                         Just Teachers, Samples States, Sex Dummy          All Workers, Samples States, Sex Dummy
