NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL-ECONOMY POSITIVE ROLE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM
IN SUSTAINING IMMIGRATION (BUT NOT VICE VERSA)
Edith Sand
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 13598
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13598

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

We acknowledge Steve Coate, Zvi Hercowitz and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull for insightful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Edith Sand and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Political-Economy Positive Role of the Social Security System in Sustaining Immigration
(But Not Vice Versa)
Edith Sand and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 13598
November 2007
JEL No. E6,H1
ABSTRACT
In the political-economy debate people express the idea that immigrants are good because they can
help pay for the old, thus help sustaining the social security system. In addition, the median voter whose
income derives from wages will wish to keep out the immigrants who will depress his/her wage. Therefore
the decisive voter will keep migrants out. The paper addresses these two accepted propositions. For
this purpose we develop an OLG political economy model of social security and migration to explore
how migration policy and a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security system are jointly determined.
The sub-game perfect Markov , depends on the different patterns of fertility rates among native born
and migrants. Our analysis demonstrates that a social security system may change the first proposition
significantly because the median voter may opt to bring in migrants to help him/her during retirement.
As for the second proposition we get a significantly nuanced version. Not always immigration helps
sustain the social security.

Edith Sand
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978,
ISRAEL
edit@post.tau.ac.il
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

The Political-Economy Positive Role of the
Social Security System in Sustaining
Immigration (But not Vice Versa) ∗
Edith Sand†and Assaf Razin‡

November 12, 2007

Abstract
In the political-economy debate people express the idea that immigrants are good because they can help pay for the old, thus help sustaining the social security system. In addition, the median voter whose
income derives from wages will wish to keep out the immigrants who will
depress his/her wage. Therefore the decisive voter will keep migrants out.
The paper addresses these two accepted propositions. For this purpose
we develop an OLG political economy model of social security and migration to explore how migration policy and a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social
security system are jointly determined. The sub-game perfect Markov ,
depends on the diﬀerent patterns of fertility rates among native born and
migrants. Our analysis demonstrates that a social security system may
change the first proposition significantly because the median voter may
opt to bring in migrants to help him/her during retirement. As for the
second proposition we get a significantly nuanced version. Not always
immigration helps sustain the social security.

1

Introduction

Economic analysis of the intergenerational and intragenerational aspects of the
sustainability of social security has had a revival of sorts in recent time. Attention focuses on the direct impact of the population aging on pay-as-you-go
∗ We

acknowledge Steve Coate, Zvi Hercowitz and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull for insightful comments.
† Tel-Aviv University
‡ Tel aviv University, Cornell University, CEPR, NBER.

1

social security system. In this context, migration is regarded by many as one of
the necessary factors for the sustainability of the system, since it tend to reverse
some consequences of the aging process. The purpose of this paper is to study
how a political-economy equilibrium model, in which both migration and taxes
interact, focusing on the intergenerational aspect of social security, works in the
presence of aging.
All over the world, declining population growth rates and rising life expectancy trigger political-economy forces, which are likely to transform the social security system, as we know it. Due to these demographic changes, the
EU population, in particular, is undergoing a long term trend of ageing, leading
to a likely fall in the working population in the 25 states from 303 million to
297 million by 2020. Two main aspects of the aging process are relevant to the
political sustainability of social security systems. From an economic perspective, a rise in the dependency ratio (i.e., the proportion of retirees per worker)
increases the number of people drawing from the system; while it decreases
the number of contributors. From a political perspective, the older is the median voter, the more relevant is the pension spending in the political agenda.
These two contradicting eﬀects induced by the process of aging, which results
in higher demand for, and lower supply of, social security influence also the
political-economy debate about migration.
There is a large controversy in the economic literature regarding the overall
fiscal influence of migration on host economies. Some argue that the net tax
revenue generated by immigrants is not significant because immigrants consume
much of the benefits they produce- especially in terms of health care and education. However, especially in light of the rapid demographic changes, migration
is often viewed as a policy that may come to the rescue of pay-as-you-go social
security systems, at least in the short run. This view reflects the fact that the
flow of immigrants can alleviate the current demographic imbalance, by influencing the age structure of the host economy. Therefore, even if migration does
not provide in itself a full-fledged long-term solution to falling birth rates and
ageing population, migration policy is considered to be one of the available tools
within a broader policy mix (such as a policy which admits immigrants based
on their skills).
Our analysis demonstrates that even if the median voter may opt to bring
in migrants to help him/her during retirement, it can actually pose a threat
to the social security system that in the absence of migration would have been
assured. This results from the immigrants’ future political power, which aﬀects
the voting strategy of the median voter. The young’s desire for higher immi-

2

gration, to maximize their old-age benefits, is constrained by their desire to
maintain old majority next period leading to an equilibrium path of alternate
taxation/social security policy with positive levels of immigration. Our analyssis
also demonstrates that even though migration depresses native born wages (see
Borjas (2003) for evidence) and the median voter is a wage earner, social security can sustain migration. Because social security provides an incentive for the
relaxation of immigration quotas.
The present paper assumes that both migration and social security policy
variables are endogenous. To isolate the intergenerational aspects we abstract
from intragenerational income transfers considerations. The basic elements are
of the model are standard in this literature. There is a pay-as-you-go social
security system, which employs payroll taxes (at a flat rate) on a representative
working young in order to finance a uniform benefit to the aged population.
Immigrants enter the economy when young, and gain the right to vote only
in the next period, when old. A crucial assumption, which derives the voter’s
strategy, is that immigrants have a higher population growth rate than the
native-born. Thus, immigration is assumed to influence the age structure of the
host economy, by eﬀecting not only the current but also the future dependency
ratio. Oﬀspring of immigrants are assumed to be completely integrated into
the country and have the same population growth as the native-born. The
tax-migration policy is endogenously determined both by conventional eﬀect on
wages, savings, etc., and by strategic considerations, concerning the eﬀect of
the current tax-migration policy on the next period tax-migration policy. The
current young would like to influence the old-young composition of next period
voters through the current migration policy and taxes.
The paper is organized as follows. We survey related literature in Section 2.
Section 3 provides analysis of the base line model, where there is no private savings, the economy does not accumulate capital, and factor prices are exogenous.
Section 4 extends the base line model to include private saving, capital accumulation, and an endogenous determination of the wage and the interest rate.
Section 5 analyzes the model with no social security and Section 6 considers
the eﬀect of aging in the extended model. Section 7 provides an interpretation
and concluding remarks.

2

Background Literature

An empirical investigation of the eﬀect of the proportion of elderly people in
the population on the size of social security benefit per retiree turn out not to
3

be significant (Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999) and Breyer and Craig (1997))
and also negative (Razin, Sadka and Swagel 2002a). Bergstrom and Hartman
(2005) estimate the expected present value of benefits and costs to US voters for
a small permanent increase in social security benefits. In addition, they explore
the sensitivity of political support for social security and reach the conclusion
that a once and for all decrease in benefits would be defeated by a majority
of selfish voters. Cooley and Soares (1999), Bohn (2005), and Boldrin and
Rustichini (2000) analyze the consequences of aging in a general equilibrium
model of social security with production, which results in a rise in the size of
social security systems. Models of altruism between generations reach the same
conclusion (Tabellini (2000) and Hansson and Stuart (1989)). Analyzing the
eﬀect of interest groups on social security suggest ambiguous results. While
some models emphasize the raise in the political power of the elderly (Verbon
and Verhoeven (1992)), other models argue that aging will reduce social security,
since larger groups experience higher deadweight costs and larger free rider
eﬀects, and will thus be less eﬃcient in exerting political pressure (Becker and
Mulligan (1998)). See also Galasso and Profeta (2002) for a survey.
Migration is often viewed as an economic force, which can mitigate the fiscal
burden induced by the process of aging since an inflow of young working age
immigrants may slow down population aging and help paying for social security.
Because immigrants often have low education and high fertility rates, their net
fiscal impact may be costly rather than beneficial. Storesletten (2000) and Lee
and Miller (2000) calibrate a general equilibrium overlapping generations model
to investigates whether a reform of immigration policies could resolve the fiscal
problems associated with the aging. Storesletten finds that selective immigration policies, involving increased inflow of working-age high and medium-skilled
immigrants, can remove the need for a future fiscal reform. Lee and Miller on the
other hand reach the conclusion that since immigrants have lower education and
higher fertility rates than that of the native-born, a higher amount of immigrant
admitted into the economy will east temporarily the projected fiscal burden of
retiring baby boomers in few decades although its overall fiscal consequences
would be quite small. Feldstein (2006) argues that the common prescription of
increased immigration would do little to reduce the future fiscal burden, and
that the only alternative is to shift from a pure tax-financed system to a mixed
system that supplements the tax financed benefits with benefits based on increased saving financial investment. Razin and Sadka (2000, 2004) address the
issue of the fiscal burden associated with immigrants in a pay-as-you-go fiscal
system. They show that the additional obligation of the fiscal system to pay

4

pension benefits to the incoming migrants, when they retire, could be shifted
forward indefinitely. If, hypothetically, the world would come to a stop at a certain point of time in the future, the young generation at that point would bear
the deferred cost of the present migration. But in an ever-lasting economy, the
migrants, by supplying work and helping the financing the pension benefit of
period zero to native-born retirees, are a boon to the host country population:
old, young, and future generations.
A pioneering paper which studied immigration policy in a political economy
setup was the paper by Benhabib (1997). He examines the determination of immigration policies that impose capital and skill (human capital) requirements on
heterogeneous immigrants through majority voting process. The model demonstrates that the native born population will be polarized between those who
would like an immigration policy to maximize the domestic capital-labor ratio
and those who would like to minimize it. Dolmas and Huﬀman (2004) and
Ortega (2005) add another angle to the political debate and model the joint decisions over immigration quotas and redistributive tax policy. Both address the
voting process in a dynamic set-up, where the native-born voters’ preferences
over immigration are influenced by the prospect that immigrants will be voting
over future tax policy. The paper of Dolmas and Huﬀman refers to the decisions over immigration quotas and redistributive tax policy in subsequent three
periods model with diﬀerent degree of international capital mobility. The latter
paper considers a infinite horizon general equilibrium model of immigration and
redistribution policies, with a heterogeneously skilled population who chooses
an immigration policy by majority vote while anticipating that immigration affects the skill premium and the skill composition of the electorate. Razin, Sadka
and Swagell (2002b) show, in a stylized model of migration and human capital
formation, that low-skill immigration may lead to a lower tax burden and less redistribution than would be the case with no immigration, even though migrants
(naturally) join the pro-tax/transfer coalition. This is due to two conflicting
eﬀects of migration on taxation and redistribution. On the one hand, migrants
who are net beneficiaries of the welfare state will join forces with the low income
native-born voters in favor of higher taxes and transfers. On the other hand,
redistribution becomes more costly to the native-born as the migrants share the
redistribution benefits with them. These models clearly dial with intragenerational transfer, and not the intergenerational transfer as in a pure social security
model. The present paper will extend this growing body of literature by analyzing the sub-game perfect Markov equilibria of a political-economy model, where
the political decisions regarding migration and pay-as-you-go social security are

5

jointly determined, focusing on the intergenerational aspect of social security.

3

A Base Line Model

The economy is populated by overlapping generations of identical individuals.
Individuals live for two periods. When young, the representative individual
works and makes a labor-leisure choice. Underdeveloped capital markets do
not allow any private savings. Social security is therefore the only means of
intertemporal transfers. When old, the individual retires, and receives social
security benefits. The tax-transfer system is "pay as you go" where in every
period the government levies a flat tax on the young’s wage income, which
fully finances the social security benefits paid to the old. Immigrants enter the
economy when young, and gain the right to vote only in the next period, when
old. They have the same preferences as those of the native-born, except from
having a higher population growth rate. Immigrants are fully integrated into the
social security system upon arrival into the country. Oﬀspring of immigrants
are like native-born in all respects (in particular, they have the same rate of
population growth).
We assume that the utility of the representative young individual is logarithmic 1 , given by:
U y (wt , τ t , bt+1 ) = Log[wt lt (1 − τ t ) −
U o (bt ) = bt

ltΨ+1
] + βLog[bt+1 ]
Ψ+1

(1)
(2)

where U y and U o are the utility functions of young and old individuals, β ∈ [0, 1]
is the discount factor, and Ψ > 0 a labor- disutility parameter (also equals to the
labor supply elasticity with respect to the wage rate). The transfer payments
to the old at period t, bt , are financed by collecting a flat income tax rate,
τ t ∈ [0, 1], from the young individual’s wage income at the same period, wt lt ,
where lt denotes hours worked.
Labor is a single input in the production of a homogenous final good. The
production function is linear:
Yt = Nt

(3)

where Yt and Nt are period t output and labor supply, respectively. Competitive equilibrium wage rate, which is equal to the marginal productivity of
1 Note

that this type of utility function implies that there are no income eﬀects on the
demand for leisure (Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman (1988)).

6

labor, is constant and normalized to unity. A worker can be either native-born
or immigrant, perfectly substitutable, and with equal productivities. The immigration quotas is expressed as a certain percentage of the number of young
individuals in the native-born population, γ ∈ [0, 1] 2 . Labor supply is:
Nt = Lt lt (1 + γ t )

(4)

where Lt is the number of young individuals in the native-born population (old
people do not work).
Immigrants have the same preferences as the native-born population, but
diﬀerent population growth rates. We assume that the native-born population
has a lower population growth rate, n ∈ [−1, 1], than that of the immigrant
population, m ∈ [−1, 1], so that, n < m. We also assume that the immigrant’s
descendants are completely integrated into the economy and therefore have the
same population growth rate as the native-born population does. The number
of young native-born individuals at period t :
Lt = Lt−1 (1 + n) + γ t−1 Lt−1 (1 + m)

(5)

In addition, immigrants are also assumed to contribute to, or benefit from,
the social security system in the same way as the native-born. Because the social
security system redistributes income from the young to the old, the balanced
government budget constraint implies:
bt+1 Lt (1 + γ t ) = τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 Lt+1 (1 + γ t+1 )

(6)

Re-arranging the expression yields:
bt+1 =

τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 [(1 + n) + γ t (1 + m)](1 + γ t+1 )
(1 + γ t )

(7)

Labor-leisure decisions of young individuals are derived, as usual, from utility
maximization, taking the prices and policy choices as given:
ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )

(8)

Substituting for bt , bt+1 and lt in equations (7) and (8) into equation (1), the
indirect utility functions of the young individual can be written as:
2 A ceiling for γ is set equal to one, which means that the number of immigrants cannot
surpass the number of native born.

7

Ψ
(9)
wt lt (1 − τ t )] +
Ψ+1
τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 [1 + n + γ t (1 + m)](1 + γ t+1 )
]
βLog[
(1 + γ t )

V y (wt , τ t , τ t+1 , wt+1 ) = Log[

such that,
ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )

(10)

Ψ
lt+1
= wt+1 (1 − τ t+1 )

(11)

Substituting for bt in equations (7) into equation (2), yields the indirect utility
functions of the old individual:
V o (bt ) =

τ t wt lt [(1 + n) + γ t−1 (1 + m)](1 + γ t )
(1 + γ t−1 )

(12)

Note that the old individual prefers that the immigration quotas will be as
large as possible, because more immigration would raise the total amount of tax
collected, and thus the social security benefits she receives. The old preferable
tax rate is the "Laﬀer point" tax rate, where the tax revenues, and therefore
the social security benefits, are maximized. The tax rate at that point is equal
Ψ
to Ψ+1
.
The young individual prefers naturally that the current tax rate is as low as
possible, namely zero. Concerning immigration quotas, the young preferences
are ambiguous. On one hand, a larger quotas increases next period social security benefits per old individual. This is due to the fact that larger quotas
increases the number of young in the next generation (some of these are oﬀspring of the current immigrants) more than it increases the number of the old
(who happen to be the current young) in the next period. This is due to the
assumption that immigrants have a higher population growth rate than that of
the native-born (m > n). Thus, the number of next period old recipients of
social security increases but the total sum of next period social security benefits
increases even more. This means that next period social security benefits per
old individual (bt+1 ) are higher the larger is the immigration quotas.
On the other hand, since immigrants gain the right to vote in the second
period of their life, when old, the level of immigration quotas which aﬀects
the ratio of next period old to young voters also influences the identity of next
period decisive voter. Lowering current immigration quota decreases the number
of next period old voters less than it decreases the number of next period young

8

voters (because we assumed m > n). Thus, voting for a low enough level
of immigration quotas (below a certain a threshold level), would change the
identity of the decisive voter from young to old in the next period. This will
lead the current young voter which will be old in the next period, to favor the
largest possible quota (due to its eﬀect on next period transfer payments) which
yet change next period decisive voter’s identity from young to old in the next
period.
3.0.1

A Political-Economic Equilibrium

We employ a subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium of perfect foresight, as our
equilibrium concept (see Krusell and Rios-Rull (1996)):
Definition 1 A subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium is defined as a vector of
policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), where T : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1], is the taxation
policy rule, T (γ t−1 ), and G : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1], is the immigration quotas policy
rule, G(γ t−1 ), such that the following functional equation holds:
b t−1 ) = arg maxπ V i (γ t−1 , π t , π t+1 ) subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ), where
1. Ψ(γ
t
π t = (τ t , γ t ) is defined as the vector of policy platform, and V i is the indirect
utility of the current decisive voter.
2. The fixed-point condition requires that if next period policy outcome is
derived by the vector of policy decision rules- Ψ, the maximization of the indirect utility of the current decisive voter will reproduce the same law of motion,
b t−1 ) = Ψ(γ t−1 ), as in 1.
Ψ(γ

The policy variables, which are the tax rate, τ t , and the immigration quotas, γ t , have to maximize the decisive voter’s indirect utility function, while
taking into account that next period political-economy policy rules depend on
the current state variable, i.e. the current immigration quotas. Current and
future political economy policy rules , as a function of state variables must be
identical. Thus, the subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium notion states that the
expected political-economy policy function, which depends on the current state
variables, must be self-fulfilling.
The subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium is characterized by a "demographic
switching" strategy. Assuming that immigrants enter the country while young
and gain the right to vote only in the next period when they are old, voters
take into account the eﬀect of admitting a certain number of immigrants on the
composition of voters and their voting preferences in the next period. Moreover,
when the number of young exceed the number of old in the population, the young
decisive voter admits a limited number of immigrants, in order to change the
9

decisive voter’s identity from young to old in the next period and maximize the
next period benefits she receives.
The equilibrium path depends on the native-born and immigrant’s population growth rates. If the population growth rates of the native-born and
immigrants are both positive, there is a steady state with no taxation/social
security benefits. If alternatively, the sum of the population growth rates is
negative, there is also another steady state, but with a certain positive level
of taxation/social security benefits (the "Laﬀer point" tax rate) and full openness to immigration. Otherwise, the sum of the population growth rates can be
positive and the native-born population’s population growth rate negative. In
this case, there is a "demographic switching" equilibrium path where some quotas on immigration always prevails while there is an alternate period by period
taxation/social security policy, depending on the identity of the decisive voter.
In a given period there is a certain amount of taxation/social security benefits
(the "Laﬀer point" tax rate) and no restrictions on immigration, while in the
next there is no taxation/social security benefits and a more restrictive policy
towards immigration.
Since immigrants gain the right to vote only in the second period of their
life in the host economy, the next period ratio of old to young voters who are
allow to vote, denoted by ut+1 , is given by:
ut+1 =

(1 + γ t )
(1 + n) + γ t (1 + m)

(13)

Assuming that in case of a tie the old will be the decisive, the condition, ut+1 <
1, assures a majority of young individuals in the next period, while the condition,
ut+1 ≥ 1, assures a majority of old individuals. Therefore, the state variable of
the economy, aﬀects the next period ratio of young to old voters, ut+1 , which
sets the profile of the next period decisive voter.
The Markov Perfect political equilibrium of the baseline model and its possible equilibrium paths, which depend on the population growth rates of the
native-born and immigrant populations, can be formalized as follows:
Proposition 2 There exists an equilibrium with the following feature :
(
if
ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
τt = 0
T (γ t−1 ) =
Ψ
τ t = Ψ+1 otherwise
G(γ t−1 ) =

(

n
γt = − m
γt = 1

if
ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
otherwise

10

(14)

(15)

 -migration
t

u =1
t

Figure 1

t-tax rate

u =1
t

Figure 2

where γt is restricted to be between zero and one. Under the assumption that the
native-born population growth rate is lower than that of the immigrant’s, there
are three possible equilibrium paths, depending on the population growth rates
of the native-born and immigrant population, as follows: 1. if qA0,there is no
taxation/social security benefits; 2. if p+ q?0, migration quota is set at its
maximum, and there is a positive level of taxation/social security benefits (the
"Laffer point" tax rate). 3. if q?0 and p+ qA0, there is a "demographic
switching" equilibrium path, where some positive level of immigration always
prevails while there is an alternate taxation/social security policy; in periods
where the decisive voter is old, the economy is fully opened to immigration
and there is a positive level of taxation (the "Laffer point" tax rate); whereas
in periods where the current decisive voter is young, there is no
taxation/social security benefits and a more restrictive policy towards
immigration.
The proposition is proved in the appendix.
The interpretation of the proposition is as follows.

11

If the old-young ratio is smaller than one (ut < 1), the decisive voter in the
current period is a young voter. The young decisive favors naturally a zero tax
rate but has two conflicting considerations regarding the desired immigration
quotas. One one hand, if there is full openness towards immigration: there will
be more young working people in period t + 1, and therefore, the tax revenue
that which will be collected from a larger work force and needed to support
retirement benefits, will increase. The young decisive voter in period t, who
will be old in period t + 1, would benefit from the more generous social security
benefits. On the other hand, if the immigration policy is excessively large, the
decisive voter in period t + 1 will be a young voter. This voter will want to see
the tax rate in period t + 1 reduced to zero; hence no social security benefits
whatsoever in period t + 1. There is a threshold level of immigration quotas,
γ t = −n/m, which is exactly the level of the immigration policy that would
equate the number of old and the number of young in period t + 1. Thus, by
choosing the immigration quotas at this level, the decisive voter in period t would
finely balance the two conflicting forces on period t + 1 social security benefits,
so as to maximize these benefits. Observe that this young voter’s preferable
immigration quotas is chosen strategically, aimed to influence the identity of the
decisive voter in the next period from young voter to old.
If the old-young ratio is higher or equal to one (ut ≥ 1), the decisive voter
in the next period is an old voter. This voter will naturally vote for the most
liberal immigration policy possible, because only the current social security
benefits matter to this voter. The immigration quota is therefore equal to its
maximum level (i.e., one). The tax revenue is set at the "Laﬀer point", where
Ψ
the tax rate is equal to Ψ+1
, because this way the current social security benefits
are maximized.
There are three possible equilibrium paths depending on the population
growth rates of the native-born and immigrant populations.
The first equilibrium path is the one where the population growth rate of the
native-born and the immigrant population growth rate are both positive; that
is, n, m > 0. In this case, the level of social security benefits is zero. This is due
to the fact that for every level of immigration, the number of next period young
voters exceeds the number of next period old voters. Therefore, the decisive
voter in the current and all the following periods is the young voter, and her
preferences are for zero labor tax. The young voter is indiﬀerent concerning the
level of immigration because it has no influence on her current income, nor on
the next period decisive voter’s identity. The resulting equilibrium path is one
in which there is a majority of young voters, and the social security system is

12

dismantled, for ever.
If the sum of the native-born and immigrant population growth rates is
negative, m + n < 0, the number of next period old voters always exceeds
the number of next period young voters. Thus, along the equilibrium path a
majority of old will always prevail, which validates a permanent existence for
the social security system and a maximum flow of immigrants.
The third equilibrium path obtains if the native-born and immigrant populations growth rates are: n < 0, and m + n > 0 . This equilibrium path is
characterized by an alternate taxation/social security policy over two consecutive periods. Some positive level of immigration always prevails. This is due to a
"demographic switching" strategy of the current and next period young voters.
The reason is that when there is a majority of old, their preferable immigration
quota is at the maximum and the tax rate is at the "Laﬀer point". Because
m + n > 0 and the old decisive voter allows as much as possible immigrants, the
number of next period young voters exceed the number of next period old voters. Thus, in the next period the decisive voter must be the young. This voter
opts for a zero tax rate, and does vote strategically on immigration levels. This
means setting immigration at the threshold level , γ t = −n/m. The identity
of the next period decisive voter will change from young to old (a possibility
of such demographic changes exists because the native-born population growth
rate is negative while the immigrant population growth rate is positive). This
creates a cycling eﬀect of an alternate taxation/social security policy, with a
certain level of immigration, depending on the identity of the decisive voter.

4

The Extended Model: Private Saving, Capital
Accumulation and Endogenous Factor Prices

The base line model assumes zero private savings; hence no capital accumulation at all. In this section, we introduce private saving. This means that
intertemporal transfers are both through private savings and through the social
security system. The aggregate savings of the current young population generates next period aggregate capital. The latter is used as a factor of production,
along with the labor input in the next period. The production function exhibits
constant return to scale. Another feature of the extended model is the wage
rate, as well as the rate of interest, are endogenously determined along the equilibrium path. Social security benefits are financed, as before, by a payroll tax

13

in a pay-as-you-go system3 .
The utility of the representative young individual, as before, is logarithmic.
ltΨ+1
)+
Ψ+1
βLog(bt+1 + (1 + rt+1 )st )

U y (wt , τ t , st , rt+1 , bt+1 ) = Log(wt lt (1 − τ t ) − st −
U o (st−1 , rt , bt ) = bt + (1 + rt )st−1

(16)
(17)

where rt is the interest rate, and st is the savings of the young at period t.
The production function is a Cobb-Douglas production function which is
assumed to use both labor and capital as its factors of production:
Yt = Nt1−a Ktα

(18)

where Kt is the aggregate amount of capital and Nt is defined as in the previous section. The wage rate and interest rate are determined by the marginal
productivity conditions (capital is assumed to depreciate completely at the end
of the period):
wt = (1 − a)(1 + γ t )−a lt−a ktα
rt = α(1 +

γ t )1−a lt1−a ktα−1

−1

(19)
(20)

where kt is capital per (native-born) worker. The balanced government budget
constraint is derived as in the previous section:
bt+1 =

τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 [(1 + n) + γ t (1 + m)](1 + γ t+1 )
(1 + γ t )

(21)

The saving-consumption decision of young individuals are made by maximizing their utility while taking the prices and policy choices as given, and the
labor-leisure decision is given as in the previous section:
¶
µ
1
bt+1
Ψ
st =
(22)
β
wt lt (1 − τ t ) −
1+β
Ψ+1
1 + rt+1
ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )

(23)

The market clearing condition requires that the net domestic saving generates
net domestic investment:
3 To

isolate the unique role of social security, the reader can compare the equilibrium types
derived in appendix 7.4. The appendix assumes a similar model, but without a social security
system.

14

st = kt+1

µ

1 + n + γ t (1 + m)
(1 + γ t )

¶

(24)

Solving for bt+1 from equations (21) and (22), and substituting bt+1 in equations
(16) , the utility indirect function of the young can be written as follows:
³
´
1
Ψ
V y (wt , τ t , rt+1 , τ t+1 ) = Log 1+β
w
l
(1
−
τ
)(1
+
βf
(τ
))
t
t
t
t+1
Ψ+1
³
´
(25a)
β
Ψ
+βLog 1+β
w
l
(1
−
τ
)(1
+
βf
(τ t+1 ))(1 + rt+1 )
t
Ψ+1 t t
where f (τ t+1 ) =

1−α 1
α 1+β τ t+1
1
1+β τ t+1

1+ 1−α
α

kt+1 =

, such that,

Ψ (1 + γ t )wt lt (1 − τ t )(1 − f (τ t+1 ))
β
1+β Ψ+1
1 + n + γ t (1 + m)

(26)

ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )

(27)

Ψ
lt+1
= wt+1 (1 − τ t+1 )

(28)

and substituting bt from equation (21) and kt from equation (24), in equations
(17), the indirect utility function of the old can be written as follows:
τ t wt lt [(1+n)+γ t−1 (1+m)](1+γ t )
+
(1+γ t−1 )

V o (γ t−1 , k t , wt , rt , τ t ) =
³
´
1+n+γ t−1 (1+m)
(1 + rt )kt
(1+γ
)

(29)

t−1

such that,

ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )

(30)

As in the previous analysis, the old individual favors a positive level of tax
Ψ
rate at a "Laﬀer Point" (τ ∗ = Ψ+1
), and the largest immigration quotas.
The preferences of the young, which will be discussed in the next section,
diﬀer from the baseline model as they are influenced by capital accumulation
and endogenous factor prices eﬀects.
4.0.2

Political-Economic Equilibria

The Markov sub-game Perfect equilibrium definition for the extended model is
as follows:
Definition 3 A Markov perfect political equilibrium is defined as a vector of
policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), and private decision rule, S, where T :
[0, 1] −→ [0, 1], is the tax policy rule, τ t = T (γ t−1 , kt ), and G : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1],
15

is the immigration policy rule, γ t = G(γ t−1 , kt ), and S : [0, ∞)− > [0, ∞), is
the saving decision rule, kt+1 = S(π t , kt ), such that the following functional
equations hold:
b t−1 , kt ) = arg maxπ V i (γ t−1 , π t , π t+1 ) subject to πt+1 = Ψ(γ t , S(π t , kt )).
1. Ψ(γ
t
β
Ψ (1+γ t )wt lt (1−τ t )(1−f (τ t+1 ))
2. S(π t , kt ) = 1+β
, with τ t+1 = T (γ t , S(π t , kt )).
Ψ+1
1+n+γ t (1+m)
3. The fixed-point condition requires that if next period policy outcome is
derived by the vector of policy decision rules- Ψ, the maximization of the indirect
utility of the current decisive voter subject to the law of motion of the capital
b t−1 , kt ) = Ψ(γ t−1 , kt ), as in
stock, will reproduce the same law of motion, Ψ(γ
1.
Policy variables have to maximize the decisive voter’s indirect utility function, while taking into account the law of motion of capital and the fact that
next period decision rules depend on the state variables, i.e. the current period
immigration quotas and next period capital per (native-born) worker. Equilibrium paths depend on the native-born and immigrant population growth rates
(as in the baseline model) and on the initial stock of capital per (native-born)
worker.
There are two types of equilibria.
The first type, is characterized by a "demographic switching" strategy, similarly to the base-line model. When the decisive voter is young, she admits
a limited number of immigrants in order to change the decisive voter’s identity from young to old in the next period. The additional eﬀect caused by the
existence of savings and the endogeneity of factor price determination, is only
quantitative.
The other equilibrium type is however diﬀerent from the base-line model.
The additional state variable, the stock of capital per (native-born) worker,
plays now a crucial role. Rational voters take into account that the current
policy variables can aﬀect next period policy variables not only through the
composition of old to young voters, but also through the eﬀect on next period
capital per (native-born) worker; the additional state variable. There is another
possible strategy of the young; a "demographic steady" strategy, where the equilibrium tax rate is a decreasing function of the capital per (native-born) worker,
and migration quota is set at its maximum level. This level of immigration
quotas renders a majority for the young in every period. The new equilibrium
of the extended model, combines strategies concerning both the old-young composition in the population, and the level of capital: there is a range of values of
the capital per (native-born) worker, for which the "demographic steady" strategy dominates; while for values outside this range, the "demographic switching"
16

strategy dominates.
In the first type of Markov sub game Perfect equilibrium (referred to by
"demographic switching strategy" equilibrium) policy rules do not depend on
the capital per (native-born) worker state variable.
Proposition 4 There exists an equilibrium with the following feature:
(
if
ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
τt = 0
T (γ t−1 ) =
Ψ
τ t = 1+Ψ
otherwise
G(γ t−1 ) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨

S(πt, kt ) =

(

n
]
if
γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m
γt = 1
otherwise
Ψ
)
1+Ψ

if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
= 0) otherwise

S(πt, kt , τ t+1 =
S(πt, kt , τ t+1

ut (γ t−1 ) < 1

⎪
S(π t, kt , τ t+1 =
⎪
⎪
⎩

Ψ
)
1+Ψ

S(π t, kt , τ t+1 = 0 )

(31)

(32)

n<0 ∩
m+n>0
if m + n < 0
otherwise n > 0
if

(33)
where γ t is restricted to be between zero and one, and γ is given explicitly in the
appendix. The equilibrium paths depend on the population growth rates and on
the initial amount of capital per (native-born) worker the economy is endowed
with. There are three main types of equilibrium paths which are similar to the
previous section:1. if n > 0, there is no taxation/social security benefits, and
there are some restrictions on immigration. 2. if m + n < 0, migration quota
is set at its maximum, and there is a positive level of taxation/social security
benefits (the "Laﬀer point" tax rate). 3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0, there is a "demographic switching" equilibrium path, where some positive level of immigration
always prevails while there is an alternate taxation/social security policy; in periods where the decisive voter is old, the economy is fully opened to immigration
and there is a positive level of taxation (the "Laﬀer point" tax rate); whereas
in periods where the current decisive voter is young, there is no taxation/social
security benefits and a more restrictive policy towards immigration.
∗

The proposition is proved in the appendix.
The intuition is the same as in section 2. Because the decision rules in
type one equilibrium do not depend on the capital per (native-born) worker,
the Markov sub game Perfect equilibrium of the base line model is essentially a
reduced form of this equilibrium. The equilibrium paths depend on the nativeborn and immigrant’s population growth rates as in the baseline model, but
naturally are also quantitatively influenced by the amount of initial stock of
17

capital per (native-born) worker. The larger the initial stock of capital, the
higher is the amount of capital accumulated every period.
The second type of Markov Perfect equilibrium of the extended model (referred to as "combined strategy" equilibrium) is specified as follows:
Proposition 5 Under several conditions on the parameters of the model, which
are specified in the appendix, there exists another equilibrium type, with the
following features:
⎧
⎪
kt ∈[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]
τ (kt ) if
⎨
if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
T (γ t−1 , kt ) =
0
otherwise
⎪
⎩ Ψ
otherwise
1+Ψ
(34)
G(γ t−1 , k t ) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

1

1
n
M in[γ ∗ , − m
]

if
otherwise

kt ∈[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]

if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1

otherwise
(35)

S(πt, kt ) =

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 ) ) if kt ∈[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]

if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
otherwise
m+n>0
if
S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )) if kt ∈ [g(F (τ 1 )), g(F (τ 1 ))]
∩n<0
otherwise
(36)
S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = 0) otherwise
Ψ
S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = 1+Ψ )
if m + n < 0
S(π t, kt ,τ t+1 = τ (k t+1 )) if kt ∈[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]
otherwise n > 0
S(π t, kt , τ t+1 = 0) otherwise
S(πt, kt , τ t+1 =

Ψ
1+Ψ )

and g(F ), F (τ ) and τ 1 are given in the appendix. The
where x = 1 + (1+Ψ)αβ
Ψ+α
equilibrium tax rate, τ (kt ), is a decreasing function in kt . The equilibrium paths,
depends on the native-born and immigrant population growth rates and on the
initial capital the economy is endowed with: 1. if n > 0 and ko ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )],
there is a "demographic steady" equilibrium path, characterized by a positive tax
rate which depends on the capital per (native-born) worker state variable and
migration quota is set at its maximum. If ko ∈
/ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], there are at least
few periods in which there is no taxation/social security benefits and there are
some restrictions on immigration. 2. if m + n < 0, migration quota is set
at its maximum, and there is a positive level of taxation/social security benefits
(the "Laﬀer point" tax rate). 3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0, there is a range of

18

ko 4 , for which there is a "demographic steady" equilibrium path, characterized
by a positive tax rate which depends on the capital per (native-born) worker state
variable and no restrictions on immigration. If ko is not in this range, there
are at least few periods in which there is a "demographic switching" equilibrium
path, characterized by an alternate taxation/social security policy where some
positive level of immigration always prevails; in periods where the decisive voter
is old, the economy is fully opened to immigration and there is a positive level
of taxation (the "Laﬀer point" tax rate); whereas in periods where the current
decisive voter is young, there is no taxation/social security benefits and a more
restrictive policy towards immigration.
The proposition is proved in the appendix.
The additional equilibrium path in the extended model are characterized by
diﬀerent optimal strategy of the young, depending on the values of the capital
per (native-born) worker: for a range of values of the capital per (native-born)
worker state variable the decision rules of the young decisive voter do not change
the next period decisive voter’s identity, while for other values of the capital per
native-born work force the "demographic switching" strategy is still optimal.
When the "demographic steady" strategy is optimal, the tax rate depends negatively on the amount of capital per (native-born) worker and there are no
restrictions on immigration.
The equilibrium tax rate of the "demographic steady" strategy, is a decreasing function of capital per (native-born) worker. This is due to the fact that
there are two conflicting forces of the eﬀect of the next period tax rate on next
period capital per native-born workers. On one hand, a higher tax rate in the
next period raises future social security benefits. Larger benefits, tend to reduce
current savings. This would cause a reduction in next period capital per nativeborn work force ("Eﬀect One"). On the other hand, a higher next period tax
rate tend to decrease the amount of hours worked next period which lowers the
next period interest rate and social security benefits. The consequent fall in the
current young future income induces more savings. This tends to increase next
period capital per (native-born) worker ("Eﬀect Two"). Since "Eﬀect One" is
stronger than "Eﬀect Two", the tax rate is decreasing in the amount of capital per (native-born) worker 5 . There are no restrictions on immigration since
larger immigration quotas has an additional positive eﬀect on the indirect utility
4 The range is defined as follows: if there is a majority of old (i.e. u ≥ 1) the range of
o
the initial capital per (native born) worker is: [g(F (τ 1 )), g(F (τ 1 ))]; otherwise, the range is:
[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )].
5 This equilibrium property of the tax function, is already noted by Forni (2005).

19

of the young. Due to the fact that "Eﬀect One" is stronger than "Eﬀect Two",
larger immigration quotas which increase next period tax rate (since it decreases
next period capital per (native-born) worker6 ), raise next period future social
security benefits. This additional positive eﬀect of immigration quotas on the
indirect utility of the young raises the preferable immigration quotas leading to
no restriction on immigration.
The reason for the additional strategy (i.e. the "demographic steady" strategy) in the "combined strategy" equilibrium, results from the additional state
variable- the capital per (native-born) worker, which influences next period policy variables. When the capital per (native-born) worker is an additional state
variable, the decisive young voter does not have to engage in a strategy of influencing next period policy variables only by changing next period decisive voter’s
identity through immigration quotas (meaning by admitting a limited amount
of immigrants). Because both current policy variables, the tax and the migration quota, influence the amount of capital per (native-born) worker; which, in
turn, influences next period policy variables. Moreover, the young can use the
"demographic steady" strategy (instead of the "demographic switching" strategy), which is optimal for low enough capital per (native-born) worker7 . This is
due to the fact that low capital per (native-born) worker adds a positive eﬀect
on the indirect utility of the young in the case of the "demographic steady"
strategy: it decreases the current wage income of the young which by reducing the amount of next period capital per (native-born) worker, leads to an
increase in the next period tax rate and benefits (since "Eﬀect One" is stronger
than "Eﬀect Two"). This raises the young future income, meaning that for low
enough capital per (native-born) worker the "demographic steady" strategy is
the dominant strategy.
The equilibrium paths depend on the population growth rates and the amount
of capital per (native-born) worker:
1. The population growth rates of the native-born and immigrant populations are positive, n, m > 0. In this case, the number of next period young
6 A larger immigration quotas increases the number of young who save leading to higher
aggregate capital accumulation in the next period. But since we assumed that m > n,
immigration quotas increases even more the number of next period young. Thus the amount
of next period capital per native-born work force decreases.
7 The reason that the "demographic steady" strategy is optimal for a closed range of capital
per (native born) worker instead of every capital per (native born) worker lower than some
threshold, is that the tax rate is assumed to be positive and smaller than one. Since the tax
rate is a function of the capital per (native born) worker, it means that the capital per (native
born) worker should also be in a specific range (see the second part of the proof in appendix
III).

20

voters exceeds the number of next period old voters, which means that the decisive voter is always young. Therefore, if the initial capital per (native-born)
worker is in the range [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], there is a "demographic steady" equilibrium path, where the optimal strategy of the young is always to vote for no
restrictions on immigration and a positive tax rate which depends on the capital
per (native-born) worker. If the initial capital is not in the range [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )],
zero tax rate and a positive immigration quotas are chosen by the young. Capital evolves in a way that it is possible to have a period where the amount of
capital per (native-born) worker enters the range [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]; if it does, from
then on the current young again vote for no restrictions on immigration and a
tax rate which depends on the capital per (native-born) worker.
2. If the sum of the population growth rates is negative, n < 0, then the
number of old voters always exceeds the number of young voters. This means
that the decisive voter is always old. In that case the old sets the tax rate at
the "Laﬀer point", and no restrictions on immigration.
3. If the sum of the population growth rates is positive, but the nativeborn population growth rate is negative, n < 0 and m + n > 0, there are two
possible equilibrium path types. If the initial capital per (native-born) worker is
in a certain range (defined in the proposition), there is a "demographic steady"
equilibrium path where the optimal strategy of the young is to set a tax rate
that depends on the capital per (native-born) worker, and to set no restrictions
on immigration. If the initial capital per (native-born) worker is outside this
range, there is a "demographic switching" equilibrium path where some level of
immigration always prevails and there is an alternate taxation policy. Capital
evolves over time in a way that there could be a period where the capital per
(native-born) worker enters the relevant range; Once in this range, the optimal
strategy of the young is to set a tax rate that depends on the capital per (nativeborn) worker, and to set no restrictions on immigration.

5

The model without the social security system

In order to emphasis the role of the social security system in the model, we next
consider a similar model with private saving, but without transfer payments
from the young to the old. We will prove that there is an equilibrium that
incorporates two strategies depending on the population growth rates. If the
immigration quota preferred by the young for its direct eﬀects on wages, is low
enough, the young decisive voter will restrict immigration even further, in order
to change next period decisive voter from young to old, so that next period old
21

decisive voter will set no restrictions on immigration. This policy is favorable
because it raises the return on savings of the current young. If the immigration
quota preferred by the young, for its direct eﬀect on wages, is high enough, the
young decisive voter will not manipulate next period young to old ratio, and set
his preferable immigration quota at a level equal to the next period quota set
by next period young decisive voter. Note that since there is no social security
system, there is no additional equilibrium as in the previous model. This is due
to the fact that the "demographic steady" strategy of this equilibrium results
from the dependency of the tax rate cum benefit rate on the capital per (native
born) worker, which does not exist in the present model.
The absence of social security system simplifies the assumptions of the model,
as follows:
The utility of the representative young and old individuals are derived only
from their own earned income and saving,

U y (wt , τ t , st , rt+1 ) = Log(wt lt − st −

ltΨ+1
) + βLog((1 + rt+1 )st )
Ψ+1

U o (st−1 , rt , ) = (1 + rt )st−1

(37)
(38)

This generates the standard saving-consumption and labor-leisure decisions:
¶
µ
1
Ψ
(39)
st =
β
wt lt
1+β
Ψ+1
ltΨ = wt

(40)

Factor prices are determined as in the extended model.
The indirect utility of the young and old respectively can be written as
follows:
µ³
´ 1+Ψ ¶
−α Ψ+α
V y (kt , γ t ,γ t+1 ) = A + (1 + β)Log
(1 − α)ktα (1 + γ t )
Ã
!
³
´ 1−α
1+Ψ
1+γ t
β
Ψ
α
−α Ψ+α −Ψ
Ψ Ψ+α
+βLog α (1 − α)( 1+β Ψ+1 1+n+γ (1+m) ((1 − α)kt (1 + γ t ) )
) (1 + γ t+1 )
t

¡
¢ 1−α
V o (γ t−1 , k t ) = α (1 − α)kt −Ψ (1 + γ t )Ψ Ψ+α kt

µ

1 + n + γ t−1 (1 + m)
(1 + γ t−1 )

¶ (41a)
(42)

The definition of the Markov sub-game perfect political equilibrium is similar
to the previous definition, but has only one policy decision rule, the immigration
policy rule, γ t = G(γ t−1 ).
22

Proposition 6 The equilibrium can be specified as follows:
⎧
n
∗
∗
⎪
⎨ γ t = M in[γ , − m ] if γ ≤ γ
if
G(γ t−1 ) =
γt = γ∗
otherwise
⎪
⎩
γt = 1
otherwise
S(γ t , kt ) =

ut (γ t−1 ) < 1

(1+γ t )
β
Ψ
1+β Ψ+1 1+n+γ t (1+m) wt lt

(43)
(44)

where γ ∗ is defined as in the proposition II, and γ is given implicitly by the
following equation:
µ

n
m

1−
1+γ

⎡
1+Ψ
µ
¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α
⎢
⎣

2
1−γ

¶Ψ

⎛
⎝

n
1− m
n
1+n− m
(1+m)
1+γ
1+n+γ(1+m)

µ

n
m

1−
1+γ

1+Ψ
¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α

1−α
⎞−Ψ ⎤β Ψ+α
⎠ ⎥
=1
⎦

(45)
The equilibrium paths depends on the population growth rates and on the
initial amount of capital per (native-born) worker the economy is endowed with.
There are four types of equilibrium paths: 1. if n > 0, there are some restrictions on immigration. 2. if m + n < 0, there are no restrictions on
immigration. 3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0, there are two possible equilibrium
paths: if γ ∗ ≤ γ, there is a "demographic switching" equilibrium path, where
some level of immigration always prevails: in periods where the decisive voter
is old, there are no restrictions on immigration; and in periods where the decisive voter is young, there are some restrictions on immigration. Otherwise, the
decisive voter is always young, and there are less restrictions on immigration
than in the "demographic switching" equilibrium path when the decisive voter is
young.

6

The Eﬀect of Aging

We are now in position to conduct a comparative dynamics across demographic
regimes. We analyze the eﬀect of aging of the native born population on the
size of the social security system and on immigration restrictions. Aging of
the population is specified by a reduction in the population growth rate of the
population (life expectancy is assumed to be exogenously fixed).
Proposition 7 1. Aging of the native born population can move the system to
an equilibrium path with a certain level of taxation/social security benefits (the
"Laﬀer point" tax rate) and no restrictions on immigration.

23

2. The aging of the native-born population enlarges immigration quotas set
by the young in the "demographic switching" equilibrium path, while decreasing
the tax rate in the "demographic steady" equilibrium path.
3. In the "combined strategy" equilibrium, aging can move the system from
a "demographic switching" equilibrium path to "demographic steady" equilibrium
path; or vise versa.
The intuition of the result is as follows. Sharp aging trend of the native-born
population, can move the system to an equilibrium path where the sum of the
population growth rates are negative, n + m < 0. In this case, the old are in
the majority every period. The old liberalize immigration policy as much as
possible and sustain the social security system by setting the tax rate at the
"Laﬀer point".
Aging of the native-born population increases the political-economy determined immigration quota when the young is in the majority. This quota,
n
γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m
], is what is chosen by the current young in the "demographic
switching" equilibrium path . The eﬀect of aging of the native-born population
on immigration policy works itself out through the ratio of old to young voters
(1+γ t )
in the next period, ut+1 = (1+n)+γ
. This dependency ratio eﬀects the
t (1+m)
n
political-economy quota as follows: in the case where γ t = − m
, the dependency ratio eﬀects the quota through the identity of next period decisive voter;
whereas in the case where γ t = γ ∗ , the dependency ratio eﬀect goes through
next period capital per (native born) worker (this results from the fact the effect of the quotas on the ratio, ut+1 : larger quota increases the amount of total
savings but since there are also more young in the next period, it has the overall
eﬀect of decreasing the capital per (native born) worker)). Since a larger quota
decreases the ratio of next period old to young voters (it increases the number
of next period immigrant descendants more than the number of next period
old immigrant), it will decrease the ratio of next period old to young voters
less the lower is the native born population growth rate. Thus, aging has the
overall eﬀect of raising the optimal immigration quota of the young voter in the
"demographic switching" equilibrium path.
Aging of the native-born population also decreases the tax rate set by the
young in the "demographic steady" equilibrium path, τ (kt ). This is due to the
fact that aging increases total savings which raises the amount of capital per
(native-born) worker. Since the tax rate is a decreasing function of the capital
per (native-born) worker state variable, the aging of the native-born population
decreases the optimal tax rate in the "demographic steady" equilibrium path.

24

Aging aﬀects the capital per (native-born) worker, and thus can move the
system from the "demographic switching" equilibrium path to the "demographic
steady" equilibrium path or vise versa, since the equilibrium paths are defined
over a closed range of the capital per (native-born) worker state variable.

7

An Interpretation and Concluding Remarks

In the baseline model, a perishable consumption good is produced using only
labor as an input; transfers from young to old (paid by flat rate tax on labor
income) are the only means of guaranteeing old-age consumption. Each generational cohort lives two periods, supplying labor inelastically when young, and
deriving utility from consumption in both periods of life.
If there were not to be immigration, it is a standard outcome in this framework that if the population growth rate is positive, young always outnumber
the old. Therefore, a pay-as-you-go social security system cannot be sustained
under majority voting. If, however, population growth is negative, so that the
old outnumber the young, then the pay-as-you-go system can be sustained with
a constant tax rate that maximize the social security benefits ( the preferred
point of old cohort at each period). Now introduce immigration into the standard framework. Immigrants arrive young but cannot vote until they are old.
Their children, who are identical to young native born, can vote when young.
Moreover, immigrants (though not their oﬀspring) have a birth rate that is
larger from the native born rate. Immigration policy can be described by a
endogenously determined quota variable. We restrict the feasible choices of the
quota with doubling the population being an upper bound on immigration. The
central tension faced by today’s young in thinking about policy is that both the
ratio of young to old in the next period, and the ratio of taxpayers to old dependents in the next period increase in the present period immigration quota.
A higher value of the latter this period will raise the number of young tax payers per old dependent next period, but also increase the voting power of the
young next period, perhaps putting them in the majority. If the native born
and the immigrants’ birth rate are positive (while by assumption the latter rate
exceeds the former), then young voters always outnumber old voters, and the
pay-as-you-go social security system will not be sustainable as a Markov equilibrium. So immigration is of no help in this case. On the other hand, if the
native-born birth rate is negative, then the social security system is sustainable
absent immigration. In this case the question is not whether immigration helps

25

sustain social security, but whether it threatens its sustainability. Assuming
that birth rate of natives is negative, the sort of equilibrium that arises depends
on the sum of native-born and immigrants birth rates. If the sum of native-born
and immigrants’ birth rates is negative, admitting no immigrants today guarantees an old majority tomorrow. Even if current young choose the maximum
allowable immigration so as to maximize next period benefits, there will still
be a majority of the old tomorrow. Both current old and current young agree
on letting in the maximal amount of immigrants, and except perhaps for the
initial period, the majority of voters will always be old. Therefore the tax rate
is set at the "Laﬀer " rate. Immigration does not yet add much to the survival
of the social security system in this case.
But when the sum of native-born and immigrants’ birth rates is positive and
the native-born birth rate is negative, immigration adds an interesting twist.
It in essence poses a threat to social security that in the absence of migration
will be assured. In this case the numbers of old and young next period are equal
and by assumption ties are decided in favor of the old. Then current young’s
desire for higher immigration, to maximize their old-age benefits, is constrained
by their desire to maintain old majority next period. If the young are currently
in the majority the set the current tax rate equal zero (implying no benefits for
the current old) and set immigration quota at an intermediate level that barely
makes the old majority in the next period. Next period, the old median voter
sets the tax at the "laﬀer" rate and the immigration quota at the maximum
level. The latter guarantees that the young will be in majority in subsequent
period; and the cycle repeats itself.
In the extended model with private saving and capital accumulation, giving
individuals two sources of consumption in old age (social security benefits and
private savings) a similar collection of equilibria exists. The extended model
has an additional collection of equilibria. As in Forni (2005), in the case of a
positive native-born birth rate, when the young are always in the majority, a
pay-as-you-go social security system is sustained by a tax rate as a function
of the capital stock (a second state variable in addition to the state variable
in the base-line model which is the ratio of old to young). The tax rate is
decreasing in the capital stock. In the case in which the fertility rates of the
native born and immigrant populations are positive, n, m > 0, the number of
next period young voters exceeds the number of next period old voters, which
means that the decisive voter is always young. Therefore, if the capital per
native-born work force is in the range [F (τ ), F (τ i )], than the optimal strategy
of the young is always to vote for a positive tax rate and maximum migration

26

quota, thus sustaining both migration and the social security system. The size of
the social security system depends on the capital per native-born worker, and on
the exogenously given ceiling on migration quotas. Thus the political-economy
sustainable migration boost up the size of the social security’s tax revenue.
If the initial capital is not in the range [F (τ ), F (τ i )], zero tax rate and a
positive migration quota, below the ceiling, are chosen by the young. Capital
evolves in a way that it is possible to have a period where the amount of capital
per native-born work force enters the range [F (τ ), F (τ i )]; if it does, from then
on the current young again vote for a positive tax rate, and sets the migration
quota at the exogenously given ceiling. The intuition is that the current young,
taking as given the fact that transfers in the next period depends on the next
period tax function, face a trade oﬀ as follows. A lower tax rate today increases
their current income but reduces the next period capital stock; hence lowering
their old-age benefits. In this case when the young are in the majority, they
will set immigration quota at its maximal level, since more immigrants increase
their old-age benefits and income without aﬀecting the balance of voting power
in the next period. In a certain range of values for the initial capital stock, with
positive native born birth rate such Markov equilibrium with sustainable social
security and immigration does exist.
Interesting extensions will study the convergence/divergenge of the Markov
equilibrium in the range [F (τ ), F (τ i )] from initial conditins within or outside
this range; and a framework in which there exists heterogeneity within the
native born and the immigrants population in terms of labor productivity. The
latter will introduce important intra-generational distribution aspects which are
absent in the present model.

8
8.1

Appendix
Proposition I:

Proof. We must show that the vector of policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), as
defined in the proposition, satisfies the equilibrium conditions:
b t−1 ) = arg maxπ V i (γ t−1 , π t , π t+1 ), subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ).
1. Ψ(γ
t
b t−1 ) = Ψ(γ t−1 ).
2. Ψ(γ
If ut ≥ 1, then the decisive voter is old. Substituting for lt from equation
(8) into (12), the utility of the old can be rewritten as:
1

τ t (1 − τ t ) Ψ [(1 + n) + γ t−1 (1 + m)](1 + γ t )
V (γ t−1 ) =
(1 + γ t−1 )
o

27

(46)

It is straightforward to show that V o (γ t−1 ) is maximized by setting π t =
Ψ
( Ψ+1
, 1).
If ut < 1, then the decisive voter is young. From equation (9), the utility of
the young voter subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ), is given by:
⎧
Ψ+1
Ψ
⎨
(1 − τ t ) Ψ ]
if
ut+1 < 1
Log[ Ψ+1
y
1
V (γ t−1 ) =
Ψ
Ψ
Ψ [1+n+γ (1+m)]
Ψ+1
2
(1−
)
t
Ψ+1
⎩ Log[ Ψ (1 − τ t ) Ψ ] + βLog[ Ψ+1
] otherwise
Ψ+1
(1+γ t )
(47)
n
In that case V y (γ t−1 ) is maximized by setting π t = (0, − m
). It should be noted
that in the case where the population growth rates are both positive, m, n > 0,
then for every immigration quota there is a majority of young in every period,
and thus the young decisive voter in every period will be indiﬀerent between all
possible immigration quota levels.

8.2

Proposition II:

Proof. We must show that the vector of policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G),
satisfies the following equilibrium conditions:
b t−1 ) = arg maxπt V i (γ t−1 , π t , π t+1 ), subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ).
1. Ψ(γ
b t−1 ) = Ψ(γ t−1 ).
2. Ψ(γ

β
Ψ (1+γ t )wt lt (1−τ t )(1−f (τ t+1 ))
3. S(πt , kt ) = 1+β
, with τ t+1 = T (γ t ).
Ψ+1
1+n+γ t (1+m)
Consider first the case where there is a majority of old in period t, i.e. ut ≥ 1.
Using the fact that,
1+Ψ
³
´ Ψ+α
−α
(48)
wt lt (1 − τ t ) = (1 − α)ktα (1 + γ t ) (1 − τ t )

¡
¢ 1−α
1 + rt = α (1 − α)kt−Ψ (1 + γ t )Ψ (1 − τ t ) Ψ+α

(49)

the utility of the old voter can be rewritten as:
1+Ψ

1−α

τ t ((1−a)(1+γ )−a kα ) Ψ+α (1−τ t ) Ψ+α [(1+n)+γ

(1+m)](1+γ t )

t
t
t−1
V o (γ t−1 , kt ) =
(1+γ t−1 )
³
´
1−α
¡
¢
1+n+γ t−1 (1+m)
+α (1 − α)kt−Ψ (1 + γ t )Ψ (1 − τ t ) Ψ+α kt
(1+γ
)

(50)

t−1

Ψ
,1).
It is can be proved that V o (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by setting πt = ( Ψ+1
Consider next the case where there is a majority of young in period t, i.e.
ut < 1. Substituting for wt lt (1 − τ t ) and 1 + rt+1 from equations (39) and (40),
the utility of the young voter subject to: πt+1 = Ψ(γ t ), can be written in the
Lagrangian form, in the following way:
(
n
])
if
ut+1 < 1
L(k t ) with π t+1 = (0, M in[γ ∗ , − m
(51)
L=
Ψ
L(k t ) with π t+1 = ( Ψ+1 , 1)
otherwise

28

³
´
1
Ψ
where A = (1 + β)Log 1+β
Ψ+1 + βLog (β), λ1 is the Lagrangian multiplier,
and L(k t ) is defined as follows:
⎧
1+Ψ
´ Ψ+α
³
⎪
−α
α
⎪
(1
+
γ
)
(1
−
τ
)
(1 + βf (τ t+1 )]
A
+
(1
+
β)Log[
(1
−
α)k
⎪
t
t
t
⎪
⎨
¡
¢ 1−α
−Ψ
L(kt ) =
+βLog α(1 − α)kt+1
(1 + γ t+1 )Ψ (1 − τ t+1 ) Ψ+α
⎪
⎪
1+Ψ
⎪
α
−α
Ψ+α (1−f (τ
⎪
t+1 )
β
⎩
Ψ (1+γ t )((1−α)kt (1+γ t ) (1−τ t ))
−λ1 (kt+1 − 1+β Ψ+1
)
1+n+γ t (1+m)
(52)
As a first step, it is easy to prove that the indirect utility of the young subject
to constant next period policy variables, is maximized by setting: π t = (0,γ ∗ ),
where γ ∗ ∈ [0, 1] is defined as follows:
γ∗ =

β(1 − α)Ψ(n − m) + α(1 + Ψ)(1 + n)x
−α(1 + Ψ)(1 + m)x

(53)

We will prove that in the case where m + n > 0 and n < 0, the indirect
n
]) 8 . If
utility of the young V y (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by π t = (0,M in[γ ∗ , − m
n
γ∗ ≤ − m
, then it is suﬃcient to prove that the indirect utility of the young is
Ψ
higher by setting π t+1 = ( Ψ+1
,1) than by setting πt+1 = (0, γ ∗ ). It is easy to
see that the higher is next period immigration quota the higher is the indirect
utility of the young since it increases next period interest rate. Regarding the
next period tax rate, it is suﬃcient to prove that:
1−α
µ
¶1+β µ
¶β Ψ+α
Ψ
Ψ
0 = Log[(1 + βf (0))
] ≤ Log[ 1 + βf (
]
1−
)
Ψ+1
Ψ+1
(54)
due to the fact that the following holds,

1+β

0 = Log[(1 − f (0))

1−α
−Ψβ Ψ+α

1−α
µ
¶−Ψβ Ψ+α
Ψ
] ≤ Log[ 1 − f (
]
)
Ψ+1

(55)

1−α
´1+β ³
´β Ψ+α
³
Ψ
Ψ
)
]. The
1 − Ψ+1
Define the function: d(Ψ) = Log[ 1 + βf ( Ψ+1
derivative of d(Ψ) is the following expression:
⎛
⎞
³
´β−1
µ
¶ Ψ+α+β−αβ
(Ψ+α)(1+β)
2
Ψ+α
(α
−
1)β(1
+
β)
1
Ψ+α+β+αβ+αβΨ
⎝
⎠ (56)
1
(Ψ(1−α)(Ψ+α)+(Ψ+1)(Ψ+α+β+αβ+αβΨ)Log( Ψ+1
))
Ψ+1
2

(Ψ+α+β+αβ+αβΨ)

Since this derivative is positive for every Ψ > 0, and for Ψ = 0 the function is
equal to zero (d( Ψ = 0)= 0), then d(Ψ) is positive for every Ψ > 0.
8 If

the population growth rates are both positive, m, n > 0, then it is straightforward to
n
see that V y (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by πt = (0, Min[γ ∗ , − m
]).

29

n
Otherwise, if γ ∗ > − m
, we must prove that the following holds,
1−α
Ã
!β Ψ+α
1+Ψ
´ 1+Ψ (1+β)
³
(1+γ ∗ )((1+γ ∗ )−α ) Ψ+α −Ψ
n Ψ
∗ −α Ψ+α
+ Log (
) (1− m )
Log (1 + γ )
1+n+γ ∗ (1+m)
1+Ψ
n −α Ψ+α
(1
m)

Ψ
+ βf ( Ψ+1
)]+
! 1−α
1+Ψ
³
´ β Ψ+α
n
n −α Ψ+α
Ψ
(1− m
)((1− m
) )
(1−f ( Ψ+1
) −Ψ Ψ
Ψ
) 2 1− Ψ+1
Log (
1+n− n (1+m)

Ã

≤ (1 + β)Log[(1 −
m

(57)
n
Since as was proved d(Ψ) is positive for every Ψ > 0, and for γ ∗ > − m
, the
following holds,
1−α
µ
µ
¶ 1+Ψ
¶ Ψ+α
n
1+Ψ 1−
1 + γ ∗ −α Ψ+α
1 + γ ∗ −Ψ(1−α) Ψ+α
m Ψ
(1 + β)Log[ (
]+βLog (
(
≤0
)
n )
n )
1− m
1− m
2
(58)
it is suﬃcient to prove that,

βLog

µ

n
(1 + m)
1+n− m
∗
1 + n + γ (1 + m)

1−α
¶−Ψ Ψ+α

1−α
µ
¶−Ψ Ψ+α
Ψ
≤ βLog 1 − f (
)
Ψ+1

(59)

Substituting γ ∗ from equation (44) into equation (50), we can rewrite the inequality in the following way,
µ
¶
Ψ
1−α 1
β(1 − α)Ψ
(60)
1+
≥
1
α 1+β Ψ+1
α(1 + Ψ)x m
Since this expression is positive, it completes the proof that V y (γ t−1 , , k t ) is
n
maximized by setting πt = (0, M in[γ ∗ , − m
]).

8.3

Proposition III:

Proof. The proof will consist of two parts. The first part will prove that
when there is a majority of young voters the policy decisions for the tax rate
and immigration quotas stated maximizes the young indirect utility function,
under the assumption that next period decisive voter is young. The second part
will complete the proof and show that under certain conditions on the models
parameters, the vector of policy decision rules as defined in the proposition,
satisfies the equilibrium conditions.
The first part of the proof:
We follow the proof of Forni (2004) to derive the policy decision rules. The
policy decision rules are obtained by using as a constraint the first derivative

30

with respect to the policy variables of the logarithm of the capital accumulation
equation. The policy decision rules are the following:
¶1+β
µ
β(1−α)
1−α
(1 − τ t (kt )) Ψ+α = kt−x c
(61)
1+
τ t (kt )
α
γt = 1

(62)

(1+Ψ)αβ
Ψ+α ,and

c is a positive constant of integration. The policy
where x = 1 +
decision rule of the immigration quotas is at its maximal value, and the policy
decision rule of the tax rate is implicitly given in equation (52). Define the
³
´− x1
β(1−α)
1+β
α+Ψ 1
following function: F (τ ) = (1 + 1−α
τ
)
(1
−
τ
)
, thus we can
α
c
rewrite the policy decision rule of the tax rate as: F (τ t ) = kt . The function
Ψ(1+β)+α
F (τ ) is decreasing in τ , for τ ∈ [0, τ ], where τ = Ψ(1+β)+α+β
, and increasing in
τ , for τ ∈ [τ , 1]. Thus, according to equation (52), for every value of capital per
(native-born) worker, kt , there are two solutions for τ (kt ) in the range [0, 1).
The solution which satisfies the equilibrium conditions, which is denoted by
τ (kt ), is decreasing in kt for kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (0)].
The solution for the policy variables given in equations (52) and (53), will
be proved to satisfy the first order conditions of the problem. Substituting for
wt lt (1−τ t ) and 1+rt+1 from equations (39) and (40), the young voter’s indirect
utility function under the assumption that next period decisive voter is young,
which sets next period policy decision rules for the tax rate and immigration
quotas to be τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 ),and γ t+1 = 1 respectively, can be written in its
Lagrangian form as follows:
¡
¢ 1+Ψ
L(kt ) = A + (1 + β)Log (1 − α)ktα (1 + γ t )−α (1 − τ t ) Ψ+α +
¡
¢ 1−α
−Ψ Ψ
(1 + β)Log[(1 + βf (τ (kt+1 )) + βLogα (1 − α)kt+1
2 (1 − τ (kt+1 )) Ψ+α
1+Ψ

−λ1 (kt+1 −

α
−α (1−τ ) Ψ+α (1−f (τ (k
t )
t+1 ))
β
Ψ (1+γ t )((1−α)kt (1+γ t )
)
1+β Ψ+1
1+n+γ t (1+m)

(63)

−λ2 (τ t − 1) − λ3 (−τ t ) − λ4 (γ t − 1) − λ5 (γ t )

The Kuhn-Tucker conditions are:
1+Ψ 1+β
1 + Ψ kt+1
∂L
= 0= −
−λ1
−λ2 +λ3
(64)
∂τ t
Ψ + α 1 − τt
Ψ + α 1 − τt
µ
¶
n−m
1+Ψ 1+β
1+Ψ
kt+1
∂L
= 0= −α
+λ1
−α
−λ4 +λ5
∂γ t
Ψ + α 1 + γt
1 + γ t 1 + n + γ t (1 + m)
Ψ+α
(65)
µ
¶
∂f (τ t+1 ) ∂τ (k t+1 )
∂L
β(1 + β)
λ1 kt+1
= 0=
(66)
−
∂kt+1
1 + βf (τ (k t+1 )) 1 − f (τ (k t+1 ))
∂τ t+1
∂k t+1
µ
¶
∂τ (k t+1 )
1
β(1 − α)
1
Ψ(1 − α)
−
+
−β
−λ1
Ψ + α 1 − τ (kt+1 ) ∂k t+1
kt+1
Ψ+α
31

kt+1 =

β
Ψ (1 + γ t )wt lt (1 − τ t )(1 − f (τ (kt+1 ))
1+β Ψ+1
1 + n + γ t (1 + m)

(67)

τ t − 1 ≤ 0, λ2 ≥ 0 and λ2 (τ t − 1) = 0

(68)

−τ t ≤ 0, λ3 ≥ 0 and λ3 (−τ t ) = 0

(69)

γ t − 1 ≤ 0, λ4 ≥ 0 and λ4 (γ t − 1) = 0

(70)

−γ t ≤ 0, λ5 ≥ 0 and λ5 (γ t ) = 0

(71)

Substituting for λ1 from equation (57) into equations (55) and (56), we derive
the following equations:
∂L
= −λ2 +λ3 = 0
(72)
∂τ t
µ
¶
−n + m
∂L (1 + β)
=
(73)
−λ4 +λ5 = 0
∂γ t 1 + γ t 1 + n + γ t (1 + m)
Since we have assumed that m > n from equation (64) we derive that γ t has a
corner solution. The solution for the tax rate, on the other hand, τ t , may be
bounding or not, meaning that τ t = τ (kt ) ∈ [0, 1]9 . Substituting the solutions
for the tax and openness rate into the indirect utility of the young, we obtain
that the optimal solution for the openness rate is γ t = 1.
The optimal solutions should also satisfy the second order suﬃcient condition, meaning that the bordered Hessian of the Lagrangian should be negatively
defined. Since the solution of the immigration quotas is a corner solution where
the largest immigration quota maximizes the young voter’s indirect utility function, the bordered Hessian of the Lagrangian is equal to:
µ
¶
µ
¶
∂2L
∂2L
∂2L
∂2L
−gτ gτ 2
− gk
− gk 2
+ gk gτ
(74)
∂ kt+1
∂kt+1 ∂τ t
∂τ t ∂kt+1
∂ τt
where gτ and gk are the derivatives of the constraint of the capital per (nativeborn) worker from equation (58) with respect to τ t and kt+1 respectively. The
bordered Hessian can be rewritten in the following way:
¡ 1−α ¢
2x(1 + 1−α
1+Ψ 2
1
α τ t )(1 − τ t )
α
(
(75)
)
³
´2
Ψ + α (1 − τ t )2
β(1−α)
1−α
1−α
1
2
(1 + β) α (1 − τ t )− Ψ+α (1 + α τ t ) (1 + 1−α
τ
α 1+β t )
!
Ã
¡ 1−α ¢
x(1 + 1−α
+
α τ t )(1 − τ t ) ´α
³
β(1−α)
1−α
1−α 1
(1 + β) 1−α
α (1 − τ t )− Ψ+α (1 + α τ t ) (1 + α 1+β τ t )(1 + β)
Denote by [τ 1 , τ 2 ] the range of the tax rate for which the bordered Hessian of
the Lagrangian is negatively defined. The optimal solution for the tax rate,
9 Note

that the utility with τ t = 1 is equal to minus infinity. Thus, the range for the tax
rate is [0, 1).

32

τ (kt ), is in the range kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], where the function F (τ ) is decreasing
in τ .
The second part of the proof:
As in the proposition II, we must show that the vector of policy decision
rules, Ψ = (T, G), satisfies the equilibrium conditions (the only diﬀerence is
that the policy decision rules, Ψ(γ t−1 , kt ), depend not only on the previous
immigration policy but also on the current capital per (native born) worker).
If the population growth rates satisfy the properties: m + n > 0 and n < 0.
Consider first the case where there is a majority of old in period t, i.e. ut ≥ 1.
The utility of the old voter is the same as in the previous proposition and thus
Ψ
V o (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by setting: πt = ( Ψ+1
,1). But unlike the previous
proposition the saving of the young in period t also depends on next period policy
variables. Thus, for kt ∈ [g(F (τ 1 )), g(F (τ 1 ))], the aggregate saving decision rule
Ψ
should follow: S(kt , π t = ( Ψ+1
,1), τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )). Otherwise, the aggregate
Ψ
saving decision rule should follow: S(kt , π t = ( Ψ+1
,1), τ t+1 = 0). Since the
derivative of next period capital per (native born) worker (defined according to
the first aggregate saving decision rule) by kt can be either negative or positive,
the first condition will require that the derivative will be positive, meaning that
Ψ
the tax rate should be in the range τ ∈ [τ 1 , τ 1 ] ⊆ [τ 1 , τ ], where τ 1 = Ψ+1
.
Denote by g(y) : kt+1 − > k t the following function:
Ψ+α
⎞ α(1+Ψ)
⎛Ã
1+Ψ !−1
µ
¶ Ψ+α
Ψ
Ψ
2
β
y⎠
(1 − f (τ (y))) (1 − α)2−α (1 −
)
g(y) = ⎝
1+β Ψ+12+n+m
Ψ+1

(76)
Thus, for kt ∈ [g(F (τ 1 )), g(F (τ 1 ))], next period policy variables are set according to: π t+1 = (τ (kt+1 ),1) and the aggregate saving decision rule follows:
Ψ
S(kt , π t = ( Ψ+1
,1), τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )). Note that for kt ∈ [g(F (τ 1 )), g(F (τ 1 ))]c
the decision rule of the tax rate τ t (kt ) is outside the relevant range, [τ 1 , τ 1 ].
Therefore the solution would imply setting the constrained, meaning either
τ = τ 1 or τ = τ 1 .The required condition is that setting the constrained would
Ψ
yield the aggregate saving decision rule: S(kt , π t = ( Ψ+1
,1), τ t+1 = 0).
Consider next the case where there is a majority of young in period t, i.e.
ut < 1. If kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], we must prove that the indirect utility of
the young voter is maximized by the "demographic steady" strategy, meaning: π t = Ψ(τ (kt ),1) and the aggregate saving decision rule follows: S(kt , π t =
(τ (kt ),1), τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )). Otherwise, If kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]c , we must prove
that the indirect utility of the young voter is maximized by the "demographic
∗
n
switching" strategy, meaning: π t = (0, M in[γ , − m
]) and the aggregate saving
33

n
Ψ
decision rule follows: S(kt , π t = (0, M in[γ ∗ , − m
]), τ t+1 = Ψ+1
). Substituting
for wt lt (1 − τ t ) and 1 + rt+1 from equations (39) and (40), the young voter’s
indirect utility function, can be written in its Lagrangian form as follows:

L=
⎧
⎪
⎨ L(k t ) with πt+1 = (τ (kt+1 ),1) if kt+1 ∈[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]
∗
n
L(k t ) with πt+1 = (0, M in[γ , − m
])
otherwise
⎪
⎩
Ψ
L(k t ) with πt+1 = ( Ψ+1
,1)

(77)
if

ut+1 < 1

otherwise

where L(kt ) is as defined in equation (43). The first part of this proposition, proved that if next period decision rules are set according to the "demographic steady" strategy, and the capital per (native-born) worker is in the
range: [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], then the optimal solution for the young is π t = (τ (kt ), 1).
In addition, we have shown in proposition II, that under the assumption that
next period policy decision rules are given according to:
(
∗
n
])
if
ut+1 < 1
(0, M in[γ , − m
π t+1 =
(78)
Ψ
( Ψ+1 ,1)
otherwise
the young voter’s indirect utility function is maximized by the "demographic
∗
n
switching" strategy: π t = (0, M in[γ , − m
]). Therefore we must show that if
kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], the value of the young voter’s indirect utility function is
higher under the "demographic steady" strategy. Since the value of the young
voter’s indirect utility function under the "demographic steady" strategy is constant in kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], and the value of the young voter’s indirect utility function under the "demographic switching" strategy is increasing in kt ,
the value of the young voter’s indirect utility function under the "demographic
steady" strategy must not be lower than the "demographic switching" strategy
for kt = F (τ 1 ):
µ³
´−(1+β) Ψβ(1−α) ¶
β
2
Ψ
2 Ψ+α c ≥
Log
2+n+m 1+β Ψ+1
µ ³
¶
´ 1+Ψ
α
−α Ψ+α
Ψ
(1 + β)Log ( 1 − α)F (τ 1 ) (1 + γ t )
(1 + βf ( Ψ+1 ) +
!β
Ã
1+Ψ
α
−α Ψ+α
Ψ
(1−f ( Ψ+1
) −Ψ 1−α
β
Ψ (1+γ t )((1−α)F (τ 1 ) (1+γ t ) )
Ψ
Ψ
) ) Ψ+α
Log α((1 − α)(1 − Ψ+1 )2 ( 1+β Ψ+1
1+n+γ (1+m)
t

(79)
In addition, we must require that if kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], then also the aggregate
saving decision rule, S(kt , π t = (τ (kt ),1), τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )) ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]. The
derivative of next period capital per (native born) worker (defined according
to this aggregate saving decision rule) by kt is positive for kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )].
34

Denote by h1 (y) and h2 (y) the following functions:
¢ 1+Ψ
¡
β
Ψ
2
(1 − α) (F (τ 1 ))α 2−α (1 − τ 1 ) Ψ+α (1−f (τ (y)))
1+β Ψ+12+n+m
(80)
1+Ψ
¢ Ψ+α
¡
β
Ψ
2
α −α
2
h (y) = y−
(1−f (τ (y)))
(1 − α) (F (τ 1 )) 2 (1 − τ 1 )
1+β Ψ+12+n+m
(81)
Denote by k1 , k1 ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], the solutions of equations: h2 (k 1 ) = 0
and h1 (k 1 ) = 0 respectively. Thus, the required condition is that [k1 , k 1 ] ⊆
[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]. Under this condition, if kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], the indirect utility
of the young voter is maximized by the "demographic steady" strategy and the
aggregate saving decision rule follows: S(kt , π t = (τ (kt ),1), τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )) ∈
[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]. For kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]c , the value of the young voter’s indirect
utility function is not lower under the "demographic switching" strategy than
under the "demographic steady" strategy (since for τ t ∈ [τ 1 , τ 1 ]c , the solution
would imply setting the constrained). Thus, if kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]c , the indirect utility of the young voter is maximized according to the "demographic
n
switching" strategy: π t = (0,M in[γ ∗ , − m
]) and the aggregate saving decision
n
Ψ
∗
rule follows: S(kt , π t = (0,M in[γ , − m ]), τ t+1 = Ψ+1
). It should be noted that
since the optimal solution changes next period decisive voter from young to old,
for all values of kt+1 (defined according to this aggregate saving decision rule:
n
Ψ
S(kt , π t = (0,M in[γ ∗ , − m
]), τ t+1 = Ψ+1
)), there are no additional conditions
on kt+1 . These conditions are suﬃcient to assure that the equilibrium conditions
are satisfied when: m + n > 0 and n < 0.
If the population growth rates satisfy the properties: n, m > 0, there is a
majority of young in every period.
If kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )], we must prove that the indirect utility of the young
voter is maximized by setting: Ψ(τ (kt ),1) and the aggregate saving decision rule
follows: S(kt , π t = (τ (kt ),1), τ t+1 = τ (kt+1 )). Otherwise, If kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]c ,
we must prove that the indirect utility of the young voter is maximized by setting: π t = (0,γ ∗ ) and the aggregate saving decision rule follows: S(kt , π t =
(0, γ ∗ ), τ t+1 = 0). The young voter’s indirect utility function can be written in
its Lagrangian form as follows:
h1 (y) = y−

L=

L(k t ) with π t+1 = (τ (kt+1 ),1) if kt+1 ∈[F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]
L(k t ) with π t+1 = (0, γ ∗ )
otherwise

(82)

where L(k t ) is as defined in equation (43). Note that the immigration quota
is not restricted (γ t = γ ∗ ), since the young decisive voter cannot change next
period decisive voter from young to old. According to proposition II, the in35

direct utility of the young subject to constant next period policy variables, is
maximized by setting: πt = (0, γ ∗ ). Thus, similarly to the previous case, we will
require that the value of the young voter’s indirect utility function under the first
decision rule (πt = (τ (kt ),1)), should not be lower than the value of the young
voter’s indirect utility function under the second decision rule (π t = Ψ(0, γ ∗ ))
at kt = F (τ 1 ):
µ³
´−(1+β) Ψβ(1−α) ¶
β
2
Ψ
2 Ψ+α c ≥
Log
2+n+m 1+β Ψ+1
µ ³
´ 1+Ψ ¶
α
∗ −α Ψ+α
(1 + β)Log ( 1 − α)F (τ 1 ) (1 + γ )
+
!β
Ã
1+Ψ
∗
α
∗ −α Ψ+α
1−α
β
Ψ (1+γ )((1−α)F (τ 1 ) (1+γ ) )
∗ Ψ
−Ψ Ψ+α
) )
Log α((1 − α)(1 + γ ) ( 1+β Ψ+1
1+n+γ ∗ (1+m)
(83)
The same conditions as before are required, meaning that [k1 , k1 ] ⊆ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )].
But, unlike the previous case, when kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]c , the optimal strategy
do not change next period decisive voter from young to old. Therefore we
c
will additionally require that for kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )] , the value of the young
voter’s indirect utility function under the corner solutions of the first decision
rule will be lower (or equal) to the value of the young voter’s indirect utility
function under the second decision rule, and that the aggregate saving decision
rule follows: S(kt , π t = (0,γ ∗ ), τ t+1 = 0). Since for kt ∈ [F (τ 1 ), F (τ 1 )]c , the
decision rule of the tax rate τ t (kt ) is a corner solution, the solution would imply
setting the constrained, meaning τ = τ 1 or τ = τ 1 . Therefore the required
condition is that setting the constrained would yield that the value of the young
voter’s indirect utility function under the corner solutions of the first decision
rule is lower (or equal) and that the aggregate saving decision rule follows:
S(kt , π t = (0,γ ∗ ), τ t+1 = 0). These conditions are suﬃcient to assure that the
equilibrium conditions are satisfied when: n > 0.
If the population growth rates satisfy the property: n + m < 0, there is a
majority of old in every period. It is straightforward to see that the old decisive
Ψ
voter’s utility V o (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by setting π t = ( Ψ+1
,1). Since the
identity of next period decisive voter’s do not change from old to young, the
Ψ
Ψ
aggregate saving decision rule follows: S(kt , π t = ( Ψ+1
,1), τ t+1 = Ψ+1
).

8.4

A model without a social security system:

In order to emphasis the role of the social security system in the model, we next
consider a similar model with private saving, but without transfer payments
from the young to the old. We will prove that there is an equilibrium that
36

incorporates two strategies depending on the population growth rates. If the
immigration quota preferred by the young for its direct eﬀects on wages, is low
enough, the young decisive voter will restrict immigration even further, in order
to change next period decisive voter from young to old, so that next period old
decisive voter will set no restrictions on immigration. This policy is favorable
because it raises the return on savings of the current young. If the immigration
quota preferred by the young, for its direct eﬀect on wages, is high enough, the
young decisive voter will not manipulate next period young to old ratio, and set
his preferable immigration quota at a level equal to the next period quota set
by next period young decisive voter. Note that since there is no social security
system, there is no additional equilibrium as in the previous model. This is due
to the fact that the "demographic steady" strategy of this equilibrium results
from the dependency of the tax rate cum benefit rate on the capital per (native
born) worker, which does not exist in the present model.
The absence of social security system simplifies the assumptions of the model,
as follows:
The utility of the representative young and old individuals are derived only
from their own earned income and saving,

U y (wt , τ t , st , rt+1 ) = Log(wt lt − st −

ltΨ+1
) + βLog((1 + rt+1 )st )
Ψ+1

U o (st−1 , rt , ) = (1 + rt )st−1

(84)
(85)

This generates the standard saving-consumption and labor-leisure decisions:
¶
µ
1
Ψ
st =
(86)
β
wt lt
1+β
Ψ+1
ltΨ = wt

(87)

Factor prices are determined as in the extended model.
The indirect utility of the young and old respectively can be written as
follows:
µ³
´ 1+Ψ ¶
−α Ψ+α
y
α
V (kt , γ t ,γ t+1 ) = A + (1 + β)Log
(1 − α)kt (1 + γ t )
Ã
!
1−α
³
´ Ψ+α
1+Ψ
1+γ
β
Ψ
α
−α Ψ+α −Ψ
t
+βLog α (1 − α)( 1+β Ψ+1
)
) (1 + γ t+1 )Ψ
1+n+γ (1+m) ((1 − α)kt (1 + γ t )
t

¡
¢ 1−α
V (γ t−1 , k t ) = α (1 − α)kt −Ψ (1 + γ t )Ψ Ψ+α kt
o

37

µ

1 + n + γ t−1 (1 + m)
(1 + γ t−1 )

¶ (88a)
(89)

The definition of the Markov sub-game perfect political equilibrium is similar
to the previous definition, but has only one policy decision rule, the immigration
policy rule, γ t = G(γ t−1 ).
Proposition 8 The equilibrium can be specified as follows:
⎧
n
∗
∗
⎪
⎨ γ t = M in[γ , − m ] if γ ≤ γ
if
G(γ t−1 ) =
γt = γ∗
otherwise
⎪
⎩
γt = 1
otherwise
S(γ t , kt ) =

ut (γ t−1 ) < 1

(1+γ t )
β
Ψ
1+β Ψ+1 1+n+γ t (1+m) wt lt

(90)
(91)

where γ ∗ is defined as in the proposition II, and γ is given implicitly by the
following equation:
µ

n
m

1−
1+γ

⎡
1+Ψ
µ
¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α
⎢
⎣

2
1−γ

¶Ψ

⎛
⎝

n
1− m
n
1+n− m
(1+m)
1+γ
1+n+γ(1+m)

µ

n
m

1−
1+γ

1+Ψ
¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α

1−α
⎞−Ψ ⎤β Ψ+α
⎠ ⎥
=1
⎦

(92)
The equilibrium paths depends on the population growth rates and on the
initial amount of capital per (native-born) worker the economy is endowed with.
There are four types of equilibrium paths: 1. if n > 0, there are some restrictions on immigration. 2. if m + n < 0, there are no restrictions on
immigration. 3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0, there are two possible equilibrium
paths: if γ ∗ ≤ γ, there is a "demographic switching" equilibrium path, where
some level of immigration always prevails: in periods where the decisive voter
is old, there are no restrictions on immigration; and in periods where the decisive voter is young, there are some restrictions on immigration. Otherwise, the
decisive voter is always young, and there are less restrictions on immigration
than in the "demographic switching" equilibrium path when the decisive voter is
young.
Proof. As in proposition II, we must show that the immigration policy decision
rule, G, satisfies the equilibrium conditions.
Consider first the case where there is a majority of old in period t, i.e. ut ≥ 1.
It is easy to see that the V o (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by setting γ t = 1.
Consider next the case where there is a majority of young in period t, i.e.
ut < 1. We will prove that in the case where m + n > 0 and n < 0, the indirect
n
utility of the young, V y (γ t−1 , kt ), is maximized by γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m
], if γ ∗ ≤ γ

38

and by γ t = γ ∗ otherwise10 . As was proved in proposition II, the indirect utility
of the young subject to constant next period policy variables, is maximized by
setting: γ t = γ ∗ , where γ ∗ ∈ [0, 1]. Define γ to be the immigration quota which
satisfies the following property:
V y (kt , γ t = −

n
= 1) = V y (kt , γ t = γ,γ t+1 = γ)
,γ
m t+1

(93a)

The indirect utility of the young voter subject to: γ t+1 = Ψ(γ t ), can be written
in the following way:
(
⎧
n
⎪
] if γ ∗ ≤ γ
M in[γ ∗ , − m
⎨ L(k ) where γ
if
ut+1 < 1
t
t+1 =
∗
L=
γ
otherwise
⎪
⎩
L(kt ) where γ t+1 = 1
otherwise
(94)
where L(kt ) is defined as follows:
⎧
µ³
´ 1+Ψ ¶
⎪
−α Ψ+α
α
⎪
⎪
(1 − α)kt (1 + γ t )
⎨ A + (1 + β)Log
Ã
!
1−α
L(kt )=
³
´ Ψ+α
1+Ψ
⎪
1+γ
β
Ψ
α
−α Ψ+α −Ψ
t
⎪
⎪ +βLog α (1 − α)( 1+β
)
) (1 + γ t+1 )Ψ
⎩
Ψ+1 1+n+γ (1+m) ((1 − α)kt (1 + γ t )
t

(95)
n
It is easy to see that if γ ∗ ≤ − m
, then the young decisive voter will set the
n
current immigration quota to be γ t = γ ∗ . Otherwise γ ∗ > − m
. If additionally
∗
the optimal immigration quota satisfy the property: γ < γ , we have to prove
that the optimal strategy of the young is to set according to: γ t = γ ∗ , which will
induce a young decisive voter in the next period voting for the same strategy,
meaning:
V y (kt , γ t = −

n
= 1) < V y (kt , γ t = γ ∗ ,γ t+1 = γ ∗ )
,γ
m t+1

(96a)

Using the fact the indirect utility of the young is higher the higher is next
period immigration quotas (as it increases the next period interest rate), we
derive, from equation (93), the following inequality:
n
= 1) = V y (kt , γ t = γ,γ t+1 = γ) < V y (kt , γ t = γ ∗ ,γ t+1 = γ ∗ )
,γ
m t+1
(97a)
n
∗
∗
Thus, the optimal strategy of the young when γ > − m and γ < γ is to set
n
the immigration quota to be: γ t = γ ∗ . Otherwise, if γ ∗ > − m
, but the optimal
∗
immigration quota satisfies the property: γ ≥ γ , we must prove that the young
V y (kt , γ t = −

1 0 If the population growth rates are both positive, m, n > 0, then it is straightforward to
see that V y (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by γ t = γ ∗ .

39

n
will set the immigration quota to be: γ t = − m
, which will induce an old decisive
voter in the next period voting for γ t+1 = 1, meaning:

V y (kt , γ t = −

n
n
= 1) > V y (kt , γ t = γ ∗ ,γ t+1 = − )
,γ
m t+1
m

(98a)

which can be rewritten in the following way:
µ

1−α
⎡
⎛
⎞−Ψ ⎤β Ψ+α
n
1− m
1+Ψ
1+Ψ
µ
¶
¶
µ
¶
−α(1+β)
Ψ
−α(1+β)
n
n
Ψ+α
Ψ+α
n
1− m
1− m
2
⎢
⎝ 1+n− m (1+m)
⎠ ⎥
>1
⎣
⎦
∗
n
1+γ
∗
∗
1+γ
1− m
1
+
γ
1+n+γ ∗ (1+m)

(99)

∗

Since γ ≤ 1, it is enough to prove that:
µ

n ¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α
1− m
1 + γ∗
1+Ψ

1−α
⎡
⎛
⎞−Ψ ⎤β Ψ+α
n
1− m
1+Ψ
µ
¶
µ
¶
Ψ
−α(1+β)
n
Ψ+α
n
1− m
⎢ 1 + γ∗
⎝ 1+n− m (1+m)
⎠ ⎥
>1
⎣
⎦
∗
n
1+γ
∗
1− m
1
+
γ
1+n+γ ∗ (1+m)

(100)

Denote by k(y) the following function:

k(y) =

µ

1
1+y

1+Ψ
¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α

⎡

⎣(1 + y)Ψ

Ã

1
1+y
1+n+y(1+m)

µ

1
1+y

1+Ψ !−Ψ
¶−α(1+β) Ψ+α

1−α
⎤β Ψ+α

⎦

(101)
Since the derivative of k(y) by y is positive for
≤ y ≤ 1, it means that
n
∗
k(γ ) > k(− m ). Thus, the optimal strategy of the young in that case is to set
n
the immigration quota to be γ t = − m
, which completes the proof.
n
−m

References
[1] Becker, G.S., Mulligan, C., 2003. Deadweight costs and the size of government. The Journal of Law and Economics 46, 293—340.
[2] Benhabib, J., 1996. On the political economy of immigration. European
Economic Review 40, 1737-43
[3] Bergstrom, T.C., Hartman, J.L., 2005. Sustainabillity of pay-as-you-go social security, Cesifo Working Paper No.1378.
[4] Bohn, Henning, , 2005. Will Social Security and Medicare Remain Viable
as the U.S. Population is
[5] Aging? An Update, in: Robin Brooks and Assaf Razin (eds.), The Politics
and Finance of
40

[6] Social Security Reform, Cambridge University Press, 44-72
[7] Boldrin, M., Rustichini, A., 2000. Political equilibria with social security.
Review of Economic Dynamics 3, 41-78.
[8] Borjas, G.J., 1999. Heaven’s door: immigration policy and the american
economy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
[9] Borjas, G.J., 2003. THE LABOR DEMAND CURVE IS DOWNWARD
SLOPING: REEXAMINING THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION ON
THE LABOR MARKET, NBER WP # 9755
[10] Breyer, F., Craig, B., 1997. Voting on social security: evidence from OECD
countries. European Journal of Political Economy 13, 705—724.
[11] Cooley, T.F., Soares, J., 1999. A positive theory of social security based on
reputation. Journal of Political Economy 107, 135— 160.
[12] Dolmas, J., Huﬀman G.W., 2004. On the political economy of immigration
and income redistribution. International Economic Review 45, 1129-1168.
[13] Feldstein M.S., 2006. The eﬀects of the ageing european population on economic growth and budgets: implications for immigration and other policies.
NBER working paper #12736, Cambridge, Mass.
[14] Forni, L,. 2005, Social security as Markov equilibrium in OLG models.
Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 178-194.
[15] Galasso, V., Profeta, P., 2002. The political economy of social security: a
survey. European Journal of Political Economy 18, 1— 29.
[16] Hansson, I., Stuart, C., 1989. Social security as trade among living generations. American Economic Review 79, 549—559.
[17] Hassler, J., Rodriguez Mora, J. V., Storesletten, K., Zilliboti, F., 2003. The
survival of the welfare state, American Economic Review 93,. 87-112, 2003.
[18] Krusell, P., Rios-Rull, J.V., 1996. Vested interests in a positive theory of
stagnation and growth. Review of Economic Studies 63, 301-29.
[19] Lee, R., Miller, T.,2000. Immigration, social security, and broader fiscal
impacts. The American Economic Review 90, 350-354.
[20] Mulligan, C.B., Sala-i-Martin, X., 1999. Gerontocracy, retirement and social security. NBER working paper #7117, Cambridge, Mass.
41

[21] Ortega, F., 2005. Immigration quotas and skill upgrading. Journal of Public
Economics 89, 1841-1863.
[22] Razin, A., Sadka, E., 2000. Unskilled migration: a burden or a boon for
the welfare state. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 102, 463—479.
[23] Razin, A., Sadka, E., Swagel, P., 2002a. The aging population and the size
of the welfare state. Journal of Political Economy 110, 900—918.
[24] Razin, A., Sadka, E., Swagel, P., 2002b. Tax burden and migration: a political economy theory and evidence, Journal of Public Economics 85,167—190.
[25] Razin, A., Sadka, E., 2004.Welfare migration: is the net fiscal burden a
good measure of its economic impact on the welfare of the native-born
population? CESifo Economic Studies 50, 709-714.
[26] Tabellini, G., 2000. A positive theory of social security. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 102, 523— 545.
[27] Storesletten, K., 2000. Sustaining fiscal policy through immigration. The
Journal of Political Economy 108, 300-24.
[28] Verbon, H.A.A., Verhoeven, M.J.M., 1992. Decision making on pension
schemes under rational expectations. Journal of Economics 56, 71— 97.

42

