NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BODY COMPOSITION AND WAGES
Roy Wada
Erdal Tekin
Working Paper 13595
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13595

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Roy Wada is an AHRQ postdoctoral fellow in Health Service Research at UCLA and RAND. Alexander
Brumlik and Jason Delaney provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Roy Wada and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Body Composition and Wages
Roy Wada and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 13595
November 2007, Revised April 2009
JEL No. I1,J3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effect of body composition on wages. We develop measures of body composition
– body fat (BF) and fat-free mass (FFM) – using data on bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) that
are available in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III and estimate wage models
for white respondents in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. Previous research used
body size or BMI for measuring obesity despite the growing concern in the medical literature that
BMI-based measures do not distinguish between body fat and fat-free body mass and that BMI does
not adequately control for non-homogeneity inside human body. Therefore, measures used in this
paper represent a useful alternative to BMI-based proxies of obesity. This paper also contributes to
the growing literature on the role of non-cognitive skills on wage determination. Our results indicate
that calculated BF is unambiguously associated with decreased wages for both males and females
among whites We also present evidence indicating that FFM is consistently associated with increased
wages. We show that these results are not the artifacts of unobserved heterogeneity. Finally, our findings
are robust to numerous specification checks and to a large number of alternative BIA prediction equations
from which the body composition measures are derived.

Roy Wada
UC, Los Angeles
roywada@ucla.edu
Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu

I. Introduction
Obesity is defined as the presence of excessive body fat (Bjorntorp 2002, World
Health Organization 1998). Therefore, it is the excessive levels of body fat that makes
someone classified as obese and is responsible for the well-documented obesity-related
health problems.2 If it is the levels of body fat that define someone as obese, then it is
important to use a measure of body fat in order to develop a better understanding of the
potentially harmful effects of obesity on an array of economic and social outcomes
ranging from labor market outcomes to self-esteem, discrimination, and marriage
problems. Body fat, however, is not directly observed by researchers. In fact, most
individuals are unaware of exactly how much body fat they possess. While it can be
measured with the aid of clinical instruments, opportunities for such measurements are
rare. It would be an expensive and difficult undertaking to collect them in a survey. For
this reason most social surveys have relied on a variety of proxies for indicating the
presence of excessive body fat. The most commonly used of these proxies for body fat is
body mass index (BMI), which is calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in
meters squared (World Health Organization, 1995). An advantage of BMI is that it is
easily calculated from height and weight, which are readily obtainable.
Unfortunately, BMI is an imperfect surrogate for body fat (Smalley et al., 1990;
Gallagher et al., 1996; Romero et al., 2006). BMI alone explains only 26% of the
variations in body fat (Gallager et al., 1996). A wide a range of conditions exist in which
BMI provides misleading information about the levels of body fat (Prentice and Jebb,
2001). In a recent review of the medical literature on the association between BMI-based

2

Obesity-related diseases include coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, hypertensions, stroke, cancers,
and liver and gallbladder diseases (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2007).

1

measures of obesity and total mortality for patients with coronary artery disease, RomeroCorral et al. (2006) found that overweight patients actually have a better survival rate and
lower cardiovascular events than underweight or obese patients. Also referred to as
obesity paradox, this lack of association (or an inverse association) between obesity and
mortality has puzzled many medical researchers.3 Economists who recently studied the
effect of obesity on the labor market outcomes using BMI have also obtained mixed
findings.4
While BMI is widely used by social scientists, a number of researchers have
recently suggested that the inconsistent effects of BMI may be due to its inability to
properly distinguish body fat from lean body mass (i.e. Allison et al., 2002; RomeroCorral et al., 2006, Wada, 2007; Cawley, 2008). A consensus report by World Health
Organization (1995) warned researchers that BMI must be interpreted carefully to avoid
confusing muscularity with obesity. Then, BMI might be less sensitive to male obesity
due to the higher levels of lean body mass in males (Wada, 2005).5 Gallager et al. (1996)
and De Lorenzo et al. (2001) suggested that the reliability of BMI for measuring body fat

3

Similar findings are also reported by several other studies that examine the association between BMI and
mortality in patients without evidence of cardiovascular disease (Flegal et al., 2005; McGee, 2005).
4
There is some consensus on a negative association between obesity and wages for white females, but no
clear evidence of a wage penalty exists for males or other female population groups and some studies even
report a positive association between obesity and wages of black males .Averett and Korenman (1996),
Baum and Ford (2004), and Cawley (2004) have all found a negative association between BMI and wages
for white females but not for males or non-white females. For white males, the effect of BMI on wages
was found to be non-linear with overweight workers earning more than underweight or obese workers.
Cawley (2004) finds that BMI is positively and significantly associated with the wages of Black males.
Baum and Ford (2004) report a weak penalty for male obesity, but the result becomes mixed when the
sample is further divided by ethnicity, as reported by Averett and Korenman (1999) and Cawley (2004).
5
A higher portion of women’s body consists of body fat due to demands of childbearing and other
hormonal functions.

2

is questionable, and that direct measurements of body fat would provide a significant
improvement towards the detection and diagnosis of obesity.6
Direct measurement of body fat is available as a part of body composition
analysis conducted by clinical investigators. In body composition analysis, body is
analytically broken down to its various components (Heyward and Wagner, 2004). A
popular model for studying obesity is the two-compartment model of body fat (BF) and
fat-free mass (FFM).7 In this model, BF is the smaller component consisting mostly of fat
tissues, while FFM is the larger component that includes everything else, including
muscles and skeletons. One advantage of two-compartment model is that body fat, which
is characteristically unhealthy and the basis for classifying someone as obese, can now be
tracked independently from the rest of a person’s body. Indeed, using body composition,
it has been clinically shown that BF is responsible for the ill effects of obesity, while
FFM is associated with health and physical fitness (e.g., Heitmann et al., 2000; Allison et
al., 2002). Thus, the marginal effects of BF can be interpreted as the incremental effect
of obesity, while the marginal effects of FFM can be considered as that of healthy body
growth. In other words, BF and FFM can exert a complex influence on the economic and
social outcomes that cannot necessarily be captured by a single measure that fails to
distinguish one from the other. Because the expected effects of BF and FFM are opposite

6

For more on the shortcomings of BMI as a measure of obesity, see Wada (2005, 2007) and Cawley and
Burkhauser (2006).
7
The two-compartment modes were first proposed by Siri (1961) and Brozek et al. (1963). FFM is
sometimes referred to as lean body mass (Heyward and Wagner, 2004). Technically, lean body mass
contains a small amount of lipids, while FFM does not any lipids at all. In males, about 97 percent of lean
body mass is FFM, while it is about 92 percent in females (Lohman, 1992).

3

to each other, a single index such as BMI may actually result in a situation where the
opposing effects cancel each other out.8
In this paper, we combine data from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 1988-94 (the NHANES III) and the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth 1979 (NLSY) to estimate the effect of body composition on the wages of white
males and white females. Our paper makes four main contributions to the literature.
First, we develop and propose using body composition measures as an alternative to the
BMI-based proxies of obesity. Second, we empirically demonstrate that the calculated
body fat is unambiguously associated with decreased wages for white males and females.
This result is in contrast to the mixed results obtained by using BMI. Our results lend
further support to the notion that that obesity is associated with a wage penalty. Third,
we find that calculated fat-free mass is associated with increased wages for both white
males and females. This is important evidence in favor of the nutrition hypothesis
regarding worker productivity. In his Nobel address, Fogel (1994) hypothesized that
increased body size should be associated with increased worker productivity.9 This
assumption of “bigger-is-better” has been questioned in light of the obesity epidemic.10
Our result using the fat-free mass is important because it points to the beneficial effect of
healthy body growth on wages. Since health is the conduit through which body size is

8

Many attempts were made to eliminate bias due to omitted variables and potential simultaneity, but they
were aimed at BMI instead of body fat itself. These include instrumental variables (Pagan and Davila,
1997; Behrman and Rozensweig, 2001; Cawley, 2004), individual, sibling, or twin fixed effects (Averett
and Korenman, 1996; Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2001; Baum and Ford, 2004; Cawley, 2004), and using
lagged values of obesity or weight (Sargent and Blanchflower, 1994; Gortmaker et al., 1993; Averett and
Korenman, 1996; Cawley, 2004).
9
See Fogel (1994) and Steckel (1995) for a summary of the nutrition hypothesis.
10
Behrman and Rozensweig (2001) explore the possibility that the negative effect of obesity is due to
unobserved heterogeneity and not necessarily due to increased body size. Fogel (1994) presents his theory
that the beneficial effect of body size is not properly captured by the observed relationship between BMI
and mortality, which is U-shaped.

4

thought to influence worker productivity, it should be the healthy body component or the
fat-free mass that should be associated with worker productivity. Fourth, our paper
contributes to the growing literature on role of non-cognitive factors in wage
determination by providing insights into the effects body fat and fat-free mass on
wages.11

II. Body Composition and Empirical Strategy
Body composition has been used for almost hundred years by nutritionists and
physiologists for the purpose of studying nutrition, physical growth, and physical
performance (Forbes, 1999). Improvements in clinical measurements and the rising tide
of obesity have led to a renewed interest in body composition. In multivariate analyses,
body composition has been shown to be significantly better at explaining individual
variations in strength, health, and physical performance than body size (Bjorntorp, 2002;
Institute of Medicine, 2005). Furthemore, it has been demonstrated that fat-free mass
(FFM) has a positive effect on health and physical performance, while body fat (BF) has
a negative effect (e.g., Heitmann et al., 2000; Allison et al., 2002).
A drawback of body composition is that it is considerably more difficult to obtain
than BMI. To overcome this difficulty, clinical investigators have developed the
bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) for measuring body composition (Kushner et al.,

11

Given that a large body of research in the human capital literature has concluded that most of the
variation in wages across individuals remains unexplained even after extensive controls of human capital
investment (Keane, 1993; Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001), have led many economists to focus on the
potential role of non-cognitive factors on wage determination (e.g., Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994; Mocan
and Tekin, forthcoming - a; Mobius, and Rosenblat, 2006; Kuhn and Weinberger, 2005; and Persico,
Postlewaite and Silverman, 2004).

5

1990; Roubenoff et al., 1995; Sun et al., 2003; Chumlea et al., 2002).12 In the BIA, the
electrical resistance of an individual’s body is measured, which is then converted into BF
and FFM with the use of a predetermined prediction equation (National Institutes of
Health, 1994).13 At the 1994 National Institutes of Health (NIH) conference on BIA, it
was concluded that BIA is a useful technique for determining body composition in
healthy individuals (National Institutes of Health, 1994).14
The construction of body composition from BIA has recently caught the attention
of several economists. For example, Wada (2005, 2007) takes a departure from the other
economic studies of obesity by using BIA information from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (the NHANES IIII) to estimate the effect of body
composition on labor market outcomes. Cawley and Burkhauser (2006) also used the
BIA and body composition information from the NHANES III to study the effect of body
composition on employment disability for respondents in the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID). Johansson et al. (2009) used a Finnish data set containing information
on body composition to ascertain the relationship between obesity and wages.
In this paper, we also use BIA information the NHANES III, which is a nationally
representative cross-sectional survey conducted between 1988 and 1994. In the NHANES
III, trained technicians in mobile laboratories obtained the necessary information from
respondents over the age of 12 who were not known to be physically handicapped or
12

Some of the other alternative methods of measuring body composition include skinfold thickness,
underwater weighting, dual x-ray absorptiometry, magnetic resonance imaging (Caterson, 2002; Heshka,
Buhl, and Heymsfield, 1994; Heymsfield et al., 1998). However, compared to BIA, these methods are
prohibitively expensive or unreasonably intrusive (Caterson, 2002; Heshka, Buhl, and Heymsfield, 1994;
Heymsfield et al., 1998) for use in large-scale epidemiological studies.
13
FFM registers a lower electrical resistance due to its high water content, whereas BF does not conduct
electricity very well.
14
The conference also stressed that the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES IIII),
which contain measurements of BIA for a nationally representative population, is promising for examining
the relationship between body composition and clinical risk factors.

6

pregnant at the time.15 The BIA information from the NHANES III can be converted into
body composition using the predictive equations developed by a number of clinical
researchers. We start our analysis by using those developed by Sun et al. (2003) for
mainly illustrative purposes, but also for the following reasons. First, these equations
were published in anticipation of use with the NHANES III. Second, this is one of the
most recently published studies on the subject. Third, other studies on the topic (Wada,
2005, 2007; Cawley and Burkhauser, 2006) also relied on this study. 16 However, we
recognize that relying only on a single set of prediction equations raises the legitimate
question as to whether our results are driven by the choice of this particular set of
prediction equations. To address this concern, we gathered a comprehensive set of
prediction equations from published sources developed by other clinical researcher. We
will present results from these equations as a robustness analysis.
Sun et al. (2003) developed their equation using a sample containing 1,474 whites
and 355 blacks aged 12-94. Because many of the predictive equations are developed
using mostly white samples and the sample sizes are often too small when minority
groups are included, they are not expected to work for minority groups (see National

15

For more information on the sample design of NHANES III, see U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (1996).
16
Sun et al. (2003) used data from five research centers to establish the models that predict fat-free mass as
a function of electrical resistance as well as height and weight. They obtain their measure of body fat by
subtracting fat-free mass from total bodyweight. Fat-free mass is calculated from a deterministic formula
based on bone mineral content, total body water, body volume, and bodyweight using a multicomponent
molecular model derived particularly for body composition analysis (Heymsfield et al., 1996). This
multicomponent molecular model is developed using superior clinical measurements by densitometry,
isotope dilution or dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (Heymsfield et al., 1996).

7

Institutes of Health, 1994; Segal et al., 1987). Therefore, we will restrict our analysis to
white men and white women only.17
The predictive equation provided by Sun et al. (2003) takes the following forms
for males,
FFM = - 10.678 + 0.262 weight + 0.652

stature 2
+ 0.015 resistance ,
resistance

(1)

and for females,
FFM = - 9.529 + 0.168 weight + 0.696

stature2
+ 0.016 resistance ,
resistance

(2)

where weight is clinically measured weight in kilograms and stature is is clinically
measured height in centimeters. The resistance is a measure of electrical resistance
measured in ohms. The predictive power of these equations is excellent with the Rsquared values of 0.90 for males and 0.83 for females (Sun et al., 2003). Once the FFM
is obtained from above equations, BF can easily be calculated as the difference between
total weight and FFM.18 Once the FFM is obtained from above equations, BF can easily
be calculated as the difference between total weight and FFM.
Unfortunately, the NHANES III does not contain information on hourly wages.
To overcome this problem, we use the information on body composition found in the
NHANES III to impute measures of body composition for respondents in the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youths 1979 (NLSY). The imputed body composition is then
used to estimate the wage equation for the respondents in NLSY. The parameters
17

While there are a few predictive equations designed specifically for blacks or Hispanics, they are not
necessary for the main purpose of this paper, which is to demonstrate the usefulness of body composition in
research related to economics of obesity.
18
They mentioned that their final equations tended to over-predict the FFM for white males by 0.4
kilogram and the FFM for white females by 0.3 kilogram. Our observations have been adjusted
accordingly by adding or subtracting the average errors from each gender group.

8

necessary to predict body composition was extracted from the NHANES by separately
regressing FFM and BF on self-reported characteristics found in both datasets. These
characteristics include the following self-reported variables: age, age2, age3, weight,
weight2, weight3, height, height2, height3, and height x weight.19
The results from the prediction equations for FFM and BF are presented in
Appendix Tables 1A and 1B. To help account for differences across gender, they are
estimated separately for males and females. Age, weight, and height as well as their
polynomials and interactions between height and weight appear to be important
determinants of FFM for most males and females. The adjusted R-squared values for
FFM are quite high at 0.82 for both males and females. They are also high for BF at
about 0.76 and 0.90. These high R-squared values imply that a very large proportion of
the variation in the FFM and BF can be explained by the variations in the covariates
included in these regressions. Taken together, results in Appendix Tables 1A and 1B
suggest that these models accurately predict the FFM and BF in the NHANES III and that
the estimated coefficients can reliably be used to construct FFM and BF in other data sets
such as the NLSY.
Using the parameter estimates from these prediction equations, we imputed levels
^

^

of FFM and BF for respondents in NLSY. The imputed values, FFM it and BFit , are then
used to included in the hourly wage equation estimated in NLSY.20 The wage equation
has the following form,

19

We only use self-reported characteristics in this regression using NHANES III because similar variables
are self-reported in NLSY Note that Cawley and Burkhauser (2006) used a similarly parsimonious
specification to predict BF and FFM in NHANES III.
20
In a way, the logic used here is contextually similar to approximating years of experience as age minus
years spent in school minus 6, which is commonly used in estimating the Mincer’s equation since years of
experience is usually unobserved in the data.

9

)
)
ln(w it ) = β X it + α 1 FFM it + α 2 BFit + ε it

,

(5)

where ln(w it ) is the logarithm of the hourly wage rate for individual i in year t, X it is a
vector of the observed determinants of wages; β and α’s are the parameters and ε it is the
disturbance term.
We will exclude both height and weight from the wage equations, since they are
^

^

already contained in FFM it and BFit . This is similar to the estimation strategy using
BMI, where height and weight enters the wage equation only through BMI. Here we
basically allow the data to determine how height and weight interact with other
characteristics of individuals to define someone as obese. However, height can also
influence earnings due to higher social capital accumulated through participation in social
and sport clubs during high school years as well as possibly more favorable treatment by
their peers (Persico, Postlewaite and Silverman, 2004). To account for the possibility that
height can have an independent effect on wages, we will control for a set of variables that
would serve as a proxy for the sociability of individuals, such as participation in high
school sports and clubs, as measured in the NLSY. Alternatively, we will use height
during adolescence (prior to age 18) as an additional specification check. We also
include in our wage models variables like education, AFQT test scores, and parents’
education, that can also help further control for the individual’s social skills. We will
also estimate all of our models with individual fixed effects that will account for all the
time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity, including social skills developed during high
school as well as height during adolescence. Finally, we will present the results using the
same-sex sibling differencing that will control for family-specific unobservable factors.

10

III. Data
The NHANES III, which is described in the previous section, is an ideal dataset
for studying body composition because it provides information on both self-reported and
measured height and weight, and more importantly the BIA readings. The availability of
BIA readings in the NHANES III is critical for the purpose of this paper because it
enables us to construct measures of FFM and BF, which we later use in the wage
regressions.
Our main data set is NLSY, which is a nationally representative survey of the
U.S. population. It started in 1979 with a cohort of males and females between ages 14
and 21. These individuals have been followed annually until 1993 and biannually
thereafter. The NLSY provides detailed information on the labor market outcomes of
respondents along with a rich set of personal and family characteristics. Although the
NLSY does not provide a direct measure of body composition, it is one of the few
economic surveys with longitudinal information on the body measurements, such as
height and weight. We pooled all the NLSY between years 1981-2004 to create our
analysis sample because self-reported weight information is available in this period. Our
NLSY sample for the wage models is between ages 18 and 49. To avoid changes in
body composition during pregnancy, females who were determined to be pregnant at the
time of an interview are dropped from our sample.21 We also omit respondents who are
in the armed forces (Baum and Ford, 2004) and omit the supplemental poor white
sample. Finally, we restrict our sample to whites because the BIA prediction formulas

21

Reports of current pregnancies and past pregnancies were not collected at every interview. To overcome
this problem, a dataset was constructed from the birth dates of women’s biological children and the
interview dates. Women were identified as pregnant if the interview occurred between 9 months before or
after the birth of a biological child.

11

were developed mostly using white samples. After applying these exclusion criteria, we
have a pooled-sample of 22,833 white males and 19,468 white females with required
observations for variables of interest.
The NLSY asks about the hourly wage of respondents at their primary jobs. We
deflated the hourly wages to 1991 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.22 The other
variables included in the analyses are age, years of education, years of job tenure, an
indicator for marital status, an indicator for urban residence, region indicators, the highest
grade completed by the mother, the highest grade completed by the father, the score from
Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) as a proxy measure of intelligence, years of
employment experience, and year dummies. We also include county unemployment rate
as a control for labor demand conditions. A dummy variable indicating whether the
individual has any health problems limiting the kind or amount of work one can perform
is also included. Finally, we also constructed a binary indicator indicating blue-collar
workers.
The height and weight information provided in the NLSY is self-reported.
Previous studies show evidence of reporting error in self-reports of weight and height
(Rowland, 1989; Gorber et al., 2007).23 In order to avoid bias in their estimates, several
studies utilized the NHANES, which contains both measured and self-reported height and
weight, to correct for reporting bias in the NLSY (Cawley, 2004, 2006; Lakdawalla and
Philipson, 2002; and Chou, Grossman, and Saffer, 2004). Following the approach in

22

Following Cawley (2004), hourly wages were top- and bottom-coded to be between 1 and 500 in 1991
dollars.
23
Gorber et al. (2007) conducted a review of existing empirical evidence to determine the degree of
agreement between measured and self-reported measures of height, weight, and BMI. Their review of 64
studies suggested evidence for under-reporting for weight and BMI and over-reporting for height that
varies between men and women.

12

these studies, we regressed measured weight on self-reported weight, its square and cube,
age, age-squared, and age-cubed, separately by race and sex. We then repeated this
process for height. Finally, we used the coefficient estimates from the NHANES weight
and height regressions to construct measures of weight and height in the NLSY that are
corrected for reporting error. However, our results are not sensitive to this
implementation.
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for the NLSY sample along with the
definitions of the variables, including the predicted FFM and BF. The descriptive
statistics is presented by the gender. As illustrated in Table 1, white males are taller and
heavier than white females, but this is due to their higher levels of FFM. White females,
in fact, possess a higher level of BF. White males and females earn about 13.59 dollars
and 10.39 dollars per hour, respectively. The proportion of sample having a health
problem limiting work and other activities is slightly higher for females. As expected,
there is little difference between the genders regarding the mother’s and father’s
education. Similarly, the AFQT test scores are almost the same. Finally, white males are
much more likely to work in blue-collar occupations than white females.

IV. Results
Studies using conventional measures of obesity (BMI, weight, binary indicators of
overweight and obese) typically implement the empirical analyses in a numbers of steps.
First, they usually estimate models using contemporaneous measures of obesity. Second,
they repeat their analysis using lagged measures of obesity to guard against the
possibility of reverse causality from wages to obesity. Third, they estimate models

13

controlling for fixed effects to control for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity that
would potentially bias the results.24 We follow the same pattern in our analysis of the
effect of body composition on wages. Note that we also estimated our models using
these conventional measures to confirm the findings of the previous studies. Our results
are largely consistent with those of previous studies, but they are not discussed here to
economize on space.25
Table 2A presents the results from the wage models with two contemporaneous
measures of body composition – FFM in kilograms and BF in kilograms. Table 2B and
2C display the results from the models with the lagged measures and the fixed effects,
respectively. Differently from the previous studies, we also estimate models with samesex sibling fixed effects, whose results are displayed in Table 2D.26
As we discussed in Section II, in order to account for the possibility that current
height may serve as a proxy of the degree of the individual’s social skills and that this
may have an independent impact on wages, we also control for variables that would serve
as a proxy for the sociability of the individual in some specifications. Specifically, the
sociability variables that we include in the models are nine binary indicators for the most
active high school club participation, such as athletics or marching band.27 To better

24

See Cawley (2004) for a more detailed discussion of the empirical specifications used in studies with
conventional measures.
25
These results are available in a longer version of this paper and are available from the authors upon
request.
26
Note that, since these models use measures of body composition constructed from the regressions
coefficients that are transferred from NHANES III to the NLSY, the standard errors will be underestimated.
Therefore, we present bootstrapped standard errors in all these tables. We implemented bootstrapping with
399 replications. The implications of the results remained the same when we repeated higher values of
replications.
27
There are ten clubs minus one for the excluded category. It is likely that the contemporaneous sociability
variables are endogenous to wages because higher wages are likely to raise sociability. In order to avoid
bias due to potential reverse causality from wages to sociability, we use sociability indicators from high
school years rather than current indicators of sociability. Nevertheless, models that also included current

14

assess the effect of these variables on the impact of body composition measures, we
present results in Tables 2A and 2B with and without these indicators. Note that the
sociability variables are not included in Table 2C because their effects are captured by the
individual fixed effects.
In Table 2A, we find that the coefficients on the measures of body composition
have the signs consistent with our expectations for both genders. That is, the FFM and the
BF are associated with an increase and a decrease in wages, respectively, regardless of
the gender. The results with social indicators remain very similar to those without them.
Including nine variables for high school clubs that capture the social skills of the
individual do not cause appreciable changes to the coefficient estimates. Looking at the
coefficients in the results with social indicators in Table 2A, a one kilogram increase in
the BF reduces wages by about one percent for both white males and females. When the
FFM is raised by one kilogram, the wages increase by about 0.8 percent for white males
and about 1.3 percent for white females. 28 These results indicate that, while an increase
in body size due to BF will hurt wages, an increase due to FFM is actually beneficial.
Table 2B presents the result for lagged values of FFM and BF. We chose to lag
FFM and BF by seven years because larger lags will considerably reduce the number of
available observations, while smaller lags may not be sufficiently different from the
contemporaneous values.29 Sample size is reduced by approximately half as a result of
using 7-year lags. The results from the lagged estimations are largely similar to the
indicators of sociability such as measures of self-assessed “shyness” did not change the results. These
results are available from the authors upon request.
28
Note that a one kilogram increase in BF is equivalent to about 5 percent increase in the body fat of white
males and about 4 percent increase in the body fat of white females. Similarly, a one kilogram increase in
the FFM is equivalent to about 2 percent increase in the fat-free mass of white males and white females.
29
Seven lags were also used by Averett and Korenman (1996) and Cawley (2004) for their studies using
BMI. Note that our lags are for seven-year lags instead of seven-observation lags, given that NLSY
became biannual after 1994.

15

results using contemporaneous FFM and BF in Table 2A. Both the coefficients for FFM
and BF are significant for white males and females. The estimated magnitudes are also
similar to the contemporaneous results but slightly larger (away from zero).
Table 2C presents the coefficients of FFM and BF from regressions with
individual fixed effects. These models account for all of the time-invariant unobserved
factors, including sociability from high school. Despite controlling for time-invariant
heterogeneity, the results from Table 2C indicate that the effects of BF and FFM are still
significant for white males and white females. More interestingly, the magnitudes of the
FFM and BF effects for white males and white females approximately double between
Tables 2A and 2C after controlling for fixed effects.
The persistent and significant effects of body composition even after controlling
for individual fixed effects suggest that an increase in BF is indeed bad for the wages of
not only white females but also for white males. We also find that individuals earn a
wage premium for having an increase in their FFM. These findings are a departure from
the previous studies based on BMI that consistently find an obesity penalty for white
females but not always for males.
Finally, we present the results from the models with the same-sex sibling fixed
effects in Table 2D. The number of available observations was significantly reduced by
this operation, 3,597 for males and 2,666 for females, which represent about 1/3 of the
original sample. We present the results with and without social indicators. The estimated
coefficients are remarkably similar to the earlier results in magnitude, although
controlling for high school sociability appears to slightly reduce the estimated effect.
Also the effects for white males are not estimated with much precision possibly due to

16

reduced sample size and the fact that the identification in these model comes from
discordant measures between siblings. The results from the same-sex fixed effects
further support the notion that our results for FFM and BF are not generated by
unobserved heterogeneity in household or environmental characteristics.

Alternative BIA Conversion Equations for FFM and BF
It is possible that the findings that are discussed above are driven by the choice of
a particular set of BIA conversion equations. In order to address this question, we
gathered a comprehensive set of predictive equations estimated by other clinical
researchers. This set includes 47 BIA separate equations derived and published by
various researchers at various times.30 We believe that this set includes most of the wellknown BIA prediction equations that exist in published sources. These equations are
presented in Appendix Table 4. We estimated our models using each of these alternative
equations. Note that we use the same set of regressors in these models and also include
individual fixed effects. Remarkably, as discussed below, these estimations produced
FFM and BF coefficients that are extremely consistent with those presented in this paper.
In Table 3, we present the coefficients on the FFM and BF for each gender for
each of these 47 prediction equations. It is a very interesting that, in all 47 equations, all
four FFM and BF coefficients – a total of 188 regression coefficients (47 x 2 x 2) – have
30

This is the same list identified in a recent study by Willet et al. (2006), minus one redundant equation due
to replication. We combine four equations in that list because they were body-fat specific equations of
Segal et al. (1988) that were originally meant to be combined (see Heyward and Wagner, 2004) and should
have been combined by Willet et al. (2006). All 4 equations based on percentage body fat (as opposed to
level measures of FFM or bodyweight) are dropped from the list due to high degree of prediction errors
stemming from a linear model being fitted to truncated values between 0 and 100. Many of the remaining
prediction equations are actually less suitable for the purpose of this paper because they are derived for
populations of different ages like children and older adults. Nevertheless, they are retained in our analysis
to show that the final result is largely robust to such built-in errors. To this list, we further add four
equations from other published resources.

17

the expected sign, that is, the effect of FFM is positive and the effect of BF is negative.
In our opinion, it is a remarkable finding that not a single coefficient has a sign that
contradicts with our expectations. As summarized in Table 4, the FFM coefficients are
statistically significant in 47 out of 47 models and the BF coefficients are statistically
significant in all 47 models for white males. This is consistent with our results presented
in Table 2C. For white females, the FFM coefficients are significant in 41 models and
the BF coefficients are significant in 43 models.
In order to summarize the information in Table 3, Table 4 also presents the
medians of the 47 BF and 47 FFM coefficients for each group. The medians for females
are generally larger in magnitude (about 70%) than the estimated coefficients using the
prediction equations of Sun et al. (2003). For males, they are similar for FFM, but the
median for BF is about 20% smaller. The fact that most of the median values move away
from zero give support to our claim that our main result was not driven by the choice of a
particular prediction equation. We believe that this analysis provides strong and clear
evidence that the results presented in Table 3 are not driven by the choice of a particular
set of prediction equations.
In summary, the persistent and significant effects of body composition even after
controlling for individual fixed effects suggest that an increase in BF is indeed bad for the
wages of not only white females as usually found in the studies using BMI but also for
white males. Also FFM is consistently associated with increased hourly wages.

Discussion and Robustness

18

Several potential explanations can be offered for the negative effect of body fat on
wages. One of these explanations is that body fat lowers an individual’s productivity
through adversely affecting health. Fixed effects would capture any time-invariant health
problems or limitations that would be correlated with body fat. However, this
explanation is still plausible if the health limitations or problems are time-variant. Note
that all of our wage models include a binary variable indicating any health limitation in
the kind or amount of work one can perform while on the job. This variable is also
included in the fixed effects models since it is available in every year, and thus can be
time-variant. The effect of this variable is negative in every model and it remains mostly
statistically significant even in the fixed effects models. Furthermore, the coefficients on
body composition variables remain essentially the same when the health limitation
variable is excluded from the models.31
Customer discrimination may be another explanation for the negative effect of
body fat if customers in certain occupations have negative preferences against employees
with higher levels of body fat. Note that we include a binary indicator for the
individual’s blue-collar occupation in our models. The exclusion of the blue-collar
occupation indicator did not cause any appreciable chance in the coefficients of body
composition variables in Table 2C. As a further test of customer discrimination
explanation, we also constructed ten binary occupational indicators and included them in
the fixed effects models instead of a single indicator for blue-collar occupation. The
fixed effects results with occupation dummies are presented in Appendix Table 2. As
illustrated in the table, the estimates remained almost identical when we controlled for

31

Another possible explanation is that health limitations due to high levels of body fat adversely affecting
the ability of individuals to work rather than their wages (Baum and Ford, 2004).

19

occupation indicators in the models. These results suggest that the opposing effects of
body fat and fat-free mass are independent of customer discrimination.32
Another explanation would be that individuals with excess body fat may be less
concerned about their future and thus invest less in accumulating human capital (Baum
and Ford, 2004). Note that our models include education, tenure, experience, and current
school attendance, which should control for investments in human capital. Thus, this
hypothesis is unlikely to explain why body fat lowers wages in our analysis.
Another possibility is the likely negative correlation between self-esteem and
obesity. Mocan and Tekin (forthcoming – b) show that wages of individuals are affected
directly by obesity and indirectly through the impact of obesity on self-esteem. Cawley
(2004) also offers self-esteem channel as an explanation as to why obesity has a negative
effect on the wages of white females. In order to support his argument, he cites evidence
indicating that obesity has a more adverse effect on the self-esteem of white females than
it does on the self-esteem of black and Hispanic females. Averett and Korenman (1999)
find that obesity is associated with low self-esteem among white females, but not among
black females. If increased body fat is indeed negatively correlated with self-esteem, this
may be an explanation for the negative effects of BF that we find in this paper. Note that
we control for a large number of variables that proxy sociability of the individual. For
example, we control in some of our models participation in high school clubs and sports
as well as self-assessed indicators of shyness. If these variables capture the self-esteem
of the individuals, then this explanation is unlikely to be responsible for the effects
obtained in this paper. Of course, we acknowledge the possibility that these controls are
imperfect proxies for self-esteem.
32

Note that we cannot rule out the possibility of employer discrimination.

20

The sociability indicators, which are included in the models to control for any
direct effect that height can have on wages through impacting an individual’s social
capital, do not cause any appreciable change to the coefficients. In order to guard against
the possibility that sociability indicators do not fully capture this channel, we
experimented with models controlling for height during adolescence. Specifically, we
estimated models with earliest available height before age 18 in addition to the sociability
indicators. In order to implement this, we had to restrict our sample such that earliest
available height of an individual is from a point in life before age 18. As a result of this,
our sample sizes went down to less than 1/4th of the original sizes. These results are
presented in Appendix Table 3. Despite dramatic reductions in the sample sizes, all of
the FFM and BF coefficients are in the expected sign and the effects are largely
consistent with those in previous tables. Note that sociability indicators are also
controlled for in these models. Results remained very similar when we controlled only
for height before age 18.

V. Conclusion
In this paper, we examine the effect of body composition on wages of white males
and white females. Previous studies on this subject exclusively relied on BMI and
bodyweight to measure obesity. However, there is ample evidence to suggest that these
are not the best surrogates of obesity because of their inability to distinguish between fat
body mass and fat-free mass. Since it is the body fat that classifies an individual as obese,
the effects obtained in previous studies may be confounded by the impact of fat-free
component of body composition.

21

We measure body composition by body fat (BF) and fat-free mass (FFM). In
order to do this we utilize the information on the Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis that is
available in NHANES III and develop a method for directly calculating body
composition for use in regression analysis. By using measures of BF and FFM, we are
also able to distinguish between the effects of health physical growth (represented by an
increase in FFM) and an unhealthy physical growth (represented by an increase in BF) on
wages. The analysis of body composition also allows us to study the effect of FFM on
wages for the first time in the literature. Because FFM consists mostly of muscles and
skeletons, it presents a plausible way to estimate the effect of physical health on worker
earnings.
Our results suggest that a rise in BF is associated with decreases in the wages of
both white males and white females, while a rise in the FFM is associated with an
increase in the wages of both groups. These findings are in contrast to the previous
studies that found strong evidence of a negative effect on white females but not always
for white males. Given that a higher proportion of women’s body consists of fat than
men due to demands for childbearing and other hormonal functions, BMI may serve as a
better measure of excessive fatness for women than men. Such gender-dependent
correlation could particularly explain the previously mixed and unstable findings for men.
Our results indicate that individuals with high levels of FFM or lean body mass
earn a wage premium. In other words, it is the healthy growth in body size that is
beneficial for wages. To the extent that FFM can be seen as a measure of healthy growth,
our results provide evidence in favor of the nutrition hypothesis expounded by Fogel
(1994). It has been long hypothesized that increased body size should be associated with

22

increased worker productivity. Our result using fat-free mass demonstrates that it is the
healthy growth of FFM that is beneficial. We also present evidence that these results are
not artifacts of other characteristics of the individuals that are correlated with obesity.
Finally, we show evidence that our findings are robust to the choice of prediction
equation based on which the body composition measures are derived. Researchers have
recently found that non-cognitive characteristics such as beauty, leadership, and tallness
are positively related to earnings. By studying the effects of BF and FFM on wages, this
study also contributes to the growing literature on the role of non-cognitive factors on
wage determination.

23

References
Allison, D.B., S.K. Zhu, M. Plankey, M.S. Faith, and M. Heo (2002). “Differential
Associations of Body Mass Index and Adiposity with All-cause Mortality among Men in
the First and Second National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES I
and NHANES II) Follow-up Studies,” International Journal of Obesity, 26, no. 3: 41016.
Averett, Susan, and Sanders Korenman (1996). “The Economic Reality of the Beauty
Myth,” Journal of Human Resources 31(2): 304-330.
Averett, Susan, and Sanders Korenman (1999). “Black-White Differences in Social and
Economic Consequences of Obesity,” International Journal of Obesity, 23:166-173.
Baum, Charles- L. and William- F. Ford. 2004. The wage effects of obesity: A longitudinal study.
Health Economics 13, no. 9: 885-99.
Baum, Charles L., and William F. Ford (2004). “The Wage Effects of Obesity: A
Longitudinal Study,” Health Economics, 13: 885-899.
Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2001. The returns to increasing bodyweight. PIER
Working Paper 01-052.
Bjorntorp, Per. 2002. Definition and classification of obesity. In Eating disorders and
obesity : A comprehensive handbook, ed. Christopher G. Fairburn and Kelly D.
Brownell:377-81. New York: Guilford Press.
Brozek, J., Grande, F., Anderson, J. T., & Keys, A. (1963). Densitometric Analysis of
Body Composition: Revision of Some Quantitative Assumptions. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 110, 113-140.
Caterson, Ian D. (2002). Overweight and Obesity. In Essentials of human nutrition, ed.
Jim Mann and A. Stewart Truswell: 273-88. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cawley, John (2004). “The Impact of Obesity on Wages,” Journal of Human Resources,
39(2): 451-474.
Cawley, John, and Richard V. Burkhauser (2006). “Beyond BMI: The Value of More
Accurate Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research,” NBER Working
Paper No. 12291, June. Forthcoming in Journal of Health Economics.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2007). Diseases and Risk Factors.
http://www.cdc.gov/steps/disease_risk/index.htm

24

Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer. 2004. An economic analysis of adult
obesity: Results from the behavioral risk factor surveillance system. Journal of Health Economics
23, no. 3: 565-87.
Chumlea, W. Cameron, Shumei S. Guo, Robert J. Kuczmarski Katherine M. Flegal,
Clifford L. Johnson, Steven B. Heymsfield, Henry C. Lukaski, Karl Friedl, and Van S.
Hubbard (2002). “Body Composition Estimates from NHANES III Bioelectrical
Impedance Data,” International Journal of Obesity, 26: 1596-1609.
Conley, Dalton, and Rebecca, Galuber (2005). “Gender, Body Mass, and Economic
Status,” NBER Working Paper Ni. 11343, May.
De Lorenzo A, P. Deurenberg, M. Pietrantuono, N. Di Daniele, V. Cervelli, A. Andreoli
(2003) How fat is obese? Acta Diabetol, 40: S254–S257.
Deurenberg, P., J. A. Weststrate, and K. van der Kooy. (1989). Body composition
changes assessed by bioelectrical impedance measurements. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 49, No. 3: 401-3.
Fogel, Robert W. (1994). “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of
Long-term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy,” American Economic Review 84, no. 3:
369-95.
Forbes, G. B. (1999). Body composition: influence of nutrition, physical activity, growth,
and aging. Modern nutrition in health and disease. M. E. Shils. Baltimore, Williams &
Wilkins: 789-809.
Gallagher, Dympna, Marjolein Visser, Dennis Sepulveda et al. (1996). “How Useful is
Body Mass Index for Comparison of Body Fatness across Age, Sex, and Ethnic
Groups?” American Journal of Epidemiology, 143(3): 228-39.
Gorber, S. Connor, Tremblay, M., Moher, D., and Gorber B. (2007). “A Comparison of
Direct vs. Self-report Measures for Assessing Height, Weight, and Body Mass Index: A
Systematic Review,” Obesity Reviews, Vol. 8, No. 4, July, pp. 307-326 (20)
Gortmaker, S. L., Must A., Perrin J.M., Sobol, A.M., and Dietz W.H. (1993). “Social and
Economic Consequences of Overweight in Adolescence and Young Adulthood,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 329: 1008-1012.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Jeff E. Biddle (1994). “Beauty and the Labor Market,”
American Economic Review, vol. 84, No. 5.

25

Heitmann, B. L., H. Erikson, B. M. Ellsinger, K. L. Mikkelsen, and B. Larsson. 2000.
Mortality Associated with Body Fat, Fat-Free Mass and Body Mass Index among 60year-old Swedish Men-a 22-year Follow-up. The Study of Men Born in 1913. Int J Obes
Relat Metab Disord 24, no. 1: 33-7.
Heshka, Stanley, Kathleen Buhl, and Steven B. Heymsfield. 1994. Obesity: Clinical
evaluation of body composition and energy expenditure. In Obesity : Pathophysiology,
psychology, and treatment, ed. George L. Blackburn and Beatrice Stefannie Kanders:3979. New York, NY: Chapman & Hall.
Heymsfield, S. B., Z. M. Wang, and R. T. Withers (1996). “Muticomponent Molecular
Level Models of Body Composition Analysis,” in Human Body Composition: Methods
and Findings, A. F. Roche, S. B. Heymsfield, and T.G. Lohman (eds.), Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics, 129-148.
Heymsfield, Steven B., David B. Allison, Zi-Mian Wang, Richard N. Baumgartner, and
Robert Ross. 1998. Body composition. In Handbook of obesity, ed. George A. Bray,
Claude Bouchard and W. P. T. James:41-77. New York: M. Dekker.
Heyward, Vivian H. and Dale R. Wagner. 2004. Applied body composition assessment.
2nd ed. Champaign, IL : Human Kinetics.
Houtkooper LB, Lohman TG, Going SB, Howell WH. Why bioelectrical impedance
analysis should be used for estimating adiposity. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.
1996; 64 (suppl):436S– 48S.
Institute of Medicine (2005). Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber,
fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids. Washington, D.C., National
Academies Press.
Johansson, Edvard, Petri Bockerman, Urpo Kiiskinen, and Markku Heliovaara (2009).
“Obesity and Labour Market Success in Finland: The Difference between Having a High
BMI and Being Fat,” Economics and Human Biology, 7: 36-45..
Johnson D.W., Herzig KA, Purdie D.M. et al. (2000). “Is Obesity a Favorable Prognostic
Factor in Peritoneal Dialysis Patients?” Perit Dial Int, 20:715–21.
Kuhn, Peter and Catherine Weinberger (2005). “Leadership Skills and Wages,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 23:3, pp. 395-436.
Kushner, R. F., A. Kunigk, M. Alspaugh, P. T. Andronis, C. A. Leitch, and D. A.
Schoeller. 1990. Validation of Bioelectrical-Impedance Analysis as a Measurement of
Change in Body Composition in Obesity. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52, no.
2: 219-23.

26

Kyle, Ursula G., Laurence Genton, Laurie Karsegard, Daniel O. Slosman, and Claude
Pichard. 2001. Single prediction equation for bioelectrical impedance analysis in adults
aged 20-94 years. Nutrition 17, no. 3: 248-53.
Lakdawalla, Darius and Tomas Philipson. 2002. “The Growth of Obesity and
Technological Change: A Theoretical and Empirical Examination,” NBER Working
Paper No. 8946.
Lohman, Timothy G. 1992. Advances in body composition assessment. Current Issues in
Exercise Science, Monograph No. 3. Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics Publishers.
Lukaski, H. C., P. E. Johnson, W. W. Bolonchuk, and G. I. Lykken. 1985. Assessment of
fat-free mass using bioelectrical impedance measurements of the human body. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 41, no. 4: 810-17.
Lukaski, H.C. (1987). “Methods for the Assessment of Human Body Composition:
Traditional and New,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 46: 527-556.
Macias, N., H. Aleman-Mateo, J. Esparza-Romero, and M. E. Valencia. 2007. Body fat
measurement by bioelectrical impedance and air displacement plethysmography: A crossvalidation study to design bioelectrical impedance equations in Mexican adults. Nutrition
Journal 6: 18.
McGee D.L. “Body Mass Index and Mortality: A Meta-Analysis Based on Person-Level
Data form Twenty-Six Observational Studies,” Ann Epidemiol 2005, 15:87-97.
Mobius, Markus M., and Tanya S. Rosenblat (2006). “Why Beauty Matters,” American
Economic Review, vol. 96:1, pages 222-235.
Mocan, H. Naci, and Erdal Tekin (forthcoming - a). “Ugly Criminals.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Mocan, Naci H., and Erdal Tekin (forthcoming - b). “Obesity, Self-esteem, and Wages,”
in Economic Aspects of Obesity, Michael Grossman and Naci Mocan (eds.), University
of Chicago Press.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (1998). Clinical guidelines on the
identification, evaluation, and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: the evidence
report. Bethesda, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes
of Health, http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/ob_gdlns.htm.
National Institutes of Health (1994). “Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis in Body
Composition Measurement,” National Institutes of Health Technology Assessment
Conference Statement, December 12-14,
http://consensus.nih.gov/1994/1994BioelectricImpedanceBodyta015PDF.pdf

27

Pagan, Jose A., and Alberto Davlia (1997). “Obesity, Occupational Attainment, and
Earnings,” Social Science Quarterly, 78(3): 756-770.
Persico, Nicola, Andrew Potlewaite, and Dan Silverman (2004) “The Effect of
Adolescent Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height,” Journal of
Political Economy, 112:5, pp. 1019-53.
Prentice, Andrew M. and Susan A. Jebb (2001). “ Beyond Body Mass Index,” Obesity
Reviews 2 (3), 141–147.
Romero-Corral, Abel, Victor M. Montori, Virend K. Somers, Josef Korinek, Randal J.
Thomas, Thomas G. Allison, Farouk Mookadam, and Francisco Lopez-Jimenez (2006).
“Association of Bodyweight with Total Mortality and with Cardiovascular Events in
Coronary Artery Disease: A Systematic Review of Cohort Studies,” Lancet, Aug 19;
368(9536): 666-78.
Roubenoff, R., G. E. Dallal, and P. W. Wilson. 1995. Predicting Body Fatness: The Body
Mass Index vs Estimation by Bioelectrical Impedance. Am J Public Health 85, no. 5:
726-8.
Rowland, M. L. (1989). “Reporting Bias in Height and Weight Data,” Statistical Bulletin,
70(2): 2-11.
Rush, Elaine, Lindsay Plank, Vishnu Chandu, Manaia Laulu, David Simmons, Boyd
Swinburn, and Chittaranjan Yajnik (2004). “Body Size, Body composition, and Fat
Distribution: A Comparison of Young New Zealand Men of European, Pacific Island,
and Asian Indian Ethnicities,” The New Zealand Medical Journal, vol. 117, no. 1207,
December, pp. 1-9.
Segal, K. R., A. Dunaif, B. Gutin, J. Albu, A. Nyman, and F. X. Pi-Sunyer. 1987. Body
composition, not bodyweight, is related to cardiovascular disease risk factors and sex
hormone levels in men. J Clin Invest 80, no. 4: 1050-5.
Segal, K. R., M. Van Loan, P. I. Fitzgerald, J. A. Hodgdon, and T. B. Van Itallie. 1988.
Lean body mass estimation by bioelectrical impedance analysis: A four-site crossvalidation study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 47, no. 1: 7-14.
Stolarczyk, L. M., V. H. Heyward, M. D. Van Loan, V. L. Hicks, W. L. Wilson, and L.
M. Reano. 1997. The fatness-specific bioelectrical impedance analysis equations of segal
et al: Are they generalizable and practical? American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 66, no.
1: 8-17.
Siri, W. E. (1961). Body Composition from Fluid Space and Density. In J. Brozek & A.
Hanschel (Eds.), Techniques for Measuring Body Cmposition (pp. 223-244).
Washington, DC: National Academy of Science.

28

Smalley, K.J., A.N. Knerr, Z.V. Kendrick, J.A. Colliver, and O.E. Owen. 1990. Reassessment of
Body Mass Indices. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52, no. 3: 405-08.
Steckel, Richard H. 1995. Stature and the Standard of Living. Journal of Economic Literature 33,
no. 4: 1903-40.
Strauss, Richard S. “Childhood Obesity and Self-Esteem,” Pediatrics vol. 105, No. 1,
January 2000, pp. 1-5.
Sun Shumei S., W. Cameron Chumlea, Steven B. Heymsfield, Henry C. Lukaski, Dale
Schoeller, Karl Friedl, Robert J. Kuczmarski, Katherine M. Flegal, Clifford L. Johnson,
and Van S. Hubbard (2003). “Development of Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis
Prediction Equations for Body Composition with the Use of a Multicomponent Model for
Use in Epidemiologic Surveys,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 77: 331-340.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Center for Health Statistics.
The Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III, 1988–1994)
CDROM. Washington, DC: Center for Disease Control; 1996.
Wada, Roy. 2005. “Obesity, Muscularity, and Body Composition: The Puzzle of GenderSpecific Penalty and Between-Ethnic Outcomes,” Andrew Young School of Policy
Studies Working Paper, Georgia State University, March.
Wada, Roy. 2007. “Obesity and Physical Fitness in the Labor Market,” Unpublished
Dissertation. Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, May.
Willett, Kamali, Rui Jiang, Elizabeth Lenart, Donna Spiegelman, and Walter Willett
(2006). “Comparison of Bioelectrical Impedance and BMI in Predicting Obesity-Related
Medical Conditions,” Obesity, vol. 14, no. 3, March, pp.480-490.
World Health Organization (1995). “Physical Status: The Use and Interpretation of
Anthropometry,” World Health Organization Technical Report Series, 854.
World Health Organization (1998). Obesity : Preventing and managing the global
epidemic : Report of a WHO consultation on obesity, Geneva, 3-5 June 1997. Geneva:
World Health Organization Division of Noncommunicable Disease Programme of
Nutrition Family and Reproductive Health.
World Health Organization Expert Consultation (2004). “Appropriate Body-Mass Index
for Asian Populations and Its Implications for Policy and Intervention Strategies,”
Lancet, 363: 157–63.

29

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics (Mean and Standard Error) of NLSY 1979
Variables
Hourly Wage
FFM

Definitions
Hourly wage rate in 1991 dollars
(adjusted by CPI)
Estimated Fat-free Mass in kilograms

BF

Estimated Body Fat in kilograms

BMI

Weight/Height2

Underweight

Dummy variable = 1 if BMI<18.5

Healthy

Dummy variable = 1 if 18.5≤BMI<25

Overweight

Dummy variable = 1 if 25≤BMI<30

Obese

Dummy variable = 1 if 30≤BMI

Weight b

Kilograms

Height b

Meters

Health Limitation

Mother's Education

Dummy variable = 1 if Health limits kind
or amount of work
Armed Forces Qualification Test from
1980-1981
Years of education completed by mother

Father's Education

Years of education completed by father

Children

Married

# of biological/step/adopted children in
the household
Dummy variable =1 if currently attending
school
Dummy variable =1 if married

Education

Years of education

Age

Age in years (to the closest month)

Tenure

Years of tenure (50 weeks/year)

Experience

Years of work experience (50
weeks/year)
Dummy variable =1 if unemployment
rate is less than 5.9%
Dummy variable =1 if unemployment
rate is between 6% and 8.9%

AFQT 1980

Attend

Low
unemployment a
Medium
unemployment

30

White
Males
13.59
(18.00)
63.15
(8.657)
20.56
(7.550)
26.23
(4.497)
0.00631
(0.0792)
0.441
(0.496)
0.383
(0.486)
0.169
(0.375)
83.70
(15.94)
1.785
(0.0625)
0.0343
(0.182)
54.88
(27.94)
12.07
(2.346)
12.33
(3.322)
0.823
(1.119)
0.0824
(0.275)
0.541
(0.498)
13.37
(2.413)
31.31
(6.836)
4.705
(5.100)
12.15
(6.760)
0.462
(0.499)
0.356
(0.479)

White
Females
10.39
(16.49)
43.74
(5.651)
23.02
(9.960)
24.71
(5.442)
0.0311
(0.174)
0.617
(0.486)
0.208
(0.406)
0.143
(0.350)
67.02
(15.34)
1.646
(0.0565)
0.0484
(0.215)
54.94
(25.36)
11.97
(2.363)
12.23
(3.164)
0.974
(1.130)
0.101
(0.302)
0.550
(0.498)
13.50
(2.198)
31.65
(7.107)
4.059
(4.630)
11.28
(6.587)
0.467
(0.499)
0.352
(0.478)

High
unemployment
Very high
unemployment
Urban

Dummy variable =1 if unemployment
rate is between 9% and 11.9%
Dummy variable =1 if unemployment
rate is higher than 12%
Dummy variable =1 if urban

Northeast

Dummy variable =1 if Northeast region

West

Dummy variable =1 if West region

Midwest

Dummy variable =1 if Midwest region

South a

Dummy variable =1 if South region

Blue-collar
Year 1981

Dummy variable =1 if blue-collar
occupation b
Dummy variable =1 if year=1981

Year 1982

Dummy variable =1 if year=1982

Year 1985

Dummy variable =1 if year=1985

Year 1986

Dummy variable =1 if year=1986

Year 1988

Dummy variable =1 if year=1988

Year 1989

Dummy variable =1 if year=1989

Year 1990

Dummy variable =1 if year=1990

Year 1992

Dummy variable =1 if year=1992

Year 1993

Dummy variable =1 if year=1993

Year 1994

Dummy variable =1 if year=1994

Year 1996

Dummy variable =1 if year=1996

Year 1998

Dummy variable =1 if year=1998

Year 2000 a

Dummy variable =1 if year=2000

Year 2002

Dummy variable =1 if year=2002

Year 2004

Dummy variable =1 if year=2004

Observations
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. a Omitted category.
text for explanations).

31

b

0.118
0.117
(0.323)
(0.322)
0.0640
0.0632
(0.245)
(0.243)
0.728
0.724
(0.445)
(0.447)
0.188
0.186
(0.390)
(0.389)
0.165
0.168
(0.371)
(0.374)
0.360
0.325
(0.480)
(0.468)
0.287
0.322
(0.453)
(0.467)
0.554
0.297
(0.497)
(0.457)
0.0443
0.0480
(0.206)
(0.214)
0.0693
0.0716
(0.254)
(0.258)
0.0685
0.0678
(0.253)
(0.251)
0.0671
0.0671
(0.250)
(0.250)
0.0724
0.0682
(0.259)
(0.252)
0.0733
0.0685
(0.261)
(0.253)
0.0705
0.0649
(0.256)
(0.246)
0.0703
0.0669
(0.256)
(0.250)
0.0718
0.0675
(0.258)
(0.251)
0.0692
0.0655
(0.254)
(0.247)
0.0709
0.0713
(0.257)
(0.257)
0.0685
0.0700
(0.253)
(0.255)
0.0603
0.0668
(0.238)
(0.250)
0.0590
0.0653
(0.236)
(0.247)
0.0646
0.0706
(0.246)
(0.256)
22,833
19,468
Adjusted height and weight. (See the

Table 2A
OLS Results from the Models using Contemporaneous Fat-Free Mass and Body-Fat
Variable
Fat-Free Mass
Body Fat
Sociability
indicators
Observations

White Males
0.00789***
0.00740***
(0.00221)
(0.00223)
-0.00947*** -0.00937***
(0.00259)
(0.00259)
No
22,833

Yes
22,833

White Females
0.0130***
0.0127***
(0.00334)
(0.00337)
-0.0113***
-0.0109***
(0.00195)
(0.00196)
No
19,468

Yes
19,468

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 2B
OLS Results from the Models using Lagged Fat-Free Mass and Body-Fat
Variable
Fat-Free Mass
Body Fat
Sociability
indicators
Observations

White Males
0.00818***
0.00771***
(0.00272)
(0.00276)
-0.0106***
-0.0107***
(0.00348)
(0.00352)
No
9,466

Yes
9,466

White Females
0.0160***
0.0160***
(0.00433)
(0.00432)
-0.0132***
-0.0135***
(0.00252)
(0.00253)
Yes
7,896

No
7,896

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 2C
Fixed Effects Results from the Models using Fat-Free Mass and Body-Fat
Variable
Fat-Free Mass
Body Fat
Observations

White
Males
0.0172***
(0.00581)
-0.0180***
(0.00575)
22,833

White
Females
0.0355**
(0.0155)
-0.0196**
(0.00789)
19,468

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

32

Table 2D
Same-Sex Sibling Results from the Models
using Contemporaneous Fat-Free Mass and Body-Fat
Variable
Fat-Free Mass
Body Fat
Sociability
indicators
Observations

White
Males
0.0138**
(0.00636)
-0.0149**
(0.00728)

White
Males
0.0128**
(0.00649)
-0.0132*
(0.00751)

White
Females
0.00938
(0.0104)
-0.00920
(0.00597)

White
Females
0.0123
(0.0104)
-0.0103*
(0.00585)

No
3,597

Yes
3,597

Yes
2,666

No
2,666

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

33

Table 3
Fixed-Effects Estimation with Supplementary BIA Equations with FFM and BF
Prediction Equation

Boulier
Cordain
Danford1
Danford2
Davies
Deurenberg1
Deurenberg2
Deurenberg3
Deurenberg4
Deurenberg5
Eston1
Fjeld1
Fjeld2
Gray1
Gray2
Heitmann1
Heitmann3
Houtkooper1
Houtkooper2
Jebb
Kushner_Schoeller1
Kushner_Schoeller2
Kushner_Schoeller3
Kushner1
Kyle
Lohman1
Lohman2
Lohman3
Lukaski_Bolonchukl
Lukaski_Bolonchuk2
Lukaski1
Lukaski2
Lukaski3
Lukaski4
Macias
Rising
Roubenoff
Segal1
Segal2
Segal3
Stolarczyk
VanLoan_Maychn
VanLoan1
VanLoan2
VanLoan3
Wattanapenpaiboonl

White Males
FFM
0.00962***
0.0166***
0.0143***
0.0196***
0.0163***
0.0183***
0.0219***
0.0193***
0.0184**
0.0229***
0.0198***
0.0136***
0.0303***
0.0123**
0.00848**
0.0166**
0.0139**
0.0182***
0.0165***
0.0407***
0.0147***
0.0250***
0.0218***
0.0143***
0.0278***
0.0219***
0.0194***
0.0211***
0.0239***
0.0232***
0.0163***
0.0161***
0.0184***
0.0188***
0.0174***
0.0320***
0.0188***
0.0164**
0.0112**
0.0128**
0.0177***
0.0148**
0.0172***
0.0183***
0.0188***
0.0191***

(0.00320)
(0.00534)
(0.00463)
(0.00627)
(0.00523)
(0.00584)
(0.00698)
(0.00657)
(0.00725)
(0.00727)
(0.00631)
(0.00441)
(0.00957)
(0.00581)
(0.00342)
(0.00754)
(0.00606)
(0.00583)
(0.00531)
(0.0128)
(0.00474)
(0.00793)
(0.00694)
(0.00462)
(0.00697)
(0.00695)
(0.00618)
(0.00567)
(0.00758)
(0.00737)
(0.00524)
(0.00518)
(0.00506)
(0.00522)
(0.00470)
(0.0101)
(0.00522)
(0.00806)
(0.00478)
(0.00549)
(0.00565)
(0.00682)
(0.00551)
(0.00585)
(0.00602)
(0.00611)

BF
-0.0427***
-0.00922***
-0.00922***
-0.0143***
-0.00922***
-0.00922***
-0.00922***
-0.0228***
-0.0142***
-0.00922***
-0.0205***
-0.00922***
-0.0546***
-0.00467**
-0.00676***
-0.0100**
-0.0116**
-0.0179***
-0.0178***
-0.0194***
-0.0128***
-0.0150***
-0.0168***
-0.0115***
-0.0197***
-0.0222***
-0.0238***
-0.0171***
-0.0172***
-0.0177***
-0.00922***
-0.00922***
-0.0125***
-0.0128***
-0.0147***
-0.0295***
-0.0128***
-0.00738**
-0.00895***
-0.0274**
-0.00650***
-0.0122**
-0.0247***
-0.0228***
-0.0207***
-0.0233***

34

(0.0131)
(0.00278)
(0.00278)
(0.00434)
(0.00278)
(0.00278)
(0.00278)
(0.00741)
(0.00523)
(0.00278)
(0.00623)
(0.00278)
(0.0168)
(0.00196)
(0.00242)
(0.00419)
(0.00463)
(0.00543)
(0.00540)
(0.00588)
(0.00387)
(0.00453)
(0.00509)
(0.00348)
(0.00479)
(0.00676)
(0.00725)
(0.00441)
(0.00522)
(0.00536)
(0.00278)
(0.00278)
(0.00329)
(0.00339)
(0.00380)
(0.00902)
(0.00339)
(0.00329)
(0.00347)
(0.0110)
(0.00198)
(0.00517)
(0.00753)
(0.00693)
(0.00628)
(0.00709)

White Females
FFM
0.0338*** (0.0124)
0.0541*** (0.0195)
0.0474*** (0.0171)
0.0625*** (0.0225)
0.0530*** (0.0191)
0.0588*** (0.0211)
0.0694*** (0.0249)
0.0474**
(0.0186)
0.0339**
(0.0155)
0.0721*** (0.0258)
0.0629*** (0.0227)
0.0454*** (0.0164)
0.0932*** (0.0334)
0.0135
(0.00962)
0.00392
(0.00483)
0.0324**
(0.0165)
0.0261**
(0.0130)
0.0585*** (0.0211)
0.0536*** (0.0194)
0.123***
(0.0439)
0.0483*** (0.0175)
0.0780*** (0.0280)
0.0688*** (0.0248)
0.0471*** (0.0171)
0.102***
(0.0229)
0.0689*** (0.0248)
0.0617*** (0.0223)
0.0803*** (0.0200)
0.0747*** (0.0268)
0.0727*** (0.0262)
0.0531*** (0.0191)
0.0526*** (0.0189)
0.0708*** (0.0182)
0.0719*** (0.0188)
0.0678*** (0.0169)
0.0981*** (0.0351)
0.0719*** (0.0188)
0.0216
(0.0145)
0.0102
(0.00839)
0.0132
(0.0104)
0.0152*
(0.00877)
0.0175
(0.0124)
0.0554*** (0.0200)
0.0587*** (0.0212)
0.0602*** (0.0217)
0.0610*** (0.0220)

BF
-0.116***
-0.0202***
-0.0202***
-0.0348***
-0.0202***
-0.0202***
-0.0202***
-0.0475***
-0.0226**
-0.0202***
-0.0525***
-0.0202***
-0.150***
-0.00617*
-0.00544
-0.0121**
-0.0150**
-0.0450***
-0.0447***
-0.0492***
-0.0305***
-0.0366***
-0.0418***
-0.0267***
-0.0554***
-0.0574***
-0.0620***
-0.0485***
-0.0431***
-0.0444***
-0.0202***
-0.0202***
-0.0332***
-0.0342***
-0.0406***
-0.0784***
-0.0342***
-0.00989*
-0.00931
-0.0270
-0.00712**
-0.0145
-0.0645***
-0.0590***
-0.0530***
-0.0605***

(0.0408)
(0.00679)
(0.00679)
(0.0120)
(0.00679)
(0.00679)
(0.00679)
(0.0177)
(0.00953)
(0.00679)
(0.0182)
(0.00679)
(0.0528)
(0.00336)
(0.00415)
(0.00544)
(0.00666)
(0.0156)
(0.0155)
(0.0171)
(0.0104)
(0.0126)
(0.0144)
(0.00911)
(0.0121)
(0.0200)
(0.0216)
(0.0117)
(0.0149)
(0.0153)
(0.00679)
(0.00679)
(0.00817)
(0.00856)
(0.00971)
(0.0274)
(0.00856)
(0.00559)
(0.00604)
(0.0187)
(0.00326)
(0.00889)
(0.0225)
(0.0205)
(0.0184)
(0.0211)

Wattanapenpaiboon2

0.0176***

(0.00564)

-0.0147***

(0.00445)

0.0567***

(0.0205) -0.0359***

(0.0123)

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 4
Summary Statistics for Supplemental BIA Equations with FFM and BF
Statistics
# of equations with
significant coefficients
Median coefficient

Variable
FFM
BF
FFM
BF

White
Males
47
47
0.0183
-0.0143

White
Females
41
43
0.0585
-0.0342

Appendix Table 1A
Determinants of Fat-free Mass (FFM) from NHANES III
White
Males

White
Females

Age

0.0296
(0.0631)

0.121***
(0.0366)

Age2 (/100)

-0.0986
(0.135)

-0.316***
(0.0800)

Age3 (/100)

0.000340
(0.000881)
301.9
(250.4)

0.00194***
(0.000531)
-181.3
(115.2)

Height2 (/100)

-175.8
(147.3)

108.8
(76.45)

Height3 (/100)

33.71
(28.98)
0.259*
(0.152)

-18.86
(16.92)
0.262***
(0.0889)

Weigh2 (/100)

-0.168
(0.113)

0.187**
(0.0784)

Weight3 (/100)

0.000265
(0.000347)
0.276***
(0.0870)
-160.6
(142.3)
3201
0.824

-0.000757***
(0.000288)
-0.0359
(0.0539)
111.2*
(57.97)
3539
0.816

Variable

Height

Weight

Height*Weight
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

35

Appendix Table 1B
Determinants of Body Fat (BF) from the NHANES III
White
Males

White
Females

Age

-0.0653
(0.0628)

-0.158***
(0.0456)

Age2 (/100)

0.241*
(0.134)

0.350***
(0.0995)

Age3 (/100)

-0.00166*
(0.000877)
-258.2
(249.2)

-0.00222***
(0.000660)
545.6***
(143.3)

Height2 (/100)

147.9
(146.6)

-373.9***
(95.14)

Height3 (/100)

-29.30
(28.84)
0.327**
(0.151)

80.59***
(21.06)
0.685***
(0.111)

Weigh2 (/100)

0.402***
(0.112)

-0.165*
(0.0976)

Weight3 (/100)

-0.000964***
(0.000345)
-0.162*
(0.0866)
151.1
(141.6)

0.000343
(0.000359)
0.122*
(0.0671)
-270.8***
(72.15)

3201
0.763

3539
0.897

Variable

Height

Weight

Height*Weight
Constant

Observations
R-squared

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

36

Appendix Table 2
Fixed Effects Results from the Models using Fat-Free Mass and Body-Fat
with Occupational Dummies
Variable
Fat-Free Mass
Body Fat
Observations

White
Males
0.0163***
(0.00580)
-0.0177***
(0.00572)
22,833

White
Females
0.0341**
(0.0153)
-0.0184**
(0.00780)
9,509

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Appendix Table 3
OLS Results from the Models using Contemporaneous Fat-Free Mass and Body-Fat
(Restricted to Earliest Available Height at Age before 18)
Variable
Fat-Free Mass
Body Fat
Sociability
indicators
Earliest available
Height
Observations

White
Males
0.0144**
(0.00566)
-0.0113*
(0.00583)
Yes

White
Females
0.0388**
(0.0187)
-0.0212**
(0.00966)
Yes

Yes

Yes

5,110

3,870

Notes: Bootstrapped, robust standard errors clustered around individuals are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

37

Appendix Table 4
BIA Prediction Equations
For Lean Body Mass a
Heitmann1
Segal 1
Segal 2
Segal 3
Segal 3a
Segal 3b
Segal 3c
Segal 3d
Van Loan and Mayclin
For FFM
Boulier
Cordain
Chumlea
Deurenberg1
Deurenberg2
Deurenberg3
Deurenberg4
Deurenberg5
Eston1
Gray1
Gray2
Houtkooper1
Houtkooper2
Jebb
Lohman1
Lohman2
Lohman3
Lukaski1
Lukaski2
Lukaski3
Lukaski4
Macias
Rising
Roubenoff
Stolarczyk
Van Loan1
Van Loan2
Van Loan3
Wattanapenpaiboon1
Wattanapenpaiboon2

0.279Ht2/R + 0.181Wt + 0.231Ht + 0.064(Sex + Wt) − 0.077Age − 14.94;
M = 1, F = 0
0.00108Ht2 − 0.02090R + 0.23199Wt − 0.06777Age + 14.59453
0.00132Ht2 − 0.04394R + 0.30520Wt − 0.16760Age + 22.66827
Segal 3a-3d combined together. See Heyward and Wagner (2004, p.140)
0.00066360Ht2 − 0.02117R + 0.62854Wt − 0.12380Age + 9.33285
0.00088580Ht2 − 0.02999R + 0.42688Wt − 0.07002Age + 14.52435
0.00064602Ht2 − 0.01397R + 0.42087Wt + 10.43485
0.00091186Ht2 − 0.01466R + 0.29990Wt − 0.07012Age + 9.37938
0.000985Ht2 + 0.3736Wt − 0.0238R − 4.2921Sex − 0.1531Age + 17.7868;
M = 0, F = 1
0.40Ht2/R + 0.64Wt − 0.16Age + 6.37 − 2.71Sex; M = 1, F = 2
0.81Ht2/R + 6.86
−10.678 + 0.262Wt + 0.652Ht2/R + 0.015R (M) and −9.529 + 0.168Wt +
0.696Ht2/R + 0.016R (F)
0.762Ht2/R + 4.20
0.672 × Ht2/R + 3.1Sex + 3.9; M = 1, F = 0
0.406 × Ht2/R + 0.360Wt + 5.58Ht + 0.56Sex − 6.48
0.340 × Ht2/R + 15.34Ht + 0.273Wt − 0.127Age + 4.56Sex − 12.44
0.652 x Ht2/R + 3.8Sex+10.9
0.52Ht2/R + 0.28Wt + 3.25
0.00151Ht2 − 0.0344R + 0.140Wt − 0.158Age + 20.387
0.00139Ht2 − 0.0801R + 0.187Wt + 39.830
0.58Ht2/R + 0.24Wt + 2.69
0.61Ht2/R + 0.25Wt + 1.31
0.348613Ht2/R + 0.168998Wt + 13.96674
0.475Ht2/R + 0.295Wt + 5.49
0.485Ht2/R + 0.338Wt + 5.32
0.62Ht2/R + 0.21Wt + 0.10Xc + 4.2
0.821Ht2/R + 4.917
0.827Ht2/R + 5.21
0.756Ht2/R + 0.110Wt + 0.107Xc − 5.463
0.734 Ht2/R + 0.096Xc + 0.116Wt + 0.878Sex - 4.033
0.7374Ht2/R + 0.1763Wt - 0.1773Age + 0.1198*Xc - 2.4658
0.34Ht2/R + 0.33Wt − 0.14Age + 6.18Sex + 13.74
0.734Ht2/R + 0.116Wt + 0.096Xc + 0.984Sex − 4.03; M = 1, F = 0
0.001254Ht2 − 0.04904R + 0.1555Wt + 0.1417Xc − 0.0833Age + 20.05
0.50Ht2/R + 0.37Wt + 1.93Sex + 3.12; M = 1, F = −1
0.51Ht2/R + 0.33Wt + 1.69Sex + 3.66; M = 1, F = −1
0.53Ht2/R + 0.29Wt + 1.38Sex + 4.40; M = 1, F = −1
0.4936Ht2/R + 0.332Wt + 6.493
0.6483Ht2/R + 0.1699Wt + 5.091

38

For Total Bodyweight a
Danford1
Danford2
Davies
Fjeld1
Fjeld2
Heitmann3
Kushner1
Kushner and Schoeller1
Kushner and Schoeller2
Kushner and Schoeller3
Lukaski and
Bolonchuk1
Lukaski and
Bolonchuk2

0.65Ht2/R + 0.71
0.45Ht2/R + 0.11Wt + 1.84
0.60Ht2/R + 0.50
0.67Ht2/R + 0.48
0.18Ht2/R + 0.39Wt + 0.76
0.240Ht2/R + 0.172Wt + 0.040(Sex × Wt) + 0.165Ht − 17.58
0.593Ht2/R + 0.065Wt + 0.04
0.5561Ht2/R + 0.0955Wt + 1.726
0.382Ht2/R + 0.105Wt + 8.315
0.396Ht2/R + 0.143Wt + 8.399
0.372Ht2/R + 3.05Sex + 0.142Wt − 0.069Age + 4.98; M = 1, F = 0
0.374Ht2/R + 0.151Wt − 0.083Age + 2.94Sex + 4.65; M = 1, F = 0

Ht is height in centimeters, Wt is weight in kilograms, R is resistance in ohms, Xc is reactance in ohms
(reactance is a different type of resistance sometimes used in BIA). Source: Willett et al. (2006),
supplemented by Heyward and Wagner (2004), Deurenberg et al (1989), Kyle, et al (2001), Lukaski
(1985), and Macias (2007).a Lean body mass (LBM) is converted to FFM by the equation FFM =
0.97*LBM for males and FFM = 0.92*LBM for females (Willett, 2006; Lohman, 1992). Total
bodyweight (TBW) is converted to FFM by FFM = TBW/0.73 (Willett, 2006; Houtkooper et al., 1996).

39

