INCENTIVE CONFLICT IN CENTRAL-BANK RESPONSES
    TO SECTORAL TURMOIL IN FINANCIAL HUB
                 COUNTRIES
                Edward J. Kane


            WORKING PAPER 13593
                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INCENTIVE CONFLICT IN CENTRAL-BANK RESPONSES TO SECTORAL TURMOIL
                      IN FINANCIAL HUB COUNTRIES

                                         Edward J. Kane

                                       Working Paper 13593
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13593


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2007




The author wishes to thank Ramon P. DeGennaro, Robert A. Eisenbeis, Richard Herring, James Moser,
and James Thomson for comments that greatly improved the paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Incentive Conflict In Central-Bank Responses to Sectoral Turmoil in Financial Hub Countries
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 13593
November 2007
JEL No. E58,F33,G21,G28

                                               ABSTRACT

National safety nets are imbedded in country-specific regulatory cultures that encompass contradictory
goals of nationalistic welfare maximization, merciful treatment of distressed institutions, and bureaucratic
blame avoidance. Focusing on this goal conflict, this paper develops two hypotheses. First, in times
of financial-sector stress, political pressure is bound to increase the incentive force of the second and
third goals at the expense of the first. Second, gaps and distortions in cross-country connections between
national safety nets require improvisational responses from de facto hegemonic regulators. Reinforced
by reputational concerns, the hegemons' goal conflicts dispose them to react to cross-country evidence
of incipient financial-institution insolvencies in short-sighted ways. During the commercial-paper
and interbank turmoil of summer 2007, de facto hegemons used repurchase agreements to transfer
taxpayer funds -- implicitly but in large measure -- to several of the particular institutions whose imprudence
in originating, pricing, and securitizing poorly underwritten loans led to the turmoil in the first place.
The precedent established by these transfers promises to exacerbate the depth, breadth, and duration
of future instances of financial-institution insolvency by confirming that institutions that underinvest
in due diligence can expect taxpayers to protect them from much of the adverse consequences.


Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu
    INCENTIVE CONFLICT IN CENTRAL-BANK RESPONSES TO SECTORAL
               TURMOIL IN FINANCIAL HUB COUNTRIES


     Political concern for the safety of a particular enterprise or economic sector

increases both with its clout and with the extent to which its failure might generate

negative externalities that harm voters and so-called “innocent parties” that cannot

directly influence the tradeoffs its managers make. Implicitly or explicitly, most

governments maintain a safety net for banks and selected other firms. This net combines

measures that restrict the risky positions that protected institutions assume in the first

place with measures that limit the damage that customers, employees, creditors, and

stockholders suffer when and if disaster ensues. Managers of protected institutions may

be likened to a team of high-wire artists. They deliberately throw themselves into risky

positions and, when things turn out badly, a messy multiparty disaster can ensue.

     Section I of the paper identifies the conceptual components of a national safety net

and describes the incomplete ways that the nets of financial-center countries are joined

today. Section II introduces the idea that national regulatory cultures exist and embrace

conflicting norms. Section III develops the hypothesis that financial turmoil alters the

preference ordering that regulatory cultures assign to conflicting regulatory norms. In

times of turmoil, the incentive force exercised by norms that foster truth-telling and

accountability for efficient and distributionally defensible loss control declines sharply,

while the influence of competing nationalistic and blame-minimization norms intensifies.

For the leaders of the hegemonic global regulatory community (especially the Fed and

the European Central Bank), the absence of an established procedure for sharing losses

that might be imbedded in the accounts of large multinational institutions increases the



                                              2
depth of their exposure to a personal and bureaucratic reputational disaster. To reduce

this exposure, policymakers in these countries can use central-bank lending to shift some

of the worrisome losses to national taxpayers by directly and indirectly subsidizing

troubled financial markets and institutions that lie within their purview whenever it

appears that financial-institution insolvencies may be widespread. Officials’ reputational

concerns and limited policy options combine to create a disposition to over-react to

multinational financial stress (such as that observed during the 2007 subprime turmoil).

In the US, this disposition implies that having a corporate subsidiary with primary-dealer

status opens a channel through which a few deeply troubled foreign conglomerates and

domestic nonbanks can plan to extract substantial subsidies by engaging in repurchase

agreements with the Fed.

     Current market turmoil may be attributed to the market’s simultaneous

reassessment and repricing of the downside risks inherent in securitization vehicles that

outsourced the due-diligence phase of the underwriting process to credit-scoring models

and credit-rating organizations. For example, trading in the riskiest slice of the ABX

index of bonds backed by home loans made in the second half of 2006 slid to a new low

of 18 cents by late October, while the TABX index (which proxies the assets underlying

collateralized debt obligations) has also continued to slide.

     The reassessment and repricing clogged the pipeline of unfinished securitizations,

particularly for institutions and conduits that originated or packaged the riskiest loans or

securitization structures. In addition, the repricing undermined the solvency of highly

leveraged institutions (such as structured investment vehicles) that had routinely short-

funded a risky portfolio.




                                              3
     Although using central-bank resources to relieve insolvency-driven shortages of

liquidity at troubled institutions keeps markets running more smoothly in the short run, it

generates adverse long-run consequences by allowing institutions to reap rewards in

proportion to the imprudence they showed in originating, pricing, and securitizing poorly

underwritten loans. Accommodating their needs threatens to exacerbate the depth,

breadth, and duration of future instances of financial-institution insolvency by

encouraging these and other institutions to underinvest in due diligence in the future.

Section IV explains that, to offset short-run pressure on central banks to give troubled

institutions a break, it is important to require officials to follow market-mimicking

procedures in curing so-called liquidity shortages and to justify and account explicitly for

the value and distribution of the subsidies their last-resort lending generates.

     I. Understanding National Safety Nets and How Weakly They are Linked

       Financial stability is often defined by contraposition: as the absence of

widespread liquidity and solvency crises. An enterprise experiences a liquidity crisis

when it finds it difficult and/or inordinately expensive to refinance its debt or to meet

other obligations as they come due. A liquidity squeeze is usually rooted in an

overleveraged balance sheet or an unsupportable business plan. In other cases, lending

institutions should be able to recognize a firm’s legitimate credit needs. However, when

financial institutions in a given nation or region undergo serious liquidity crises of their

own, their ability to support the liquidity needs of viable customers can be temporarily

disrupted.




                                              4
The desirability of preventing the dissolution of fundamentally healthy firms creates a

logical case for the existence of private or governmental lenders of last resort (Thornton,

1802; Bagehot, 1873).

       A troubled firm falls into insolvency when the discounted value of its

accumulated and projected losses exceeds its capacity to absorb these losses. For an

individual nation, a corporate insolvency crisis amounts to a tsunami of individual-firm

red ink. A financial tsunami occurs when losses passed into the accounts of at least one

systemically important financial-services firm or sector overwhelm its enterprise-

contributed capital and are perceived to be spilling rapidly into the balance sheets of

various counterparties. The crisis is propagated by the political and economic efforts of

potential loss-bearers to shift their contractual exposure to the tidal wave of losses onto

less-wary parties, especially ordinary taxpayers.

       A nation’s financial safety net has three goals: (1) avoiding liquidity and

insolvency crises; (2) identifying and alleviating temporary liquidity shortages (i.e.,

“disorderly markets”); and (3) mitigating the effects of both isolated and widespread

insolvencies when they surface. The fabric of the net combines arrangements intended to

detect and contain developing financial-institution problems with politically feasible

arrangements for absorbing and distributing losses protected institutions might incur.

This paper argues that, whereas national safety nets in hub countries may be likened to a

relatively sturdy nylon mesh, the fabric connecting these nets is tissue-thin. For safety-

net managers, the cross-country tissue fails to establish global accountability for the

knock-on economic effects of the policies they follow. Without such accountability,

national authorities are free to maximize a myopic and self-determined welfare function




                                              5
that they need not worry about revealing or defending ex post. Given so much discretion,

global safety-net support is unlikely to be allocated in distributionally defensible or cost-

effective ways either within or across nations (cf. Todd, 2002).

     Systemic risk concerns the chance of a system breakdown or devolution.

Breakdowns may come from damage that spreads contagiously from one part of a

network to another or from the disintegration of one or more network connections.

Within a country, systemic risk expresses the danger is that a wave of insolvencies will

suddenly interfere with payments and credit flows between regions and major

institutions. In a global context, systemic risk is the risk that losses embodied in one

nation’s wave of insolvencies will batter firms and households located on foreign

financial shores. By expanding opportunities for transferring local risks across countries

at low cost, globalization helps to reduce the concentration of idiosyncratic risks in

individual nations. But at the same time, intrafirm and hub-and-spoke linkages between

the financial-services firms and markets of individual nations provide opaque channels

through which the destructive energy unleashed by one country’s liquidity shortage or

insolvency crisis and its speed of transmission to other countries might actually be

amplified.

     Regulatory lags in adapting to cross-country securitization has left the tissue

connecting national safety nets dangerously thin. National markets for interbank loans

and financing customer needs are integrating faster through intrafirm and hub-and-spoke

linkages than arrangements for mitigating the consequences of cross-country shocks. By

default, responsibility for managing global crisis pressures falls upon a handful of

incentive-conflicted national regulatory institutions and cross-country lenders of last




                                              6
resort. To understand how these pivotal institutions might interact in different kinds of

global crises, one must recognize that inconsistent constraints and incentives are built

into the norms that govern the political and regulatory cultures within which their

managers operate.

Components of National Nets

       Modern finance theory emphasizes that financial-institution customers and safety-

net managers must control incentives for opportunistic behavior by financial-institution

managers, owners, and borrowers (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Diamond, 1984; La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998). Managerial opportunism has three

intertwined roots:

       1. Monitoring costs: difficulties outsiders face in obtaining reliable information

           about unfavorable developments and observing adverse actions by institution

           managers, including recklessness, negligence, incompetence, fraud, and self-

           dealing;

       2. Policing costs: difficulties outsiders face in adequately analyzing and

           responding to whatever information its monitoring activity uncovers;

       3. Coordination costs: difficulties customers and national safety-net managers

           face in coordinating collective action.

       Safety nets centralize the functions of monitoring, analyzing, and responding to

evidence about institutional performance. Ideally, this outsourcing of due diligence helps

financial institutions to maintain customer confidence by solving three coordination

problems: avoiding redundant monitoring expense; standardizing contracting protocols;

and timing and calibrating disciplinary action. When its incentives are aligned with




                                             7
society’s needs, a conscientious monitor-enforcer will make it unprofitable for

institutions to misrepresent their economic condition to customers and to pursue profit-

making opportunities that unfairly exploit their informational advantages.

     Viewed as a bureaucratic structure, a safety net has three components: (1) financial-

institution regulators and monitors; (2) lenders of last resort; and (3) regimes for

financing safety-net activities and allocating the losses imbedded in insolvent enterprises.

This architecture is supported by a social contract whose counterparties are major sectors

of a nation’s political, regulatory, and economic communities. In principle, the contract

has three segments:

       1. Subcontracts that define and assign supervisory responsibilities for preventing

           and resolving disruptive financial-institution insolvencies;

       2. Subcontracts that define a range of tax-transfer techniques for financing this

           supervisory activity and whatever losses it fails to prevent;

       3. Subcontracts that dictate the political and economic incentives under which

           such safety-net operators discharge their responsibilities.

Tissue Connecting National Nets in Open Economies

     Regulators in hub countries are well aware of the need to stretch the span of their

safety nets to match the span of the markets and institutions under their purview.

However, they lack the authority to tax or compensate foreign entities directly as global

stability might require. The connections forged to date focus mainly on guarding against

crises in good times and hardly at all on how to deal with crises when they occur

(Eisenbeis and Kaufman, 2005).




                                              8
     Two world-spanning portfolio institutions were established in 1944 at Bretton

Woods: the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. Unlike the “Fund”

which can operate somewhat like a bank, the “Bank” operates as a fund that cannot

provide timely crisis assistance. The European Central Bank (ECB) is an important and

more recent regional portfolio institution. Its monetary-policy activities span the markets

of Euro-area countries.

     National safety nets are also linked by a series of less-comprehensive international

financial organizations. These bridging organizations are of two types: (1) portfolio

institutions to which member countries have contributed funds that their managers invest

in particular kinds of assets and (2) intergovernmental and self-regulatory forums for

coordination (such as the Financial Stability Forum and Financial Stability Institute) that

serve primarily to debate, evaluate, and secure agreement on rules and standards for

overseeing cross-border business in a club-like atmosphere.

     At least six worldwide coordinating forums deserve mention: the World Trade

Organization (WTO), the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the International

Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), the International Association of

Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), and the International Association of Swaps Dealers

(IASD).

     Functioning within the BIS, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)

leads the way in formulating cross-country standards for banks. Regionally, the

European Commission develops economic policy guidelines for European Union (EU)

countries. These last two forums have developed the principle that primary responsibility




                                             9
for the solvency of multinational financial conglomerates lies with home-country

regulators.

     Arguably, only the BIS, the ECB, and the IMF establish financial and regulatory

tissue that meaningfully connects the supervisory activities and fiscal resources that

constitute financial nets in different countries. These three institutions seek to persuade

individual countries to identify and adopt improved safety-net arrangements. However,

only the ECB can truly create money and is able to react promptly enough to assist

troubled institutions and markets when they fall into distress.

     Because none of these institutions has the authority to levy taxes at will, their

managers cannot overtly allocate losses in crisis circumstances. Whatever subsidized

crisis assistance these entities can supply must flow through some form of last-resort

lending.

     This paper makes three points:

     1.       The global net enlarges the web of multiparty contractual duties and

              obligations facing managers of national nets. The links concern the

              deployment of implicit government guarantees and subsidized lender-of-

              last-resort credit facilities.

     2.       Central-bank repurchase agreements have evolved into a particularly

              opaque substitute for discount-window lending.

     3.       The absence of a global tax-transfer mechanism for resolving the

              insolvency of multinational conglomerates is apt to call forth an

              inflationary oversupply of subsidized last-resort lending from central banks




                                               10
              in financial hub countries when substantial multinational shocks first

              emerge.

     II. Incentive Conflicts Built into National Regulatory Cultures

       In a democracy, financial regulation and supervision are cooperative endeavors.

Anyone can propose rules, but to command compliance requires legitimacy: a mutual

understanding that the rules are conceived and enforced to increase the social welfare of

an identifiable community.

Dimensions of Regulatory Culture

       To win and sustain a legitimate right to wield coercive force on behalf of a larger

community, regulators must accept and respect appropriate checks on their authority. An

“appropriate” check is one that incentivizes regulators to act in ways that are consistent

with the community’s political institutions and its citizens’ understanding of the

community’s past regulatory experience.

       A culture is defined as customs, ideas, and attitudes that members share and

transmit from generation to generation by systems of subtle and overt rewards and

punishments. Carnell (1993) and Kane (2003) assign regulatory culture the role of

defining, authenticating, and promoting the financial common good. One country’s

regulatory culture may differ from another’s along as many as six dimensions:

   1. in the character of the statutory grant of authority, the reporting responsibilities,

       and governance structure that a regulatory enterprise receives;

   2. in the specific rules the enterprise formulates and how it develops and

       promulgates them;

   3. in the methods the enterprise uses to monitor for violations;




                                             11
   4. in the penalties it can or does impose on clients when it finds material violations;

   5. in the nature and extent of due-process restrictions (including specific burdens of

       proof) that protect regulated institutions from unfair administrative procedures;

   6. in the character of institutions’ rights to appeal regulatory decisions to a higher

       authority.

       The taboos and traditions incorporated in a regulatory culture take the form of

norms that embody community goals and standards of fair play and proper use of

government power. The first four dimensions of the culture set limits on safety-net

managers’ authority over their regulatees. Along with banks’ rights to challenge and

appeal adverse actions, the final two dimensions of a regulatory culture provide credible

ways for regulators to bond themselves to exercise their authority in the joint interests of

financial institutions and their various creditors and counterparties.

Importance of Transparency and Deterrency

       To complete the cycle of social-contract enforcement, the suppliers of regulatory

risk capital—healthy institutions and ordinary taxpayers—must be able to observe and

discipline the economic value of their stake in the rulemaking and enforcement activities

that regulators undertake. Ideally, savvy taxpayers would impose reporting requirements

and establish deterrent rights sufficient to persuade net managers to deploy their

examination, supervisory, and lending powers at reasonable economic cost to society as a

whole. Also ideally, these costs would be measured comprehensively and include both

the costs of operating the net and the costs of managing its occasional breakdown.

Taxpayer ability to monitor regulators is important because the co-operative nature of

financial regulation and the exercise of appeal rights by regulated institutions would




                                             12
otherwise tend to make regulatory personnel overly responsive to industry concerns (i.e.,

subject them to regulatory “capture”).

What if Monitoring and Policing Costs Were Zero?

       Regulators’ tools of damage control are rulemaking and enforcement. To

understand the economic role these tools play, it is helpful to imagine a world in which

customers’ monitoring and policing costs are uniformly zero. In this world, financial

contracts would not need external enforcement. Coordination costs would be irrelevant.

Establishing a team of centralized monitors and enforcers to thwart risk-shifting and

misconduct by bank insiders would offer no incremental benefit either to institutions or to

their customers. In such a world, changes in an institution’s condition and risk exposure

would be transparent to everyone and counterparties would possess sufficient expertise

and sanctions to deter an institution’s insiders from trying to take advantage of them.

       Maximal transparency (MT) describes a framework of disclosure that would

perfectly and costlessly inform customers about changes in bank or fund performance and

risk-taking activities. To set up an easy-to-remember rhyme, we coin the term maximal

deterrency (MD) to describe a situation in which customers would immediately and

perfectly understand the implications of information flows and would be able to protect

themselves completely and costlessly from whatever threat to their wealth this

information might reveal.

       The more closely an economy comes to offering creditors maximal transparency

and maximal deterrency, the less ex ante value that financial institutions and safety-net

managers can create for their counterparties. In an MTMD economy, cash in advance

and credit could substitute perfectly for each other in every payment context. Similarly,




                                            13
direct and indirect finance would provide equally economical ways of mobilizing

savings, of choosing which real investment projects savers ought to support, and of

deciding how to price project risk. As envisaged in the Capital Asset Pricing Model,

corporate and government securities could be offered in denominations small enough to

allow virtually every individual saver to invest directly in a diversified portfolio of

stocks, bonds, and derivative securities.

       The MTMD thought experiment clarifies that safety nets owe their existence to

market imperfections which include: difficulties of contract enforcement; blockages in

information flows; differences in monitoring costs; variation in financial transaction

costs; delays in appreciating and processing relevant information; and the costliness and

inadequacy of the deterrent remedies that individual depositors have available to them. It

also clarifies that a national safety net is implicitly a six-party contract. The net imposes

mutual rights and duties on: institutions, investors, borrowers, depositors, safety-net

managers, and suppliers of safety-net capital (principally healthy banks and taxpayers).

The touchstone by which to judge the performance of safety-net managers is how fairly

they treat each of the many counterparties participating in their social contract and how

efficiently they control the diverse social costs of coping with divergences from MT and

MD conditions.

       III. Global and National Incentive Conflicts in Safety-Net Management

       In practice, national safety-net managers assemble a staff that can wield six

categories of regulatory instruments:

       1. record-keeping and disclosure requirements;

       2. activity limitations;




                                              14
        3. capital, loss-reserving, and other position limits;

        4. takeover rights and other enforcement powers;

        5. lines of credit; and

        6.      performance guarantees.

        It is not enough for safety-net managers to use these instruments to block corrupt

and unwise flows of institutional credit and avoid customer runs. They must seek also to

minimize the social damage caused by temporary bouts of illiquidity and by lasting

insolvencies. Moreover, to administer lender-of-last-resort facilities properly, safety-net

managers must perform a financial triage function. This begins by identifying solvent,

but illiquid institutions and shielding them from having to sell assets into momentarily

disorderly markets at fire-sale prices. But efficient triage must also establish an

accountable procedure for identifying and either winding up or recapitalizing insolvent

institutions.

What Countries Manage the Global Safety Net?

      Arguably, procedures for developing recommendations and controlling the portfolio

activity of supranational institutions give disproportionate weight to the interests of the

US, Britain, and the few other countries that function as global hubs. For example, in the

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the US has four representatives and Britain

two. This overweighting is no accident. Only a few national money markets have forged

strong interinstitutional links with one another. While intrainstitutional linkages are

extremely important, most cross-border institution-to-institution business (especially,

securitizations and derivatives transactions) flows to and from major financial-services




                                             15
firms headquartered in global hub countries. To understand who manages systemic risk

globally, one must first identify these hub countries.

      Wojcik (2007) measures the value of international financial-services business

currently performed by firms headquartered in 41 leading countries. His index shows

that this product line is dominated geographically by firms headquartered in the UK, US,

and Euro area (especially Germany, France, and The Netherlands). Other countries

perform much less international financial service.

      The UK produces roughly 30 percent of the relevant services, followed by the US

which supplies another 20 percent. Euro-area countries furnish 28 percent, although a

good portion of this is probably transacted among area countries. Even though each of

the following countries is among the world’s top-ten producers, Hong Kong, the

Caymans, Japan, and Switzerland book only 12 percent of the market among them.

Australia and Canada handle another 3 percent. The last 7 percent of the market is shared

by 19 other countries.

Differences in Hub-Country Cultures

        The first dimension of any regulatory culture establishes a bureaucratic structure

for managing particular portions of the net. In the hub countries we have identified, this

structure is multidimensional and generates a number of uncomfortable incentive

conflicts.

        In the UK, the tasks of making and carrying out monetary-policy decisions and of

monitoring financial-institution loss exposures are assigned to different organizations.

The Bank of England is tasked with stabilizing the real economy and financial markets,

while the Financial Services Authority (FSA) handles financial supervision. In the US,




                                             16
The Federal Reserve System jointly pursues both tasks. Additional incentive conflicts

come from the Fed’s need to share (and compete for) rights to supervise variously

chartered institutions with other agencies. In theory, the Fed’s interest in competing for

regulatory turf--both globally and with other US agencies--adds goals and restraints to its

monetary policymaking process and regulatory culture that the Bank of England (B of E)

faces in more overtly political ways.

       Although the Fed is the sole supervisor for the US holding companies that

ultimately book the vast majority of America’s cross-country loss exposures, by

converting its national-bank subsidiary to a federally chartered thrift in March 2007,

Countrywide Financial cleverly moved itself into the mortgage-market friendly

jurisdiction of the Office of Thrift Supervision and extricated itself from direct

supervision by the Fed and OCC. Moreover, as mortgage-market turmoil expanded,

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac sought to expand their role in stabilizing mortgage markets

at the expense of the Fed. The policy significance of this intensification in regulatory

competition has increased as mortgage-market turbulence became more and more

prolonged.

         In the global arena, the B of E competes for jurisdiction with both the Fed and

the ECB. Like the B of E, the ECB conducts monetary policy (jointly for Euro-area

countries) and has to leave supervisory activities to other parties: the member nations to

whom it is politically accountable. However, unlike the B of E, in an emerging crisis, the

ECB does not have a discount window and must adapt its decisions about substitute

forms of last-resort lending to the needs that individual-country regulators put forward.




                                             17
         These differences in supervisory responsibility and channels for clientele

influence are bound to affect the amount and quality of information available to central-

bank personnel at the outset of either type of crisis. In particular, with only a few large

domestic organizations to investigate, one might have thought that B of E personnel

would be able to separate liquidity shocks from solvency shocks more quickly and more

effectively than either the Fed or ECB can. However, the B of E’s handling of the

Northern Rock episode throws both hypotheses into doubt.

         Principal-agent theory indicates that incentive conflicts driven by regulatory

competition and clientele pressure for relief explain, at least in part, the different patterns

of diagnosis and initial response during the August 2007 subprime turmoil. The B of E’s

initially hard-line response to FSA requests for it to help UK mortgage lenders indicates

that it did not see hedge-fund failures and wholesale writedowns of mortgage-backed and

other structured securitizations as posing as great a threat to real economic activity as

spokespersons for the two other hegemonic central banks vigorously proclaimed.

Governor Mervyn King stressed a concern for mitigating moral hazard that

spokespersons for the FSA, ECB, and the Fed downplayed (Shieritz and Wiesmannin,

2007).

Repurchase Agreement As Particularly Opaque Last-Resort Loans

         Even in emergencies, the Fed’s discount window is ordinarily available only to

institutions chartered in the US and their condition and need for funds are reviewed

before a loan is dispersed. In contrast, repurchase agreements are put out at auction to a

previously designated set of 21 “primary dealers” in securities. As Table 1 indicates,

eligible counterparties include subsidiaries of Countrywide Financial (the largest




                                              18
originator of zero-equity and nonamortizing mortgages in the US) and eleven foreign

conglomerates (including HSBC whose US subsidiary was also an aggressive mortgage

lender). Although interaffiliate loans from bank subsidiaries of US holding companies

are restricted by the Fed’s Regulation W and Section 23A of the Bank Holding Company

Act, other primary dealers were able to on-lend the proceeds from Fed repos to affiliated

parties without restriction. When the subprime turmoil intensified in early August 2007,

several troubled mortgage lenders and selected hedge-fund sponsors (Countrywide,

HSBC, and Bear Stearns) and foreign institutions (whose opportunity cost for funds were

rising sharply) were likely both to bid aggressively for repo funds and to enjoy substantial

subsidies on whatever funds they managed to raise in this way. Around August 20, the

Fed used its authority to exempt banking organizations from 23A limits to grant

Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, and Bank of America a parallel (albeit temporary) right to

engage in well-collateralized securities financing transactions with their affiliates.

How Repurchase Agreements Substitute for Discount-Window Loans

     Traditionally, last-resort loans have been disbursed through the discount window

and offered only to banks. In the midst of either a liquidity or insolvency crisis, last-

resort lending to a restricted class of borrowers inevitably delivers implicit subsidies to

members of the favored class. What we may call the subsidy-minimization norm of last-

resort lending requires that subsidy-minimizing collateral requirements be imposed and

that contract interest rates show a substantial premium over rates observed on less-risky

securities in the open market.

     Even though many nonbank institutions are eligible for emergency central-bank

loans today, penalty rates and collateral requirements make it costly and even dangerous




                                             19
for deeply distressed nonbank firms to meet their liquidity demands through the discount

facility. For a firm that is in or approaching insolvency, central-bank insistence on

charging reasonable risk premiums and enforcing collateral standards raises the

opportunity cost to borrowers of tying up eligible assets. Although in difficult

circumstances central banks can and do lend at a lower premium and relax the collateral

requirements they enforce, managers of deeply troubled institutions often fear the bad

publicity that last-resort borrowing might generate. This publicity can intensify the

market pressure that a borrowing firm faces, in that it can lead private creditors

(including other banks) to demand higher rates or stronger collateral support in private

deals that might otherwise have carried less-onerous terms. For deposit institutions

during August 2007, the longer maturities, low costs, and nonstigmatized character of

Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances made the FHLB system the preferred source

of government loans (Dudley 2007).

     From the central-bank perspective, when funds are supplied through the discount

window, borrowers hold the initiative and contract terms must conform to the posted

schedule of discount rates and eligibility requirements. At the discount window,

borrowers also decide when and for how long they want to borrow and what collateral

they will offer. Central banks have discovered that they can use repurchase agreements

(“repos”) to undertake last-resort lending in a more flexible and less stigmatized way. By

actively bidding for repos an incipient crisis, a central bank can assure knowledgeable

parties that the collateral it is prepared to accept includes the particular assets whose

markets, originators, and securitizers seem most sorely distressed. It can also shade its

range of acceptable collateral to favor specific counterparties and set the maturity and




                                              20
price of particular deals without regard to the declared structure and terms of discount-

window lending.

     As valuable as this flexibility might be in times of turmoil, it is also dangerous. The

danger is that nonbank institutions such as hedge funds, aggressive mortgage lenders, and

investment- bank subsidiaries of domestic and foreign conglomerate firms that

experience substantial demands for redemption from their investors and other

counterparties will be able to misrepresent the character and to understate the extent of

the unbooked losses driving their distress. Moreover, insolvent institutions can fuel

regulatory competition by lobbying on behalf of other agencies in competing jurisdictions

(such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the US) that might be eager to help them when

and if the central bank does not.

     Libor is the interest rate at which US and foreign banks lend to one another. Figure

1 shows that in August, 2007 overnight interest rates for banks in different nations and

currencies responded differently to the onset of liquidity pressure. UK banks faced

higher rates in the Euro market than either US or Eurozone banks did. This indicates that

foreign banks suspected that some British institutions might be holding or temporarily

warehousing a disproportionate share of the particular kinds of credit risk that were being

reassessed and repriced. Because the US federal-funds rate lay well below the Fed’s 5.25

percent target and the Euro-market rate for dollars for most of the next month, one may

infer that US banks were reluctant to borrow fed funds to onlend them in Europe.

     In the US, liquidity pressure focused not on banks per se, but on securitizers of

opaque pools of loans. Figures 2 shows that, while the volume of commercial paper fell




                                            21
sharply when the turmoil first surfaced, the decline was concentrated in asset-backed

paper. Moreover, even this market segment began to recover within a couple of weeks.

      Figure 3 clarifies two points. First, in the US liquidity never truly dried up. New-

issue markets for AA-rated commercial paper remained active through every day of the

turmoil period. Second, while the volume of all three types of issues declined in the

week before the Fed’s injection of liquidity on August 10, the sharp decline in the asset-

backed segment was from a monthly high. Within two weeks, the volume of new issues

in that segment had recovered and was fluctuating much less than in July.

      These data (and the failure and government rescue of a few German and British

banks) indicate that a market-driven triage process came into play as soon as the quality

of underwriting standards embodied in mortgage-backed and complex securitizations

came under fire. The market response was to require better documentation and stronger

collateral from originators and conduits and to eschew questionable pools of loans. The

regulatory response was to use primary dealers to flood troubled institutions and markets

with funds. To justify this, officials characterize themselves as merely remedying a

shortage of market “liquidity” rather than bailing out a set of institutions (including

structured investment vehicles and their sponsors) that chose to compound their already

substantial exposure to default risk with an interest-rate bet that posed potentially ruinous

levels of rollover risk.

IV. Where Implicit Subsidies Originate: The Political Economy of Last-Resort Lending

      In its initial stages, an insolvency crisis is observationally indistinguishable from a

transitory shortage of aggregate liquidity. The common symptom is that economically

significant institutions or sectors suddenly find it impossible to roll over their debts on




                                              22
profitable terms. Established central-banking practice is to take action that buys time for

bank staff to determine the fundamental sources of the distress. This is done by

announcing a willingness to lend freely to banks in desperate circumstances on a

collateralized basis at a penalty rate.

      Last-resort lending represents the first line of defense against an emerging national

or global crisis. But it must be understood that this crisis-management strategy unfolds in

a politically charged atmosphere: one that highlights the goal of minimizing exposure to

blame and regret. Few top policymakers are willing to risk being blamed by themselves

or others for embracing policies that industry propaganda would characterize as

escalating a bad situation.

      Myopic blame avoidance is supported politically and ethically by three exculpatory

norms that are imbedded in the regulatory culture of virtually every country in the world:

(1) the mercy norm, (2) the nationalistic norm, and (3) the nonescalation norm. These

all-purpose justifications for regulatory intervention conflict with the day-to-day norm of

conscientiously tracking and minimizing the long-run social-welfare costs generated by

the size and distribution of the subsidies the safety net delivers.

      The mercy (or good-Samaritan) norm holds that it is politically unacceptable for

regulators to abandon the employees, creditors, and stockholders of institutions they

oversee to the vagaries of the market at the first sign of distress. The mercy norm

generates a unilateral regulatory right to alleviate sudden attacks of financial “pain.” In

particular, it allows safety-net managers to claim without proof that their interventions

are merely preventing a sudden liquidity shock from destroying institutions whose

fundamentals are sound.




                                              23
     The nationalistic norm embodies a duty of loyalty to domestic institutions and even

to foreign firms that accept responsibility for making markets in domestic bonds. Safety-

net managers face a politically enforced de facto obligation to maintain orderly financial

markets and to protect institutions headquartered in their jurisdiction by supporting their

ability to compete with firms headquartered in foreign lands. The help regulators provide

may entail either granting subsidized access to government funds and guarantees,

resisting the entry and subsequent local expansion of foreign firms, or paving the way for

domestic firms to operate more effectively in foreign territory.

     The nonescalation norm holds that it is better to interfere with market efforts to

discipline a troubled institution (such as Countrywide Financial or Northern Rock) than

to risk turning burgeoning financial turmoil into a national or international disaster.

Relying on this norm, safety-net managers can justify lending to insolvent institutions in

any distressed sector. They merely have to express a fear that allowing markets to work

out what they are free to characterize as a liquidity shock would result in a disorderly

liquidation of assets at fire-sale prices and that this event would spread adverse effects

throughout the economy in ways that would be impossible to reverse.

     These blame-avoidance norms come together in what we might call the First

Commandment of Turmoil Management: Be merciful unto important Home-Country

Institutions and lead their problems not into contagion with other firms or markets.

Policy Implications

       An ideal safety net is one that would fairly and efficiently mitigate the particular

monitoring, policing, and coordination difficulties that present themselves to financial

institutions, investors, depositors, and taxpayers in the informational, ethical, legal, and




                                              24
economic environment of connected countries at a particular time. This means that

evolving differences in the size and shape of institutional risk taking call for frequent

adjustments in the dimensions of the mesh and in the strength and locations of the net’s

supporting piers. Politicians have so far been reluctant to involve themselves in the

design and operation of regulatory linkages between country safety nets. They have

allowed incentive-conflicted top regulators to decide how consistently and how promptly

these links should expand to accommodate changes in the market, legal, bureaucratic, and

ethical/cultural problems the net is intended to alleviate.

       Principal-agent theory tells us that decisions about how to forge and maintain

safety-net connections are influenced by incentives that result from political and

bureaucratic arrangements that convey to nation-based regulatory officials and financial-

institution stakeholders a collection of net economic rents and burdens.

       To fashion a net of the social-welfare maximizing size and strength, decisions

bearing on the cost and effectiveness of the net’s components must be observable enough

to allow watchdogs for outside stakeholders to exert healthy market discipline on

protected institutions and healthy budgetary pressure on regulators. Because no

hegemonic official feels fully accountable for policy-induced flaws in financial-

institution risk-taking incentives, gaps in the global net are bound to subsidize risk in

some venues. Welfare economics tells us that, for global strategies of subsidy control to

be more successful, employment contracts must assign top regulators the duty of

measuring and managing the global social costs generated by decisions about net design

and simultaneously incentivize regulatory personnel to support these duties appropriately.




                                              25
       Information systems and supervisory technology for monitoring bank capital and

risk exposures are deemed to be transparent if they can be analyzed by trained outside

experts and evaluated objectively in the financial press. From the point of view of

accountability, it is unfortunate that—unlike the splattering of an unlucky or incompetent

acrobat—breakdowns in financial safety nets are not immediately visible to the naked

eye. This lack of transparency intensifies the conflict between the task of maximizing a

net’s effectiveness and minimizing the blame that safety-net managers have to absorb for

what they do and do not do. Losses can be blamed on events “technically” outside the

regulator’s span of control or attributed to unforeseeable events transmitted through

opaque linkages across national markets.

       Precisely because top regulators do not want their professional reputation

besmirched by blame for banking scandals or policy mistakes, their authority over

reporting protocols can be abused. Having the ability to reduce transparency supports an

incentive to distribute implicit subsidies to needy clienteles and to delay insolvency

resolution in tough times or tough cases. Such subsidies allow institutions whose

insolvency cannot yet be publicly recognized an opportunity to gamble for resurrection at

taxpayer and competitor expense (Kane, 1989). To protect the reputations of their

agency or its top officers during their particular terms in office, opportunistic regulators

may be tempted to conceal and sugarcoat information about emerging difficulties. In

particular, policymakers whose term in office is coming to an end may elect not to

challenge misleading bank condition reports and might even encourage deceptive

information to be entered on balance sheets and income statements.




                                             26
       Knowing that regulators dislike public criticism and can block the flow of adverse

information enables managers and owners of insolvent institutions to exploit regulators’

incentive conflicts. Unscrupulous managers can persuade officials to neglect their natural

duty of truth-telling. The persistence of options to cover up subsidies and clientele

weakness supports the hypothesis that most regulatory cultures give officials de facto

authority to conceal or mischaracterize evidence of widespread losses as long as they can

assert ex post that forthright statements might have generated or intensified a decline in

customer confidence.

       Incumbent officials can rely on this untestable claim to lessen their exposure to

blame. In principle, the goals of calming public fears and taking cost-effective action to

preserve or restore banking solvency can be pursued at the same time, but not with equal

effectiveness nor with equal exposure to industry criticism. Depending on the quality of

a nation’s information and bureaucratic environments, high officials may escape blame

for incurring insolvency-resolution costs on their watch by doctoring and suppressing

evidence long enough to pass the bill for safety-net losses onto the next generation of

regulatory officials. The existence of this reputation-preserving escape hatch undermines

the urgency of promptly understanding newly emerging forms of risk-taking and

engaging in extensive crisis planning. In turn, myopically underinvesting in forward-

looking activities disposes regulators to conceive of future financial breakdowns as if

they were unique events that must always and everywhere be handled in an ad hoc

manner.

       Common sense tells us that, to cope with continuing financial innovation,

politicians must enact legislation that makes regulators accountable for developing and




                                             27
regularly reviewing a strategic plan for managing different kinds of crises and for training

their staff in the use of their evolving crisis-management protocols. Unless backed up by

solid disaster planning, the existence of national safety nets may foster expectations of a

secularly expanding propensity to bail out distressed firms. The need for markets to test

the limits of this propensity from time to time may generate a series of infrequent, but

highly disruptive global crises. Ironically, the more time that passes between crises, the

more important crisis planning becomes because fewer financial-institution managers and

regulatory personnel will have hands-on experience in dealing with crisis pressures.

      V. Summary Implications

      Goodfriend (1994) underscored the need for someone to define specific principles

under which the Fed would and would not be allowed to provide funds to troubled

institutions. Intentionally or unintentionally, providing government liquidity support

directly to troubled firms rewards firms that have made bad bets. Substituting flexible

repurchase agreements for discount-window loans is dangerous because it better masks

both the identities of recipient institutions and the size of the benefits they receive.

      Editorial cartoonists seem to have understood the distributional effects of the

hegemons’ policies more clearly than the mainstays of our nation’s financial press. One

of my favorite cartoons shows a central-bank helicopter lifting a well-dressed banker out

of the sea and away from a shark that, despite a might leap, is just able to nip the seat of

the banker’s pants. A second cartoon shows a lifeguard proudly carrying a shark (that I

would label “sponsors of structured securitizations”) onto the beach, while leaving

dozens of taxpayers and mortgage borrowers foundering in rough seas.




                                              28
     Ideally, last-resort lenders should be required to model and maximize the present

discounted value of the net social-welfare benefits generated by the size and distribution

of whatever institutional subsidies their rescues deliver. Within nations, the principle of

democratic accountability would dictate that central banks ask their economic staff to

estimate in a reproducible manner the social value of these subsidies and to compare the

social value of the damage that last-resort lending and capital forbearance avoided with

projections of the present and future social costs generated by the subsidy program. If

any national government or supranational entity truly wanted to embrace this principle, it

would have already enacted legislation to that effect and would have done so in a way

that would not politicize decisions about aggregate monetary policy in the process.

     It is difficult to imagine that central bankers and industry lobbyists in hub countries

would tolerate such legislation today. Unfortunately, it is even harder to imagine that

citizens of the hub countries care enough about the possible knock-on effects that nation-

based last-resort lending could have on the welfare of citizens in other countries to

subject themselves to the cross-country tax-transfer obligations needed to construct an

efficient financial safety net of appropriately global dimensions.




                                             29
                                           Table 1

      LIST OF DESIGNATED PRIMARY DEALERS AUTHORIZED TO BID WHEN
           REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS ARE OFFERED BY THE FED

BNP Paribas Securities Corp.
Banc of America Securities LLC
Barclays Capital Inc.
Bear, Stearns & Co., Inc.
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.
Citigroup Global Markets Inc.
Countrywide Securities Corporation
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC
Daiwa Securities America Inc.
Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Securities LLC
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Greenwich Capital Markets, Inc.
HSBC Securities (USA) Inc.
J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.
Lehman Brothers Inc.
Merrill Lynch Government Securities Inc.
Mizuho Securities USA Inc.
Morgan Stanley & Co. Incorporated
Nomura Securities International, Inc.
UBS Securities LLC



Source: Downloaded from the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on
September 15, 2007.




                                           30
                                            Figure 1




                               Overnight Interest Rates

6.50



6.00



5.50



5.00



4.50



4.00



3.50



3.00
   13 7

   15 7

   17 7

   19 7

   21 7

   23 7

   25 7

   27 7

   29 7

   31 7

           7




   12 7

   14 7

   16 7

           7
         07

         07

         07

         07


   11 7




         07

         07

         07


   10 7
        00

        00

        00

        00

        00

        00

        00

        00

        00

        00

        00




        00

        00

        00

        00
         0




         0
       20

       20

       20

       20

       20




       20

       20

       20

       20
     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2




     /2

     /2

     /2

     /2
    1/

    3/

    5/

    7/

    9/




    2/

    4/

    6/

    8/
 8/

 8/

 8/

 8/

 8/




 9/

 9/

 9/

 9/
8/

8/

8/

8/

8/

8/

8/

8/

8/

8/

8/




9/

9/

9/

9/
                  Euro Libor       US Euro- $Libor     Fed Funds   UK Libor




       Source: Compiled by Robert A. Eisenbeis from data on the websites of The
               FinancialTimes and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.



                                                 31
                                                                                        8/
                                                                                            1/
                                                                                               2




                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                      500000
                                                                                                                                          1000000
                                                                                                                                                    1500000
                                                                                                                                                                               2000000
                                                                                                                                                                                         2500000
                                                                                         8 / 00 7
                                                                                            3/
                                                                                               2
                                                                                         8 / 00 7
                                                                                            5/
                                                                                               2
                                                                                         8 / 00 7
                                                                                            7/
                                                                                               2
                                                                                         8 / 00 7
                                                                                            9/
                                                                                       8 / 2 00
                                                                                          11 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          13 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          15 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          17 7
                                                                                             /




     Reserve Bank of New York.
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          19 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          21 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          23 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          25 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          27 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          29 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       8 / 20 0
                                                                                          31 7
                                                                                             /2




                                                                                                       Financial CP
                                                                                         9/ 007
                                                                                            2/
                                                                                               2




32
                                                                                         9 / 00 7
                                                                                                                                                              Assetbacked CP




                                                                                            4/
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 2




                                                                                         9 / 00 7
                                                                                            6/
                                                                                               2                       NON Financial CP
                                                                                         9 / 00 7
                                                                                            8/
                                                                                       9 / 2 00
                                                                                          10 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          12 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          14 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          16 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Outstanding Commercial Paper (Weekly)




                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          18 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          20 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          22 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          24 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          26 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          28 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       9 / 20 0
                                                                                          30 7
                                                                                             /
                                                                                       1 0 20 0
                                                                                           /2 7
                                                                                             / 20
                                                                                                  07
     Source: Compiled by Robert A. Eisenbeis from data on the website of the Federal
                                                               Figure 3




                         Daily Value of Newly Issued Overnight Commercial Paper

                 80000                                                                                               10000


                                     Fed Liquidity Injection                                   Fed 50 BP Rate Drop   9000
                 70000

                                                                                                                     8000
                                                               Asset Backed AA CP Left Scale
                 60000
                                                                                                                     7000

                 50000
                                                                                                                     6000
  ($ Millions)




                 40000                                                                                               5000


                                                                                                                     4000
                 30000                                    AA Financial CP

                                                                                                                     3000
                 20000
                                                          AA Non-Financial CP - Right Scale                          2000

                 10000
                                                                                                                     1000


                    0                                                                                                0
                                            07




                                                                               07
                          7


                          7


                          7


                          7




                                                          7


                                                          7


                                                          7




                                                                                             7


                                                                                             7


                                                                                             7


                                                                                             7


                                                                                             7
                        00


                        00


                        00


                        00




                                                        00


                                                        00


                                                        00




                                                                                           00


                                                                                           00


                                                                                           00


                                                                                           00


                                                                                           00
                                          20




                                                                             20
                      /2


                      /2


                      /2


                      /2




                                                      /2


                                                      /2


                                                      /2




                                                                                         /2


                                                                                         /2


                                                                                         /2


                                                                                         /2


                                                                                         /2
                                       7/




                                                                          4/
                    10


                    17


                    24


                    31




                                                    14


                                                    21


                                                    28




                                                                                       11


                                                                                       18


                                                                                       25



                                                                                       /2


                                                                                       /9
                                     8/




                                                                        9/




                                                                                    10


                                                                                    10
                 7/


                 7/


                 7/


                 7/




                                                 8/


                                                 8/


                                                 8/




                                                                                    9/


                                                                                    9/


                                                                                    9/




                             AssetBacked CP       AA NonFinancial CP        AA Financial CP




Source: Compiled by Robert A. Eisenbeis from data on the website of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.




                                                                  33
                                    REFERENCES

Bagehot, Walter, 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (reprinted,

     Dodo Press, 2006).

Bordo, Michael, 1992. “The Lender of Last Resort: Some Insights from History”, in

     George Kaufman (ed.) Research in Financial Services: Public and Private Policy,

     Vol 1.

Carnell, Richard, 1993. “The Culture of Ad Hoc Discretion,” in George Kaufman and

       Robert Litan (ed.), Assessing Bank Reform: FDICIA One Year Later,

       Washington: Brookings Institution, pp. 113-121.

Diamond, Douglas, 1984. “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review

       of Economic Studies, 51(July), pp. 343-414.

Dudley, William C., 2007. “May You Live in Interesting Times,” Unpublished Paper

       Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (October 17).

Eisenbeis, Robert, and George Kaufman, 2005. “Bank Crisis Resolution and Foreign-

       Owned Banks.” Economic Review (October), Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Goodfriend, Marvin, 1994. “Why We Need an ‘Accord’ for Federal Reserve Credit

       Policy: A Note,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 26(August, Part 2),

       pp.572-580.

Jensen, Michael C., and William Meckling, 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial

       Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial

       Economics, 3(June), pp. 305-360.

Kane, Edward J., 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington: The

       Urban Institute Press.



                                          34
_____________, 2000. “Designing Financial Safety Nets to Fit Country Circumstances.”

     (unpublished).

_____________, 2004. “Financial Regulation and Bank Safety Nets (in Spanish)”,

     Papeles de Economia Española, 101, pp. 34-63.

La Porta, Rafael; Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,

       1998. “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (December), pp.

       1113-1155.

Schieritz, Mark, and Gerrit Wiesmannin, 2007. “British Banks Scoop Up ECB Cash,”

       Financial Times (September 14).

Thornton, Henry, 1802. An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of

     Great Britain. New York: Farrar & Rhinehart, 1939.

Todd, Walker F., 2002. “Central Banking in a Democracy: The Problem of the Lender of

     the Last Resort,” in Patricia M. McCoy (ed.), Financial Modernization after

     Gramm-Leach-Bliley, Newark, NJ: Matthew Bender.

Wojcik, Dariusz, 2007. “The International Finance Index and Its Derivatives,” Oxford:

     Oxford University Centre for the Environment, Working Papers in Employment,

     Work and Finance: WPG 07-12 (July).




                                          35
