                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MODELING GREAT DEPRESSIONS:
                       THE DEPRESSION IN FINLAND IN THE 1990S

                                        Juan Carlos Conesa
                                         Timothy J. Kehoe
                                           Kim J. Ruhl

                                       Working Paper 13591
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13591


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2007




Conesa gratefully acknowledges the support of the Barcelona Economics Program of CREA, the Ministerio
de Educación y Ciencia under grant SEJ2006-03879, and the Generalitat de Catalunya under grant
2005SGR00447. Kehoe and Ruhl gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation
under grant SES-0536970. We thank Mark Gibson, John Dalton, and Kevin Wiseman for excellent
research assistance. The data and computer programs used in the analysis presented here are available
on line at www.greatdepressionsbook.com. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Juan Carlos Conesa, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Modeling Great Depressions: The Depression in Finland in the 1990s
Juan Carlos Conesa, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 13591
November 2007
JEL No. E13,E32,E50,F41,F59

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper is a primer on the great depressions methodology developed by Cole and Ohanian (1999,
2007) and Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007). We use growth accounting and simple dynamic general
equilibrium models to study the depression that occurred in Finland in the early 1990s. We find that
the sharp drop in real GDP over the period 1990-93 was driven by a combination of a drop in total
factor productivity (TFP) during 1990-92 and of increases in taxes on labor and consumption and increases
in government consumption during 1989-94, which drove down hours worked in Finland. We attempt
to endogenize the drop in TFP in variants of the model with an investment sector and with terms-of-trade
shocks but are unsuccessful.


Juan Carlos Conesa                                  Kim J. Ruhl
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                             University of Texas at Austin
Edifici B, Campus Bellaterra                        BRB 3.148
08193 Cerdanyola del Valles, SPAIN                  Austin, Texas 78712
juancarlos.conesa@uab.es                            ruhl@eco.utexas.edu

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu
1. Introduction

       The general equilibrium growth model is the workhorse of modern economics. It is the
accepted paradigm for studying most macroeconomic phenomena, including business cycles, tax
policy, monetary policy, and growth. The collection of papers edited by Kehoe and Prescott
(2002, 2007) and earlier work by Cole and Ohanian (1999) break the taboo against using the
general equilibrium growth model to study great depressions like that in the United States in the
1930s. This paper is intended as a primer on the great depressions methodology.
       If output is significantly above trend, the economy is in a boom. If it is significantly
below trend, the economy is in a depression. Trend is defined relative to the average growth rate
of the industrial leader. We use a trend growth rate of 2 percent per year because this rate is the
secular growth rate of the U.S. economy in the twentieth century. In the twenty-first century, it
is possible that the European Union or China will become the industrial leader, and it will be
appropriate to define the trend growth rate relative to that economy rather than to the U.S.
economy.
       A great depression, according to Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007), is a particular episode
of a negative deviation from trend satisfying the following three conditions:


1. It must be a sufficiently large deviation. Kehoe and Prescott require that the deviation must
   be at least 20 percent below trend.


2. The deviation must occur rapidly. Kehoe and Prescott require that detrended output per
   working-age person must fall at least 15 percent within the first decade of the depression.


3. The deviation must be sustained. Kehoe and Prescott require that output per working-age
   person should not grow at the trend growth rate of 2 percent during any decade during the
   depression.


       Figure 1 displays the evolution of output per working-age person in the United States for
more than a hundred years, relative to a 2 percent trend. The U.S. Great Depression of the 1930s
can easily be identified from this figure. Great depressions are not a relic of the past, however,
and, unless we understand their causes, we cannot rule out their happening again. Argentina,


                                                 1
Brazil, Chile, and Mexico had depressions during the 1980s that were comparable in magnitude
to those in Canada, France, Germany, and the United States in the interwar period. In recent
times, New Zealand and Switzerland—rich, democratic countries with market economies—have
experienced great depressions. In the 1990s, two countries, Finland and Japan, experienced not-
quite-great depressions. The case of Japan has been analyzed in Hayashi and Prescott (2002,
2007). In this paper, we analyze the experience of Finland.
       We rely on growth accounting to decompose changes in output into three portions: the
first due to changes in inputs of labor, the second due to changes in inputs of capital, and the
third due to the changes in efficiency with which these factors are used, measured as total factor
productivity (TFP). We then use simple applied dynamic general equilibrium models to identify
and quantify the sources of these movements. We analyze the standard neoclassical growth
model and then provide three extensions: a model with distortionary taxes and government
consumption, a two-sector model with investment specific technological change, and an open
economy model with terms-of-trade changes.
       An important feature of our analysis is that, given that we provide a battery of models for
analysis, we have to provide explicit ways of making the data and the model outcomes
comparable. The theory used will guide the measurement in the data, and the discussion of how
to do that in a consistent way is a useful contribution on its own.

2. The Finnish Experience in the 1990s

       Finland has experienced spectacular growth during the past century. Figure 2 displays
data on real GDP per working-age person (15–64 years) over the period 1900–2005. Notice how
growth in Finland, which has averaged 2.4 percent per year, has consistently outstripped the
trend growth of 2 percent per year of the United States during most of the century depicted in
Figure 1. The major interruptions to this growth in Finland have been the First World War
during 1914–18, the two wars with the Soviet Union 1940–45, and two economic depressions—
one in the 1930s and the other in the 1990s. Figure 3 provides a comparison of the depression
that began in 1929 with the one that began in 1990. Neither episode meets the Kehoe-Prescott
criteria for a great depression because real GDP per working-age person detrended by 2 percent
per year did not fall by 20 percent.




                                                  2
        Finnish economists like Kiander and Vartia (1996) refer to both episodes as great
depressions, however, and note that the episode in the 1990s was the more severe of the two. In
Figure 3, it is clear that Finnish economic performance, measured in terms of real GDP per
working-age person, was worse in the 1990s than it was in the 1930s: By 1993, the trough of the
depression of the 1990s, detrended real GDP per working-age person had fallen by 18.5 percent,
compared with a fall of only 14.3 percent by 1932, the trough of the depression of the 1930s.
Although the Finnish depression of the 1990s is not a great depression according to the Kehoe-
Prescott criteria, it comes close, and this paper uses it as a case study for the great depressions
methodology of Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007).
        Our analysis shows that the sharp drop in real GDP over the period 1990–93 was driven
by a combination of a drop in TFP during 1990–92 and of an increase in taxes on labor income
and on consumption during 1989–94, which drove down hours worked in Finland.
        Our results are in accord with those of Böckerman and Kiander (2002b) and Kiander and
Vartia (1996), who characterize the causes of the Finnish depression as a combination of “bad
luck, bad banking, and bad policy.” The bad luck refers to the 1989–91 collapse of the Soviet
Union, Finland’s principal trading partner in 1989; the bad banking refers to the banking crisis in
Finland in 1991–94; and the bad policy refers to Finnish labor market policies, in particular, the
sharp increase in labor income taxes. Gorodnichenko, Mendoza, and Tesar (2007) also focus on
the banking crisis and decline in trade with the Soviet Union as the shocks that generated the
depression in Finland. Other references for economic developments in Finland in the 1990s
include Böckerman and Kiander (2002a), Kiander (2004), and Koskela and Uusitalo (2004).
        Our conclusion that the drop in TFP and the increases in taxes and government
consumption, when introduced into the model, can account for the Finnish depression of the
1990s leaves much room for future research. The base case model that we present takes the
fluctuations in TFP as exogenous. A more successful analysis would model TFP fluctuations as
endogenous. In such an analysis, the banking crisis and the collapse in trade with the Soviet
Union—the bad luck and bad banking of Kiander and Vartia (1996)—would probably play
crucial roles.
        In the analysis presented here, in both the model with investment and the model with
trade, a portion of the fluctuations in TFP is endogenous. These models are not successful in
capturing the TFP fluctuations observed in the data, however. In fact, we show that in each



                                                  3
model the endogenous portion of TFP moves in the wrong direction—that is, it actually increases
during the depression. In a more successful model in which TFP fluctuations are endogenous,
the crucial elements that drive the fall in TFP 1990–92 may involve the fluctuations in the
relative price of investment and the terms of trade, but these two features alone are not enough.
The analysis in this paper indicates some of the difficulties that a more successful analysis will
have to overcome.

3. The Dynamic General Equilibrium Model

        This section presents the simple dynamic general equilibrium model that serves as the
base case in our analysis of the Finnish economy. The model features a representative household
that chooses paths of consumption, leisure, and investment in order to maximize utility. The
household maximizes the utility function

                           ∑           β t ( γ log Ct + (1 − γ ) log(hN t − Lt ) )
                               ∞
(1)                            t =T0



subject to a sequence of budget constraints,

(2)                                Ct + K t +1 = wt Lt + (1 − δ + rt ) K t ,

nonnegativity constraints on Ct and I t = K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t , and a constraint on the initial stock of

capital, KT0 . In the utility function, the parameter β , 0 < β < 1 , is the discount factor and the

parameter γ , 0 < γ < 1 , is the consumption share. Both need to be calibrated. Ct is

consumption, K t is the capital stock, Lt is hours worked, wt is the wage rate, rt is the rental

rate, and δ , 0 < δ < 1 , is the depreciation rate. The total number of hours available for work is
hN t , where N t is the working-age population and h is the number of hours available for market

work. We specify h as 100 hours per week. One period of time is one year.
        Firms operate in a perfectly competitive market, using a constant returns to scale
technology, which we assume to be Cobb-Douglas:

(3)                                            Yt = At K tα L1t−α ,




                                                             4
where Yt denotes total output, At is total factor productivity (TFP), and α , 0 < α < 1 , is the
capital share. The conditions that firms earn zero profits and minimize costs provide expressions
for the factor prices:

(4)                                   wt = (1 − α ) At K tα L−t α

(5)                                     rt = α At K tα −1 L1t−α .

        The current period’s output is divided between consumption and investment. The
feasibility constraint is

(6)                           Ct + K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t = At K tα L1t−α .


4. The Data

        To perform the growth accounting, we use national accounts data and labor force
surveys. For Finland, we use national accounts data constructed using the United Nations’
System of National Accounts (SNA93), downloaded from SourceOECD, and data on hours
worked per worker, employment rates, and working-age population from the corresponding
Labor Force Surveys, also available in the Groningen Growth and Development Center database.
        The standard growth accounting is done by the use of an aggregate production function,
which is of the Cobb-Douglas form (3). In terms of data, we need measures of output and the
capital stock at constant prices and of hours worked. We need to take a stand on what data
categories we should be including as investment. We consider the raw measurement of hours
worked we use in our analysis as less problematic, although alternatively we could choose to
weigh hours by some measurement of efficiency units of labor. We also need to calibrate the
capital share, α .
        In the base case model, we assume a closed economy without a government or a foreign
sector, and hence the feasibility condition is given by equation (6), which can be written as

(7)                                         Ct + I t = Yt .

There are several alternative strategies for matching up objects in the model with those in the
data. One strategy is to ignore the government and the foreign sector. When following that
strategy, Ct corresponds to Private Consumption in the national accounts, and I t corresponds to



                                                        5
Private Gross Capital Formation. Output is then the sum of these two categories. Notice that
this strategy leaves a sizeable fraction of GDP out of the analysis. Another set of strategies—
which are followed by the papers in Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007)—start by defining Yt to be
GDP, and then allocate the categories that are not explicitly considered in the analysis,
Government Consumption and Net Exports, to either consumption or investment. The most
frequently followed strategy in Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007) is to allocate both categories to
consumption. Hayashi and Prescott (2002, 2007) follow an alternative strategy of allocating
Government Consumption to consumption but Net Exports to investment, since net exports
result in the accumulation of capital abroad. Consistent with this strategy, Hayashi and Prescott
define Yt to be gross national product (GNP), rather than GDP. Recall that GNP adds the foreign
income of domestic residents to GDP and subtracts the income within the country of foreign
residents.
       At this point, these alternative strategies for matching up objects in the model with those
in the data seem somewhat arbitrary. In practice, if one of the strategies produces very different
results from another one, it is probably best to develop a model, along with a corresponding
accounting procedure, that explicitly takes into account government consumption and/or net
exports. We do this later in the paper. Even though we do not do so in this paper, it is worth
mentioning that some researchers have found it convenient to consider durable goods
consumption as investment. Such an alternative strategy requires us to impute services from
durable goods as output. (See, for example, Hansen and Prescott 1995.)
       The variables in the feasibility constraint (6) are interpreted as physical units of a
homogeneous good, with units measured in values at base period prices. Consequently, we want
to measure output and investment at constant prices. The most straightforward procedure is to
deflate both consumption and investment with the same deflator, the GDP deflator. It is
important to understand that, in the national accounts, this is not the way constant price measures
are constructed. There, investment at constant prices is deflated with a different price deflator
than is consumption. In fact, Finnish data show a declining trend in the price of investment
relative to consumption. In our base case, this declining relative price shows up as capital
augmenting technological progress that translates into higher TFP, while the capital stock is
measured in units of forgone consumption. It is also worth noting that increases in the quality of
labor, human capital accumulation, and so on would also show up here as increasing TFP. Later,


                                                  6
we explore an alternative model in which capital goods are different from consumption goods
and can have different prices.
        In our analysis, we treat the real variables from the national accounts as though all are
measured in prices of the same base period. We later discuss the case where they are chain-
weighted quantity indexes.
        Standard national accounts, such as those of Finland, do not report a series for the capital
stock, so we have to construct such a series using the data on investment. We construct this
series using the law of motion for capital in the model,

(8)                                   K t +1 = (1 − δ ) K t + I t .

        This commonly used procedure for calculating a capital stock is referred to as the
perpetual inventory method. The inputs necessary to construct the capital stock series are a
capital stock at the beginning of the investment series and a value for the constant depreciation
rate, δ . The value of δ is chosen to be consistent with the average ratio of depreciation to
GDP observed in the data over the data period used for calibration purposes. For Finland, we
find that the ratio of depreciation to GDP over the period 1980–2005 is

                                    1    2005 δ K t
(9)
                                    26
                                       ∑ t =1980
                                                 Yt
                                                    = 0.1693 .


        Without explicit data on the capital stock at the beginning of the investment series, we
have to adopt a more or less arbitrary rule. One rule—the one that we use in this paper—is that
the capital-output ratio of the initial period should match the average capital-output ratio over
some reference period. Here we choose the capital stock so that the capital-output ratio in 1960
matches its average over 1961–70:

                                      K1960 1 1970 K t
(10)                                       = ∑            .
                                      Y1960 10 t =1961 Yt

        The system of equations (8)–(10) allows us to use data on investment, I t , to solve for the

sequence of capital stocks and for the depreciation rate, δ . There are 27 unknowns: K1980 , δ ,

and K1981 , K1982 ,..., K 2005 , in 27 equations: 25 equations (8), where t = 1980, 1981,..., 2004 , (9),
and (10). Solving this system of equations, we obtain the sequence of capital stocks and a
calibrated value for depreciation, δ = 0.0556 .


                                                        7
       An alternative rule to (10) is to choose the initial capital stock so that, when we compute
the capital stock in the subsequent period using equation (8), its growth rate matches the average
growth rate of some number of subsequent periods. If the initial date for the investment series is
far removed from the period of time in which we are interested, these different rules have little
perceptible effect on our results. In our case, we start our model in 1980, 20 years after the
beginning of our capital stock series. With the depreciation rate that we calibrate, this implies
that almost 70 percent of the 1960 capital stock has depreciated away by the time the model
starts in 1980, 0.6815 = 1 − (1 − 0.0556) 20 . By 1989, the year before the start of the depression,
this number rises to more than 80 percent.
       The last ingredient we need to perform our growth accounting decomposition is to assign
a value for the capital share, α . We can directly measure α from the data, but we need to make
some adjustments. If we are using national accounting data under SNA93, as we are in the case
of Finland, the income definition of GDP is the sum of three categories: Compensation of
Employees, Net Taxes on Production and Imports, and Gross Operating Surplus and Mixed
Income. The last category is a residual category. As Gollin (2002) argues, defining the labor
income share as the ratio of wages and salaries to GDP at factor prices (excluding indirect taxes)
is a bad idea. The problem is that some payments to labor are to self-employed workers and to
unremunerated family workers. Furthermore, the fraction of GDP that goes to such workers
varies widely from country to country. Consequently, a definition of labor income based
exclusively on the wages and salaries included in Compensation of Employees will necessarily
be misleading. Correcting the bias in the measurement of factor shares requires constructing
some measure of mixed income of the household sector. The Detailed Tables of the National
Accounts under SNA93 provide national accounts disaggregated by institutional sectors. Using
the Household Sector accounts, we measure nonwage income of the household sector as Gross
Operating Surplus and Mixed Income, minus Consumption of Fixed Capital.
       We define the labor income share as unambiguous labor income divided by GDP net of
the ambiguous categories (household net mixed income and indirect taxes):

                                    Compensation of Employees
(11)    Labor Share =                                                         .
                        GDP − Household Net Mixed Income − Net Indirect Taxes

This procedure is equivalent to splitting the ambiguous categories between labor income and
capital income in the same proportions as in the rest of the economy. Our calculations produce


                                                  8
an average value of the labor income share of 0.6410 over the period 1980–2005, so that
α = 0.3590 .

5. Growth Accounting

        Once we have obtained measures for output, investment, and hours worked, have
constructed a capital stock series, and have calibrated a capital share parameter, we compute
TFP:

                                                             Yt
(12)                                            At =               .
                                                         K t Lt1−α
                                                           α



        The growth accounting that we employ is based on that of Hayashi and Prescott (2002,
2007). To motivate this procedure, suppose that TFP and the working-age population grow at
constant rates,

(13)                                             At +1 = g 1−α At

(14)                                              N t +1 = nN t ,

where g 1−α − 1 is the growth rate of TFP and n − 1 is the growth rate of population. Then there is
a balanced-growth path in which output per working-age person, Yt / N t , grows at the rate g − 1

and the capital-output ratio, K t / Yt , and hours worked per working-age person, Lt / N t , are

constant. That such a path is feasible follows from plugging At +1 = g 1−α At and

K t +1 / N t +1 = gK t / N t into the production function (3),

                                          α          1−α                    α    1−α
                  Yt +1          ⎛K ⎞ ⎛ L ⎞                      ⎛K ⎞ ⎛ L ⎞                 Yt
(15)                     = At +1 ⎜ t +1 ⎟ ⎜ t +1 ⎟         = gAt ⎜ t ⎟ ⎜ t ⎟           =g      .
                  N t +1         ⎝ N t +1 ⎠ ⎝ N t +1 ⎠           ⎝ Nt ⎠ ⎝ Nt ⎠              Nt

Later, we show that there is a unique such path that satisfies the first-order conditions for the
representative household’s utility maximization problem, and the marginal cost pricing
conditions (4) and (5).
        We rewrite the production function as
                                                                  α
                                         Yt         1
                                                         ⎛ Kt ⎞   1−α   ⎛ Lt ⎞
(16)                                        =A    t
                                                   1−α
                                                         ⎜ ⎟            ⎜ ⎟.
                                         Nt              ⎝ Yt ⎠         ⎝ Nt ⎠


                                                               9
Notice that, in a balanced-growth path, ( K t / Yt )α /(1−α ) and Lt / N t are constant, and growth in

Yt / N t is driven by growth in At1/(1−α ) . To appreciate the usefulness of this decomposition,
consider the data for the United States over the period 1970–2005 graphed in Figure 4. The U.S.
growth path is close to balanced: the growth in Yt / N t is close to that in At1/(1−α ) , and

( Kt / Yt )
          α /(1−α )
                      and Lt / N t are close to constant. To be sure, there are deviations from balanced-

growth behavior. Over the period 1983–99, output per working-age person Yt / N t rises faster

than does the productivity factor At1/(1−α ) , for example, because hours worked per working-age

person, Lt / N t , steadily increase.
          Figure 5 depicts the growth accounting for Finland over the same period, 1970–2005. At
least three features are worth noting. First, growth in real GDP per working-age person in
Finland has been rapid over this period, averaging 2.4 percent per year, compared to 1.7 percent
in the United States. Second, the sharp drop in Yt / N t from 1989 to 1992 was driven by both a

fall in the productivity factor At1/(1−α ) and a fall in the labor factor Lt / N t , but productivity
recovered sharply in 1993, and by 1993 it was the fall in labor that accounted for all of the drop
in output. Over the entire period 1989–93, the fall in hours worked per working-age person of
21.2 percent was far larger than the drop in real GDP per working-age person, 11.8 percent in
raw terms and 18.5 percent detrended by 2 percent per year. Third, although output recovered
rapidly starting in 1994, labor recovered only partially, and hours worked per working-age
person in 2005 were still 12.5 percent below their value in 1989. These are the features of the
Finnish data that we test our model against, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

6. Computation of Equilibrium

          In this section, we explain how to solve for the model’s equilibrium. As we have
discussed in Section 3, the model features a representative household that chooses paths of
consumption, leisure, and investment to maximize utility. The paths of TFP and population are
exogenously given, and the agent has perfect foresight over their values. We start the model at
date T0 = 1980 and let time run out to infinity.




                                                       10
Definition. Given sequences of productivity, At , and working-age population, N t ,

t = T0 , T0 + 1,... , and the initial capital stock, KT0 , an equilibrium is sequences of wages, wt ,

interest rates, rt , consumption, Ct , labor, Lt , and capital stocks, K t , such that

1. given the wages and interest rates, the representative household chooses consumption, labor,
    and capital to maximize the utility function (1) subject to the budget constraints (2),
    appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and the constraint on KT0 ;

2. the wages and interest rates, together with the firms’ choices of labor and capital, satisfy the
    cost minimization and zero profit conditions, (4) and (5); and

3. consumption, labor, and capital satisfy the feasibility condition (6).

         We turn these equilibrium conditions into a system of equations that can be solved to find
the equilibrium of the model. We begin by taking first-order conditions of the household’s
problem of maximizing the utility function (1) subject to the budget constraint (2) to obtain

                                                                1− γ
(17)                                       wt ( hN t − Lt ) =          Ct
                                                                   γ

                                             Ct +1
(18)                                               = β (1 − δ + rt +1 ) .
                                             Ct

         Combining the household’s optimality conditions (17) and (18), the firm optimality
conditions (4) and (5), and the feasibility condition (6), we can specify a system of equations that
can be solved to find the equilibrium of the model.
         Before explaining how to calculate the whole equilibrium path, let us explain how to
calculate a balanced-growth path for this model.

Definition. Suppose that productivity, At , grows at the constant rate g 1−α − 1 and that working-

age population grows at the constant rate n − 1 , then a balanced-growth path is levels of the
wage, ŵ , the interest rate, r̂ , consumption, Ĉ , labor, L̂ , the capital stock, K̂ , and output, Ŷ ,
such that wt = g t −T0 wˆ , rt = rˆ , Ct = ( gn)t −T0 Cˆ , Lt = nt −T0 Lˆ , K t = ( gn)t −T0 Kˆ , Yt = ( gn)t −T0 Yˆ satisfy

the conditions for an equilibrium when the initial capital stock is KT0 = Kˆ .



                                                              11
         To solve for the balanced-growth path, we use (5) and (18) to solve for the capital-output
ratio Kˆ / Yˆ ,

                                              ⎛     Yˆ   ⎞
(19)                                    g = β ⎜1 + α − δ ⎟ .
                                              ⎝     Kˆ   ⎠

We then use (4) and (6) to rewrite (17) as

                                ⎛      NT0    ⎞ 1− γ       ⎛                   Kˆ ⎞
(20)                    (1 − α ) ⎜ h       − 1⎟ =          ⎜ 1 − ( gn − 1 + δ ) ˆ ⎟
                                ⎝       Lˆ    ⎠   γ        ⎝                   Y ⎠

and use this equation to calculate labor, L̂ . We can then use the production function (3) to solve
for K̂ and Ŷ . Using the feasibility condition (6), we can then solve for Ĉ , and, using the firm
optimality conditions (4) and (5), we can solve for ŵ and r̂ .
         We now return to the calculation of the equilibrium path. Plugging the prices (4) and (5)
into the household’s optimality conditions (17) and (18), and using the feasibility condition (6),
we obtain the system of equations

                                                                      1− γ
(21)                         (1 − α ) At Ktα L−t α ( hNt − Lt ) =                Ct
                                                                          γ

                                       = β (1 − δ + α At +1 K tα+−11 L1t−+α1 )
                                 Ct +1
(22)
                                 Ct

(23)                            Ct + K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t = At K tα L1t−α .

Solving for an equilibrium involves choosing sequences of consumption, capital stocks, and
hours worked such that these equations are satisfied, given the initial condition KT0 and final

condition, the transversality condition,

                                                       γ
(24)                                    limt →∞ β t        K t +1 = 0 .
                                                      Ct

         In principle, the system of equations that characterize the equilibrium, (21)–(23), involves
an infinite number of equations and unknowns. To make the computation of an equilibrium
tractable, we assume that the economy converges to the balanced-growth path at some date T1 ,



                                                           12
which allows us to truncate the system of equations. Using the feasibility condition (6) to solve
for Ct , we can write these equations as

                                                   1− γ
(25) (1 − α ) At Ktα L−t α ( hNt − Lt ) =                   (AK    α 1−α
                                                                       Lt   − K t +1 + (1 − δ ) K t ) , t = T0 , T0 + 1,..., T1
                                                     γ         t   t




       At +1 K tα+1 L1t−+α1 − K t + 2 + (1 − δ ) K t +1
(26)                                                      = β (1 − δ + α At +1 K tα+−11 L1t−+α1 ) , t = T0 , T0 + 1,..., T1 − 1 ,
                α 1−α
          At K t Lt     − K t +1 + (1 − δ ) K t

where KT1 +1 = gnKT1 .

           We choose T1 so that T1 − T0 is large, say 60, so that we are solving the model over the

period 1980–2040. We then construct the exogenous variables. The exogenous variables At , N t
for 1980–2005 are as they are in the data. For 2006–40, we assume that TFP grows at a constant
rate equal to the average growth rate of TFP over the period 1980–2005 and that the working-age
population grows at the same rate as in 2004–5. These are the growth rates g 1−α and n in the
specification of the balanced-growth path.
           Solving the model now consists of choosing KT0 +1 , KT0 + 2 ,..., KT1 , and LT0 , LT0 +1 ,..., LT1 to

solve the system of equations (25) and (26). This system of 2(T1 − T0 ) − 1 nonlinear equations in

2(T1 − T0 ) − 1 unknowns can be solved relatively quickly using numerical methods. A set of
MATLAB programs for solving this model are available at www.greatdepressionsbook.com.
The details of the programs are available in Appendix A.
           The solution of the system of equations (25) and (26) may involve a negative value of
investment in some periods. If this is the case, we guess the periods in which investment is 0 and
replace the corresponding equation (26) with the equation

(27)                                                       K t +1 = (1 − δ ) K t .

We follow a guess and verify approach. For our guess that investment in period t be 0 to be
correct, the condition corresponding to (18) and (26),

                        At +1 K tα+1 L1t−+α1 − K t + 2 + (1 − δ ) K t +1
(28)                                                                     ≥ β (1 − δ + α At +1 K tα+−11 L1t−+α1 ) ,
                           At K t Lt − K t +1 + (1 − δ ) K t
                                  α 1−α



must hold with inequality.


                                                                            13
7. Calibration and Results for the Base Case Model

       In addition to the exogenous paths for productivity and population, we need to specify the
parameters β , γ , δ , and α . We continue to use the values for α and δ that we calibrated in
Section 4. To calibrate a value for β , we use (22) to write

                                                 Ct +1
(29)                             β=
                                       Ct (1 − δ + α Yt +1 K t +1 )

With values for α and δ , and data on capital, output, and consumption, we compute β for each
period and take the average over 1970–80. That is, we calibrate household behavior to a period
outside that in which we are interested. We find β = 0.9752 .
       The procedure for calibrating γ is similar. We use (21) to write

                                                 Ct Lt
(30)                           γ=                                     .
                                    Yt ( hN t − Lt ) (1 − α ) + Ct Lt

Using data on consumption, hours worked, population, and output and the value for α , we find
that the average value over 1970–80 is γ = 0.2846 .
       We plot the results for the base case model in Figures 6–8. Table 1 compares the growth
accounting in the model with that in the data. Here we take natural logarithms of equation (16)
so that output per working-age person decomposes into three additive factors:

                             Yt   1             α     K       L
(31)                   log      =     log At +     log t + log t .
                             Nt 1 − α          1−α    Yt      Nt

The numbers reported in Table 1 are average annual changes multiplied by 100, which can be
interpreted as growth rates. Notice that the model only partially accounts for the fall in output
during the depression. From 1989 to 1993, real GDP per working-age person in Finland fell by
11.8 percent, 18.5 percent when detrended by 2 percent per year. In contrast, in the model it falls
by only 1.9 percent, 9.4 when detrended. Furthermore, the timing is off. Output was still falling
in 1993 in the data, whereas it is rising in the model. Notice too that the model is able to account
for only about one-third of the fall in hours worked in the data.
       The base case numerical experiment is nonstochastic in that we assume that households
in 1980 have perfect foresight on the evolution of TFP over the next 25 years. In the numerical



                                                     14
experiment that we call myopic expectations, we assume that households expect TFP in the
future to grow at the same rate that it grew over the previous 10 years. We impose these same
conditions on expectations after 2005. We assume that households have perfect foresight over
the evolution of working-age population, however, because they can observe birth rates and
project them into the future. This numerical experiment requires us to solve the model 26 times,
once for each year from 1980 to 2005. In 1989, for example, households expect TFP to grow
forever at the same rate that it grew over the period 1979–89. We compute a perfect foresight
equilibrium for these expectations. In 1990, households are surprised by a sudden fall in TFP,
and they modify their expectations of TFP growth to be that over the period 1980–90.
       Notice in Figures 6–8 and Table 1 how similar the results of the numerical experiment
with myopic expectations are to those of the base case, where there is perfect foresight,
especially with respect to real GDP per working-age person. Where there are deviations between
the results with perfect foresight and those with myopic expectations, the results with myopic
expectations move the results of the model further from the data. Notice especially in Figure 7
that the model with myopic expectations fails to capture the fall in hours worked during the
depression. This is because of the general equilibrium structure of the model. The downturn in
Finland 1989–93 was so short that households did not have time to adjust their expectations of
TFP downward and kept up levels of investment. Consequently, because the level of the capital
stock is higher during the depression in the model with myopic expectations than it is in the base
case model with perfect foresight, real wages, and therefore employment, are also higher. In
experiments with this sort of model for countries that experience longer depressions, we have
found that the myopic expectations model does better in capturing the fall in investment and
hours worked.

8. Taxes and the Role of the Government Sector
       In this section, we introduce distortionary taxes and government spending into our model.
We find that increases in distortionary taxes generate large declines in hours worked in Finland.
The conclusion agrees with that of Böckerman and Kiander (2002a, 2002b) for Finland and is in
accord with the results obtained by Conesa and Kehoe (2007), Ohanian, Raffo, and Rogerson
(2006), and Prescott (2002, 2007) for a number of other countries.




                                                15
        Consider an environment where the government levies distortionary taxes and uses the
proceeds to finance transfers to the household sector and government consumption. The
representative household’s problem is to maximize utility (1) subject to the sequence of budget
constraints

(32)              (1 + τ tc )Ct + K t +1 = (1 − τ tA ) wt Lt + (1 + (1 − τ tk )(rt − δ ) ) K t + Tt ,

appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and a constraint on the initial stock of capital, KT0 . Here

τ tc is the tax rate on consumption; τ tA is the marginal tax rate on labor income; τ tk is the
marginal tax rate on capital income; and Tt is a lump-sum transfer, which may be positive or
negative, received from the government. Notice that the introduction of taxes requires us to
modify the first-order conditions (17) and (18) of the representative household:

                                1− γ      Ct       1 − τ tA
(33)                                             =          (1 − α ) At Ktα L−t α
                                  γ     hN t − Lt 1 + τ tc

                        Ct +1 1 + τ tc
(34)                         =
                        Ct 1 + τ tc+1
                                              (
                                       β 1 + (1 − τ tk+1 )(α At +1 K tα+−11 L1t−+α1 − δ ) . )
        The sequence of government budget constraints is

(35)                            τ tc Ct + τ tA wt Lt + τ tk (rt − δ ) K t = Gt + Tt ,

where the government finances government consumption, Gt , and transfers to the household

sector Tt .
        We modify the feasibility constraint (6) to include government consumption:

(36)                             Ct + K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t + Gt = At K tα L1t−α .


Definition. Given sequences of productivity, At , and working-age population, N t , consumption

taxes, τ tc , labor taxes, τ tA , capital taxes, τ tk , and government consumption, Gt , t = T0 , T0 + 1,... ,

and the initial capital stock, KT0 , an equilibrium with taxes and government consumption is

sequences of wages, wt , interest rates, rt , consumption, Ct , labor, Lt , capital stocks, K t , and

transfers, Tt , such that


                                                              16
1. given the wages and interest rates, the representative household chooses consumption, labor,
   and capital to maximize the utility function (1) subject to the budget constraint (32),
   appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and the constraint on initial capital KT0 ;

2. the wages and interest rates, together with the firms’ choices of labor and capital, satisfy the
   cost minimization and zero profit conditions, (4) and (5);

3. government consumption and transfers satisfy the government budget constraints (35); and

4. consumption, labor, and capital satisfy the feasibility condition (36).

       It is worth pointing out that there is an equivalence between this specification and one in
which government transfers are exogenously given and the government balances its budget by
selling bonds. In this case, the representative household faces the sequence of budget constraints

(37)      (1 + τ tc )Ct + K t +1 + Bt +1 = (1 − τ tA ) wt Lt + (1 + (1 − τ tk )(rt − δ ) ) ( K t + Bt ) + Tt ,

initial conditions on capital, KT0 , and bonds, BT0 , and a constraint of the form Bt ≥ − g t B , where

the constant B > 0 is chosen large enough so that the constraint never binds in equilibrium
except to prevent the household from running Ponzi schemes. The government faces the
sequence of government budget constraints

(38)          τ tc Ct + τ tA wt Lt + τ tk (rt − δ ) ( K t + Bt ) + Bt +1 = Gt + Tt + (1 + rt − δ ) Bt

and a constraint that says that debt cannot get too large,

                                                           γ
(39)                                        limt →∞ β t         Bt +1 ≤ 0 ,
                                                           Ct

which is the transversality condition from the representative household’s problem.
       To be precise about the equivalence: For any equilibrium in the model with exogenous
transfers and government bonds, Tt and Bt , in which BT0 = 0 , there is an equilibrium in the

model with endogenous transfers, Tˆt , and no bonds in which

(40)                          Tˆt = Tt + (1 + rt − δ ) Bt − τ tk (rt − δ ) Bt − Bt +1 .




                                                                17
Conversely, for any equilibrium in the model with endogenous transfers, Tt , and no bonds, there

is an equilibrium in the model with exogenous transfers and government bonds, Tˆt and Bˆt , in

which Tˆt = Tt and Bˆt = 0 . Notice that there are actually infinitely many combinations of
transfers and bonds that have the same values of all of the other variables in equilibrium as the
model with endogenous transfers and no bonds. Unless there is some reason to model
government debt or to fix transfers, we therefore use the specification with endogenous transfers
and no bonds.
        If utility is separable between the consumption-leisure bundle and public goods and
services, the distinction between public goods and services and government consumption that is
not valued by the household is inconsequential except for welfare measurement. The distinction
between government consumption and transfers is more involved, however. We explore the
importance of this distinction in the next section.

9. Calibration and Results for the Model with Taxes and Government Spending

        To obtain estimates of the sequences of effective tax rates τ tc , τ tA , and τ tk , we use data on
aggregate tax collections from its main sources—individual and household income taxes,
corporate income taxes, sales and excise taxes, payroll taxes, and so on—and classify them
according to the tax categories we have in our analysis: consumption tax, labor income tax, and
capital income tax. We follow the methodology of Mendoza, Razin, and Tesar (1994), with two
major differences. First, since we attribute a fraction of households’ nonwage income to labor
income, we take that into account when defining the relevant tax base in the data. Second, we
set the income tax rates, τ tA , and τ tk , equal to their effective marginal rates, as opposed to
effective average rates.
        We focus on marginal rather than average effective tax rates because, given our
theoretical framework, the relevant household decisions are taken at the margin as in (33) and
(34). Notice that, with our specification of transfers, if the marginal tax rate is higher than the
corresponding average rate, then we are specifying a progressive income tax with a constant
marginal tax rate. In principle, we need to adjust our income tax estimates using estimated
effective income tax functions with disaggregated data, as in Conesa and Kehoe (2007). In this
paper, we simply follow Prescott (2002, 2007) for the U.S. case in multiplying average income


                                                    18
taxes by a factor of 1.6 to obtain marginal tax rates. An explicit procedure for calculating the tax
rates for Finland is presented in Appendix B. These tax rates are graphed in Figure 9.
       We are still left with the nontrivial issue of allocating government revenues between
government consumption and transfers. We run numerical experiments of the model under two
different specifications, following Conesa and Kehoe (2007). In the first specification, we
assume that all government revenues are given as a lump-sum rebate to households. In other
words, we set Gt = 0 in (35) and (36). This specification implies that all government revenues
go to transfers to the households, such as pensions or unemployment subsidies, or to purchases
of goods and services that would otherwise be provided privately, such as education or health
care. Our alternative specification goes to the other extreme and assumes that government
consumption in the national accounts is wasted or that it produced a public good that enters the
households’ utility function separably. For example, we could specify utility as

                    ∑           β t ( γ log Ct + (1 − γ ) log(hN t − Lt ) + η log Gt ) .
                        ∞
(41)                    t =T0



Figure 10 shows the data for the evolution of government consumption in Finland.
       In the numerical experiments, we assume that government spending grows by the factor
gn over the period 2006–40 so that we can assume the equilibrium converges to a balanced-
growth path. In the data, government consumption grows faster than this over the period 1980–
2005. If we project government consumption as growing at this faster rate into the future,
however, it eventually becomes larger than the economy can feasibly supply. The reason for this
is easily seen in Figure 10. If we extrapolate the growth in government consumption as a
percentage of GDP, government consumption eventually becomes more than 100 percent of
GDP.
       To exogenously set the productivity series, we modify equation (12),

                                                        Ct + I t
(42)                                            At =               ,
                                                        K t1−α Lαt

where Ct + I t is real GDP at factor prices in the data. When we report the contribution of TFP to
growth, however, we calculate TFP as conventionally measured,

                                                            Yˆ
(43)                                            Aˆt =         t
                                                            1−α
                                                        K   t     Lαt


                                                              19
where

(44)                                 Yˆt = (1 + τ Tc )Ct + I t

is real GDP at market prices of the base year T . For the Finnish data that we use, T = 2000 .
        We run three numerical experiments with taxes: one for each of the two alternative
specifications of government spending and a third in which we maintain tax rates constant at
their average 1970–80 and all government revenues are transferred to the household. The
presence of distortionary taxes requires us to recalibrate the household utility function
parameters β and γ . In the experiment with constant tax rates and all government revenue
transferred, we calibrate β = 1.0031 and γ = 0.4638 ; in the model with taxes and all government
revenue transferred, β = 1.0049 and γ = 0.4649 ; and, in the model with taxes and government
consumption, β = 0.9948 and γ = 0.3856 . Notice that the calibrated values of β in the first
two experiments are greater than 1, which makes the representative household’s objective
function (1) infinite in an economy in which consumption and leisure do not converge to 0
sufficiently rapidly. To avoid this problem in these two numerical experiments, we set, more or
less arbitrarily, β = 0.9990 .
        There are a number of reasons for the high calibrated value of β in a model in with taxes
where all of government revenues are transferred to consumers. The tax on capital lowers the
after-tax interest rate in the first-order condition (34), but the growth rate of consumption stays
the same as in the model without taxes. Notice that, in the experiment where we do not transfer
all tax revenues to households and we take government consumption out of Ct in (34), the

growth rate of consumption falls sufficiently for the calibrated value of β to be less than 1.
        Notice that the contribution of TFP in the growth accounting differs between the model
and the data because of the difference between the productivity factor that we exogenously fix,
At , and TFP, Aˆt , which depends on endogenously determined consumption, Ct .
        Figures 11–13 and Table 2 present the results of the three numerical experiments with
taxes and government spending. It is worth mentioning that investment is equal to 0 and the
inequality constraint (28) holds in 1994 in both the model with taxes and all government revenue
transferred and in the model with taxes and government consumption. As we have seen in
Section 7, the base case model does not account for the sharp fall in hours worked 1989–94. As


                                                     20
Figure 12 shows, the introduction of distortionary taxes in our analysis helps in accounting for
this feature of the data. If anything, the model overestimates the fall in hours worked. Conesa
and Kehoe (2007) show that alternative utility functions with lower corresponding labor supply
elasticities can produce a lower response of hours worked to changes in labor and consumption
taxes in this sort of model. Ljunge and Ragan (2004) argue that the responses of labor supply to
changes in taxes like those in Finland in the early 1990s—they focus on similar changes that
occurred in Sweden at the same time—were large, but not as large as those predicted by our
logarithmic utility function (1). Furthermore, Ragan (2005) and Rogerson (2007) argue that
much of the revenues from taxes on labor in Scandinavia are used to finance subsidies and
transfers to workers, which lower the effective tax rate on labor. This is a topic that deserves
more research.
       Figure 11 shows that the model with taxes also does a better job than the base case model
in accounting for the continued fall through 1993 in detrended real GDP per working-age person
in the data. Notice that the specification in which government consumption is wasted or enters
the utility function separably significantly improves the performance of the model relative to the
specification where tax revenues are lump-sum rebated. In this specification, increases in taxes
generate negative income effects that induce households to provide more labor in the market than
they would have done if the tax revenues were rebated.
       Finally, notice that the model with constant taxes does not perform better than the base
case model in accounting for the fall in hours or the length of the crisis. It is the evolution of
distortionary taxes that improves these features of the model’s performance, not their mere
presence in the model. This is because we have calibrated the parameters β and γ so that the
model is consistent with observed behavior over the period 1970–80. To induce households to
supply as much work and to invest as much as they did during 1970–80, we have to set β and γ
to higher values when there are taxes than when there are no taxes.

10. Two Sectors: Consumption and Investment

       We have defined investment in our growth accounting and base case model to be
investment in current prices deflated by the GDP deflator. In this section, we develop an
alternative model in which investment is investment in current prices deflated by the investment
deflator. In this model, there is an intratemporal relative price that plays a major role, the


                                                  21
relative price of investment to consumption. Figure 14 depicts the evolution of this relative price
over the period 1980–2005. As an aside, it is worth noting that some researchers argue that the
national accounts do not fully capture the improvements in quality experienced by investment
goods. (See, for example, Gordon 1990 and, for a more recent contribution, Cummins and
Violante 2002.)
        We model the investment sector in the simplest possible way. Let qt be the relative price
of investment goods to consumption goods. We assume that

                                                                  Xt
(45)                              I t = K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t =      .
                                                                  qt

That is, there is a production technology that transforms qt units of consumption goods into one
unit of the investment good. This specification is similar to that of Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Krusell (2000) and Rebelo (1991). The feasibility condition for the consumption good sector is

(46)                                  Ct + X t = At K tα L1t−α .

Combining (45) and (46), we obtain

(47)                                 Ct + qt I t = At K tα L1t−α ,

where

(48)                                  I t = K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t ,

and the budget constraint of the representative household becomes

(49)                                Ct + qt I t = wt Lt + rt K t .

The first-order condition that characterizes households’ consumption and savings behavior, (18),
becomes

                         Ct +1 1
(50)                          = β (α At +1 K tα+−11 L1t−+α1 + (1 − δ )qt +1 ) .
                         Ct    qt

The condition that characterizes households’ labor and leisure behavior, (17), stays the same.




                                                       22
Definition. Given sequences of productivity, At , relative prices of the investment good, qt , and

working-age population, N t , t = T0 , T0 + 1,... , and the initial capital stock, KT0 , an equilibrium

with a consumption sector and an investment sector is sequences of wages, wt , interest rates, rt ,

consumption, Ct , labor, Lt , investment, I t , and capital stocks, K t , such that

1. given the wages and interest rates, the representative household chooses consumption, labor,
    and capital to maximize the utility function (1) subject to the budget constraints (49),
    appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and the constraint on KT0 ;

2. the wages and interest rates, together with the firms’ choices of labor and capital, satisfy the
    cost minimization and zero profit conditions, (4) and (5); and

3. consumption, investment, labor, and capital satisfy the feasibility conditions (46), (47), and
    (48).

11. Calibration and Results for the Two-Sector Model with Consumption and Investment

        The introduction of the investment sector, and the consequent introduction of the relative
price of the investment good, requires that we make significant adjustments to the manner in
which we match the model with the data. First, the numeraire is the consumption good. As a
result, GDP in the data must be deflated by the consumption deflator, rather than the GDP
deflator as in the one-sector environment. Second, we have to recompute a consistent measure of
the capital stock using

                                                               Xt
(51)                                 K t +1 = (1 − δ ) K t +      ,
                                                               qt

where X t is investment deflated by the consumption deflator. Since the relative price of
investment changes every period, there is no method that is exactly equivalent to equations (8)–
(10) for choosing the initial capital stock and the depreciation rate δ . Some methods would take
seriously the vintage nature of our capital stock and country-specific depreciation rules. Here we
simply set

                                   1   2005 δ qt K t
(52)                                 ∑
                                   26 t =1980 Yt
                                                     = 0.1693




                                                      23
                                 q1960 K1960 1 1970 qt K t
(53)                                        = ∑ t =1961     ,
                                    Y1960   10         Yt

where

(54)                                      Yt = Ct + qt I t

is GDP in current prices deflated by the consumption good deflator.
        As in the model with taxes, we have to modify our calculation of the exogenous
productivity sequence,

                                                    Yt
(55)                                      At =                .
                                                 K t1−α Lαt

Once again, however, we report TFP as conventionally measured, (43), in Table 3, where now

(56)                                Yˆt = Ct + qT I t = Ct + I t

is real GDP at prices of the base year T , where qT = 1 .

        The change in the capital stock series changes the series for rt = α Yt / K t in the first-order

condition (18). Recalibrating β , we obtain β = 0.9792 and γ = 0.2846 . When we introduce
taxes and government consumption model into our two-sector model, we recalibrate β = 0.9901
and γ = 0.4026 .
        The results for the two-sector model discussed above are presented in the first two
columns of Table 3 and in Figures 15–17. The third column of Table 3 reports the results of a
numerical experiment in which we introduce taxes and government consumption into the two-
sector model. Once again, investment is equal to 0 and the inequality constraint (28) holds in
1994 in this model with taxes and government consumption. The results for the base case model
with two sectors in the second column of Table 3 are not very different from those for the base
case model with one sector in the second column of Table 1. The two-sector model does a worse
job of accounting for the depression, however, with output and hours worked falling even less
than in the one-sector model, as can be seen comparing Figures 6 and 15. This is because the
sharp fall in investment prices during the period 1990–93, seen in Figure 14, induces households
in the two-sector model to invest more than in the one-sector model. The larger capital stock
leads to higher wages and higher hours worked.


                                                       24
         These general equilibrium effects are also present, but to a lesser extent, in the results for
the two-sector model with taxes and government consumption presented in the last column of
Table 3 and in Figures 15–17. In this case, however, the introduction of two sectors results in a
modest improvement of the match of the model with the data over the results for the one-sector
model with taxes and government consumption presented in the fourth column of Table 2. In the
one-sector model with taxes and government consumption, as seen in Figure 12, hours worked
fall too much during the crisis 1989–93 compared with the data. Overall, however, the
introduction of two sectors into the model does not produce much of an improvement in the
model’s ability to account for Finnish macroeconomic performance during the crisis and
recovery.

12. Terms of Trade

         In this section, we open the model to foreign trade and subject it to terms-of-trade shocks.
As can be seen in Figure 18, the price of Finland’s imports relative to its exports—the terms of
trade—increased by almost 10 percent during the crisis period. Does this change in relative
prices help us explain the evolution of GDP during this period? We modify the baseline model
to incorporate trade with the rest of the world and to include three goods: a domestically
produced good, an imported good, and a nontraded investment good. We model Finland as a
small open economy. The price of Finnish imports, and thus the terms of trade, is exogenously
given.
         The representative household chooses consumption of the domestic good, consumption
of the imported good, and leisure to maximize

                     ∑           β t ( γ log ( v(Cd ,t , Cm ,t ) ) + (1 − γ ) log(hNt − Lt ) )
                         ∞
(57)                     t =T0



subject to the sequence of budget constraints

(58)                 pd ,t Cd ,t + pm,t Cm,t + qt ( K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t ) = wt Lt + rt K t ,

appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and a constraint on the initial stock of capital, KT0 . In

what follows, we choose the domestic good as numeraire, setting pd ,t = 1 . The price of the

investment good, relative to the domestically produced good, is qt . The relative price of the




                                                              25
imported good is pm,t . Since we assume that the export good is the same as the domestic good,

pm,t is also the terms of trade.

        The production of the domestic good, (3), and the corresponding profit maximization
conditions are the same as in the base case model, (4) and (5). The investment good is made by
combining the domestic good and the imported good using a constant elasticity of substitution
production function, which is usually referred to as the Armington aggregator,
                                                                                            1
(59)                   I t = K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t = Dt (ω I dρ,t + (1 − ω ) I mρ,t ) ρ ,

where I d ,t and I m ,t are, respectively, the use of domestic goods and imports in the production of

the investment good. The elasticity of substitution between imports and domestic goods in the
production of the investment good, the Armington elasticity, is σ = 1 (1 − ρ ) . The parameter ω
governs the proportion in which domestic and imported goods are used in production. The
parameter Dt determines the amounts of imports and domestically produced goods needed to

produce one unit of the investment good. Dt evolves over time to account for the relative price
of the investment good relative to exports.
        The firms that produce the investment good choose I d ,t and I m,t to solve

(60)                                           min I d ,t + pm ,t I m ,t
                                                                               1
                                     s.t.      Dt (ω I dρ,t + (1 − ω ) I mρ,t ) ρ ≥ I t


where I t is some target production level.
        Solving this minimization problem, together with the zero profit condition
                                                               1
(61)                      qt Dt (ω I dρ,t + (1 − ω ) I mρ,t ) ρ = I d ,t + pm,t I m ,t ,

results in the first-order conditions
                                                                               1− ρ
(62)                         1 = qtω I d ,t Dt (ω I d ,t + (1 − ω ) I m ,t )
                                            ρ −1         ρ                 ρ       ρ



                                                                                       1− ρ
(63)                    pm,t = qt (1 − ω ) I mρ,−t1 Dt (ω I dρ,t + (1 − ω ) I mρ,t )    ρ       .


                                                             26
       The feasibility constraints for the domestic good and the imported good are

(64)                              Cd ,t + I d ,t + X t = At K tα L1t−α

(65)                                     Cm , t + I m , t = M t ,

where M t is imports and X t is exports. The trade balance condition is

(66)                                       X t = pm ,t M t .

We later experiment with an alternative specification in which the trade balance is specified
exogenously.
       In choosing a functional form for the household’s utility over imports and domestic
goods, v(Cd , Cm ) , we assume that the household’s preferences over the two goods are identical
to the production technology for producing the investment good,
                                                                                 1
(67)                      v(Cd ,t , Cm ,t ) = Dt (ωCd ,t + (1 − ω ) Cm ,t ) .
                                                       ρ                     ρ   ρ



This assumption is commonly used, not because it is justified by data on the use of imports, but
because it simplifies the analysis of the model. It would be worth investigating if modifying this
assumption has significant effects on the quantitative models of trade in which it is employed.
       Defining
                                                                         1
(68)                           Ct = Dt (ωCdρ,t + (1 − ω ) Cm ,tρ ) ρ ,

we can rewrite the household’s problem as one of maximizing the utility function (1) subject to
the sequence of budget constraints

(69)                       qt (Ct + K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t ) = wt Lt + rt K t ,

appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and a constraint on the initial stock of capital, KT0 . Notice

that this formulation of the household’s problem closely resembles the one in the base case
model. Our assumption about household preferences in (67) implies that households demand
imports and domestic goods in the same proportions as investment good firms. This feature is
very convenient since now, adding up condition (68) and (59), we obtain




                                                           27
                                                                                                1
(70)                   Ct + K t +1 − (1 − δ ) K t = Dt (ω Z t + (1 − ω ) M t
                                                                ρ                       ρ
                                                                                            )   ρ   .

        We can also rewrite (64) as

(71)                                       Z t + X t = At K tα L1t−α .

        Conditions (70) and (71) are the new feasibility conditions. Rather than have
consumption good producing firms and investment good producing firms, we can model a single
type of firm that uses all of the imports, M t , and all of the domestically produced good that is

not exported, Z t , to produce a consumption-investment aggregate. Solving the problem of this
single type of firm generates first-order conditions very similar to (62) and (63):
                                                                               1− ρ
(72)                            1 = qtω Z tρ −1 Dt (ω Z tρ + (1 − ω ) M tρ )    ρ



                                                                                1− ρ
(73)                           pm,t = qt (1 − ω ) M tρ −1 Dt (ω Z tρ + M tρ )       ρ   .


Definition. Given sequences of productivity, At , the terms of trade, pm,t , shocks to the

investment-consumption good production function, Dt , working-age population, N t ,

t = T0 , T0 + 1,... , and the initial capital stock, KT0 , an equilibrium with trade and terms-of-trade

shocks is sequences of wages, wt , interest rates, rt , consumption-investment prices, qt ,

consumption, Ct , labor, Lt , capital, K t , output, Yt , imports, M t , exports, X t , and domestic

goods used in production, Z t , such that

1. given wages, interest rates, and prices, the representative household’s choices over
    consumption, labor, and capital solve the problem of maximizing the utility function (57)
    subject to the budget constraint (69), appropriate nonnegativity constraints, and the constraint
    on initial capital KT0 ;

2. the wages and interest rates, together with the domestic good producing firms’ choices of
    labor and capital, satisfy the cost minimization and zero profit conditions, (4) and (5);




                                                           28
3. the terms of trade and the price of the consumption-investment good, together with the
   consumption-investment good firm’s choices of imports and inputs of the domestic good,
   satisfy the cost minimization and zero profit conditions, (72) and (73);

4. consumption, labor, capital, inputs of the domestic good, imports, and exports satisfy the
   feasibility conditions (70) and (71);

5. trade is balanced, (66).

       We characterize the equilibrium of this model as we have in the previous sections, with
some slight modifications. First, given the terms of trade, we can solve a static problem that
determines the demand for domestic goods and imports and, most importantly, the price of the
investment and consumption goods. Second, we can incorporate this information into the
household’s optimality conditions.
       The first-order conditions from (72) and (73) can be combined to yield
                                                              1
                                          ⎛ ω pm ,t ⎞1− ρ
(74)                                 Zt = ⎜         ⎟ Mt .
                                          ⎝ 1− ω ⎠

       Substituting (74) into the profit function, and using the fact that profits must be zero, we
can solve for the price of the consumption-investment good,
                                                                                1− ρ
                                                          −ρ
                                        ⎛ 1−1ρ        1                       ⎞ −ρ
(75)                          qt = Dt ⎜ ω + (1 − ω ) pm ,t
                                     −1
                                                    1− ρ 1− ρ
                                                                              ⎟⎟ .
                                        ⎜
                                        ⎝                                      ⎠

Solving (66) and (71) for Z t and substituting it into (74) yields the demand function for imports
and domestic goods used in production,

                                            1                       1                  ρ
(76)                      M t = (1 − ω )   1− ρ    At K t Lt pm ,t ( qt Dt )1− ρ
                                                         α 1−α     ρ −1



                                           1                              ρ
(77)                             Zt = ω   1− ρ
                                                  At K tα L1t−α ( qt Dt )1− ρ

Combining the household’s optimality conditions with factor pricing equations from (4) and (5)
yields a system of equations that is very similar to those in the base case model, (21) and (22),




                                                            29
                   (1 − α ) At Ktα L−t α                         1− γ
(78)
                            qt
                                           ( hN   t   − Lt ) =
                                                                  γ
                                                                           Ct , t = T0 , T0 + 1,..., T1


                   Ct +1     ⎛        α At +1 K tα+−11 Lαt +1 ⎞
(79)                     = β ⎜1 − δ +                         ⎟ , t = T0 , T0 + 1,..., T1 − 1 .
                   Ct        ⎝               q t +1           ⎠

As in the base case model, we use the feasibility constraint to solve out Ct in (78) and (79). We

use (76) and (74) to substitute out for M t and Z t . Setting KT1 +1 = gnKT1 , we again have a system

of 2 (T1 − T0 ) − 1 nonlinear equations in 2 (T1 − T0 ) − 1 unknowns.


13. Calibration and Results for the Model with Terms-of-Trade Shocks

        The calibration of the initial capital stock and the depreciation rate is done in a similar
way as in Section 11. We choose δ and K1960 so that the following conditions are satisfied:

                                   1               δ qt Kt
                                      ∑
                                        2005
(80)                                                           = 0.1693
                                   26   t =1980
                                                qt (Ct + I t )

                                 q1960 K1960        1 1970        qt K t
(81)                                              = ∑ t =1961                .
                            q1960 (C1960 + I1960 ) 10         qt (Ct + I t )

We calibrate δ = 0.0543 . Using the first-order conditions of the representative household’s
problem, (78) and (79), we calibrate β = 0.9736 and γ = 0.2842 .
        The investment-consumption good production function adds two new production
function parameters, ω and ρ , and two new sequences of exogenous parameters, Dt and pm,t .

The parameter ρ is typically not calibrated but is chosen based on empirical estimates of the
elasticity of substitution between domestic goods and imports. There is considerable debate over
the value of this parameter (see, for example, Ruhl 2004), but a common value is ρ = 0.5 ,
corresponding to an Armington elasticity σ = 2 . We can rewrite (74) as
                                                                       1− ρ
                                         ω    ⎛ Zt                    ⎞
(82)                                        =⎜                        ⎟⎟      pm− ρ,t
                                       1 − ω ⎜⎝ pm ,t M t              ⎠




                                                                 30
and use data on the terms of trade, output, imports, and exports to calibrate ω . We use (82) to
calculate ω over 1980–2005 and take the average; ω = 0.6207 . With this value for ω , we can
compute
                                                                         1− ρ
                                                                −ρ
                                     ⎛ 1                 1             ⎞ −ρ
(83)                         Dt qt = ⎜ ω 1− ρ + (1 − ω )1− ρ pm1−,tρ   ⎟⎟
                                     ⎜
                                     ⎝                                  ⎠

and use this to find values for Dt . From the data we compute the deflator for consumption plus

investment and divide it through by the deflator for exports to produce qt . Dividing the

expression for Dt qt in (83) by qt yields the series Dt .

       We next turn to the construction of the capital stock, the depreciation rate δ , and the
productivity parameters At . We start by deflating the components of GDP in current prices by
the export price deflator. Deflating GDP minus exports plus imports produces

                                 Yt − X t + M t
(84)                                               = qt ( Ct + I t ) ;
                                        p x ,t

deflating exports produces

                                             X t
(85)                                                = Xt ;
                                             p x ,t

and deflating imports produces

                                          M t
(86)                                             = pm,t M t .
                                          p x ,t

We calculate the capital stock and the depreciation rate using the analogs of equations (52) and
(53) where

(87)                            Yt = qt (Ct + I t ) + X t − pm ,t M t

is GDP in current prices deflated by the export good deflator.




                                                      31
        Using the terms of trade pm,t and the price of consumption-investment qt , we recover

the quantities Ct + I t , X t , and M t . To relate the quantities from the national accounts to the

productivity parameter At , we substitute (64) into (70),

                                                                                                        1
(88)                    Ct + I t = Dt (ω ( At K tα L1t−α − X t ) ρ + (1 − ω ) M tρ ) ρ ,

and solve to obtain
                                        1                                                    1

                                            (( C + I )                                   )
                                    −
                                                                    − (1 − ω ) M t
                                                         ρ
                                ω       ρ
                                               t    t        Dt
                                                               −ρ                    ρ       ρ
                                                                                                 + Xt
(89)                     At =                                                                           .
                                                             K t α Lt1−α

        Notice that At is no longer a simple function of real GDP, capital, and labor. In the
growth accounting reported in Table 4, we calculate TFP using the conventional measure, (43),
where

(90)                  Yˆt = qT ( Ct + I t ) + X t − pm ,T M t = ( Ct + I t ) + X t − M t

is real GDP at prices in the base year T . Notice that, even though the trade balance in current
prices is always zero, the real trade balance is only zero when the terms of trade are equal to
those in the base period.
        The results from our open economy model are presented in the second column of Table 4
and in Figures 19–21. The model does not fully capture the levels of hours and capital stock.
Hours in the model are smaller than in the data before the crisis and larger after the crisis. Capital
is below its empirical counterpart for most of the period of analysis. Remember that the
preference parameters are calibrated to match average observed behavior over the 1970s. During
the crisis period, the model performs a little better than the base case model, with output falling
by about half as much as in the data. As in the base case model, the capital-output ratio grows
and hours worked falls, but not by as much as in the data. The model does most poorly in
generating a large response in hours worked. The decrease in the model is only 45 percent of
that in the data. We conclude that including the terms-of-trade reversal that Finland suffered
during the depression does not significantly improve the model.
        In the model with terms-of-trade shocks, we have assumed that trade is balanced every
period. In the data, as seen in Figure 22, Finland ran a small positive trade balance prior to the


                                                                    32
crisis and a large positive trade balance following the crisis. In 1998, net exports peaked at
almost 11 percent of current GDP. We incorporate the trade balance into this framework in a
very simple way. We assume that the real trade balance is exogenously given and perfectly
foreseen. Denoting real net exports as Bt , we rewrite the feasibility constraint, (71), as

(91)                              Z t + X t + Bt = At K tα L1t−α ,

so that when the trade balance is positive, there is less output to devote to producing
consumption and investment goods. The model is calibrated and computed in the same way as
before, with the addition of an extra exogenous variable, real net exports. In this calibration,
β = 0.9751 , γ = 0.2879 , and ω = 0.6152 . It is also possible to model the real net trade balance
as corresponding to exogenously fixed net lending abroad in the household’s budget constraint.
In the current specification, the real net trade balance is just a net use of domestic resources.
       The results of the experiment with an exogenous trade balance are reported in the third
column of Table 4, as well as in Figures 19–21. The results of this model are very similar to
those of the model with balanced trade except during the crisis period. During the crisis, net
exports are growing, driving down income left over for households. In our model, as in that of
Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2005), this induces households to supply more labor than they
would have done otherwise, which leads to GDP falling less than it would have done otherwise.
This effect is visible in Table 4, where hours worked during the crisis fall by 2.35 percent per
year in the model with the exogenous trade balance as compared to 3.13 percent per year in the
model with balanced trade. As Chakraborty (2006) has argued, this impact depends crucially on
the specification of the utility function. With a utility function of the sort used by Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) and Correia, Neves, and Rebelo (1995), for example,
                                                    ⎛           g t Lνt ⎞
                                 ∑
                                     ∞
(92)                                         β t log ⎜ γ Ct −           ⎟,
                                     t =T0
                                                    ⎝            ν ⎠
in which consumption enters in a quasi-linear manner, this income effect disappears, and hours
worked fall roughly as much in the specification with the exogenous trade balance as they do in
the specification with balanced trade.




                                                        33
14. Chain-Weighted Quantity Indexes

       Currently, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis in its National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) and the U.N. Statistics Division in its System of National Accounts (SNA)
recommend the use of chain-weighted price indexes to deflate GDP. In this section, we explain
how the analysis of the model with taxes, the model with investment, and the model with trade
would be altered if the underlying data were chain weighted. In 2006, Finland changed the real
variables in its national income accounts to Laspeyres chain-weighted quantity indexes. It
provides chain-weighted quantity indexes starting in 2000. Real variables for 1975–2000 are
measured in prices of the base year 2000, and those for earlier years are measured in prices of the
earlier based years spliced with the data of the base year 2000.
       Before discussing chain weighting, it is worth making a couple of points. First, the
distinction between chain-weighted data and data in base period prices is only relevant in the
analysis of a model in which there is some component of GDP whose relative price can vary
with respect to the other components. This is not the case in the base case model. It is the case,
however, in the three other models analyzed in this paper. In the model with taxes, the price of
consumption relative to investment is 1 + τ tc ; in the model with investment, the price of

investment relative to consumption is qt ; and, in the model with trade, the price of consumption-

investment relative to exports is qt while the price of imports relative to exports is pm,t . Second,

there are different methodologies for chain weighting. The United States’ NIPA accounting uses
Fisher chain weights. So does Statistics Canada. Most countries that follow U.N. SNA national
income accounting currently use Laspeyres chain weighting, although both Fisher weighting and
Paasche weighting are allowed. When the United States switched to chain weighting, it
recalculated real GDP and its components, going back to 1929, as chain-weighted quantity
indexes. In contrast, when Finland switched to chain weighing, it spliced the chain-weighted
data that started in 2000 with earlier data measured in base period prices.
       We discuss the decomposition of real GDP into its components that is relevant for the
model with investment when the data use Laspeyres chain weighting. Recall that in that model,
we choose consumption to be the numeraire, where consumption corresponds to all components
of GDP that are not included in investment. Here is our problem: We are given data on real
GDP and real investment, Yˆt and Iˆt , GDP and investment in current prices, Yt and It . We


                                                 34
know that C t = Yt − It is consumption in current prices. We want to calculate real consumption

Cˆt . With real data measured in base period prices, there is no problem in calculating

(93)                                         Cˆ t = Yˆt − Iˆt .

The price deflator for consumption is then simply found as

                                                          C t
(94)                                            pc ,t =        .
                                                          Cˆ t

        With chain-weighted variables, a problem arises because the decomposition of real GDP
into its components is not additive. That is, equation (93) does not hold. Instead,
                                             p Cˆ + qt Iˆt
(95)                                    Yˆt = c ,t t       ,
                                                   p y ,t

where

                                                 pc ,t Cˆ t + qt Iˆt
(96)                                 p y ,t =                            ,
                                                pc ,t −1Cˆ t + qt −1 Iˆt

which implies that

                                       p Cˆ + qt −1 Iˆt ˆ
(97)                             Yˆt = c ,t −1 t                     Yt −1 ,
                                      pc ,t −1Cˆ t −1 + qt −1 Iˆt −1

where YˆT = YT is the reference year. When working with data in base year prices, the term base
year identifies the year whose relative prices are used in each period of the data series, that is, the
fixed prices. In chain-weighted data, the base year is always changing. In equation (97), the
prices from the previous year are used to weight the current year’s real quantities, which is why
this procedure is referred to as Laspeyres chain weighting. We rewrite (97) as

                                        Ct −1 ˆ It −1 ˆ
                                               Ct +       It
                                    ˆ   Cˆt −1      Iˆt −1 ˆ
(98)                               Yt =                      Yt −1
                                                Y    t −1


and calculate




                                                             35
                                                Cˆ ⎛ Y          I        ⎞
(99)                                      Cˆ t = t −1 ⎜ t −1 Yˆ − t −1 Iˆt ⎟ ,
                                                C t −1 ⎝ Yˆt −1 Iˆt −1 ⎠

which is a first-order difference equation that we can use to calculate a series for Cˆt to use in the

model. The initial condition is CˆT = CT , where T is the reference year used by the statistical
agency in computing the real data, which for Finland is 2000.
        After performing numerical experiments with the model, we can transform our results
into a chain-weighted quantity index for GDP using the analog of (97),

                                                   C + qt −1 I t ˆ
(100)                                        Yˆt = t                   Yt −1 ,
                                                  Ct −1 + qt −1 I t −1

where YˆT = CT + IT .
        Working with Fisher chain weights is slightly more complicated, but the same ideas
apply. Real GDP is still computed using (95), but the GDP deflator, p y ,t , is now of the form

                                                                 1                            1
                                   ⎛ pc ,t Cˆ t −1 + qt Iˆt −1 ⎞ 2 ⎛ pc ,t Cˆ t + qt Iˆt     ⎞2
(101)                    p y ,t   =⎜                           ⎟ ⎜                           ⎟ ,
                                   ⎜ p Cˆ + q Iˆ ⎟ ⎜ p Cˆ + q Iˆ                             ⎟
                                   ⎝ c ,t −1 t −1 t −1 t −1 ⎠ ⎝ c ,t −1 t          t −1 t    ⎠

which is the geometric average of a Laspeyres price index and a Paasche price index. An
advantage of using a Fisher price index is that the quantity index is also of the Fisher form
                                                             1                           1
                              ⎛ p Cˆ + qt −1 Iˆt ⎞ 2 ⎛ pc ,t Cˆ t + qt Iˆt ⎞ 2
(102)                   Yˆt = ⎜ c ,t −1 t              ⎟ ⎜                  ⎟ Yˆ .
                              ⎜ p Cˆ + q Iˆ ⎟ ⎜ p Cˆ + q Iˆ ⎟ t −1
                              ⎝ c ,t −1 t −1 t −1 t −1 ⎠ ⎝ c ,t t −1 t t −1 ⎠

After substituting out the consumption prices, we have

                   C t −1 ˆ 2 ˆ ⎛              Yˆ 2 Y            ⎞ Yˆ 2        Yt −1  ˆ
(103)                      Ct + Ct ⎜ qt −1 Iˆt − t t −21 qt Iˆt −1 ⎟ − t                 Ct Ct −1 = 0
                   Cˆ t −1         ⎝             Yt Yˆt −1        ⎠ Yt
                                                                                Yˆt −21

which is a quadratic first-order difference equation in Cˆt , where again the initial condition is

CˆT = CT .
        As we have explained, the data on real GDP and its components in Finland for the period
2000–2005 are Laspeyres chain-weighted quantity indexes. This implies that the data for


                                                                 36
2002–5 differ from real data measured in prices of the base year 2000. The reference year for
the chain-weighted data is the same as the base year for the fixed base year data, 2000.
Furthermore, for Laspeyres chain-weighted data constructed as in (97), the data for the year after
the reference year are the same as the real data measured in prices of the reference year. We have
redone the numerical experiments for the model with taxes, the two-sector model with
consumption and investment, and the model with terms-of-trade shocks taking into account that
the data for Finland 2002–5 are chain-weighted data, using equations like (99) to disaggregate
real GDP into the components relevant for the model and using equations like (97) to construct
real GDP in the results of our numerical experiments. These recalculations have no noticeable
impact on our results because so little of our data is chain weighted. As we move further from
the reference year, however, chain-weighted data can look very different from real data
measured in prices of a fixed base year. Suppose, for example, that we were to analyze the Great
Depression of the 1930s in the United States employing a model in which relative price changes
play a role. Using the Fisher chain-weighted data with reference year 2000 now published by the
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis would produce significant differences from an analysis that
uses real data with fixed base year price weights.

15. Endogenous Productivity

       In each of the three variants of the model that we have studied—the model with taxes and
government consumption, the model with a consumption sector and an investment sector, and
the open economy model with terms-of trade shocks—the exogenous productivity sequence that
enters into the model differs from conventionally measured TFP. In this section, we ask whether
any of these variants of our model help explain the TFP drop in 1989–92.
       Figure 23 compares the sequence for TFP in the base case model, (12), with the
productivity sequences for each of the three variants of the model: (42) for the model with taxes
and government, (55) for the model with consumption and investment, and (89) for the model
with terms-of-trade shocks. In Figure 23, each productivity sequence is reported as At1/(1−α )
detrended by a growth rate of 2 percent per year. One view of what a successful model of
endogenous TFP would be is that it should generate a horizontal line for this series. Of course,
even that would leave the 2 percent growth trend unexplained.




                                                 37
       In addition to the productivity sequence At1/(1−α ) for the model with terms-of-trade shocks,

Figure 23 includes the sequence ( At / qt )
                                          1/(1−α )
                                                     , where qt is the price is the price of consumption-

investment relative to exports, (75). The parameter At1/(1−α ) based on (89) is a measure of
productivity in producing exports. It increases rapidly, going from 62.0 in 1980 to 167.3 in 2005
even after being detrended by 2 percent per year, and is very volatile, falling by 8.7 percent

between 1990 and 1993. Dividing by qt makes ( At / qt )
                                                               1/(1−α )
                                                                          into a measure of productivity in

producing the consumption-investment aggregate, which is more comparable with the
productivity measures for the other variants of the model.
       Notice how poorly the three variants of the model fare as theories of TFP during the
crisis. In each of these models, the exogenous productivity falls even more during the period
1989–92 than does base case TFP. This probably comes as no surprise for the model with taxes
and government consumption because we do not expect GDP at factor prices to have a
systematic countercyclical relation with GDP at market prices. It also comes as no surprise for
the model with consumption and investment because Figure 14 indicates that the relative price of
investment fell sharply during the depression, making it even more difficult to explain the drop
in TFP. Perhaps, it is surprising to some that the model with the terms-of-trade shocks does so
poorly. As Kehoe and Ruhl (2007) explain, however, adverse terms-of-trade shocks do not
translate into TFP shocks because conventional national income accounting strips them out of
measures of real GDP.
       To say that the models do poorly in explaining the TFP drop during the depression is not
to say that they do poorly everywhere. Figure 23 indicates that much of the spectacular growth
in Finland over the period 1993–2005 is due to declines in the relative price of investment.
Nonetheless, the major question left open by our analysis is: Why did TFP fall so sharply in
1989–92?

16. Conclusions

       Our analysis of the 1989–93 depression in Finland is an example of how the application
of a methodology can guide research. A good methodology provides discipline to the researcher;
in the depressions methodology developed by Cole and Ohanian (1999, 2007) and Kehoe and
Prescott (2007), this discipline is provided by growth accounting. The candidate explanation not


                                                      38
only must replicate the behavior of GDP, but also must manifest itself in the behavior of
investment, labor, and total factor productivity. The numerical experiments with the base case
model presented under Section 7 indicate that the depression in Finland is only partially
accounted for by TFP, with the remainder due to a decrease in hours worked. Considering
different variants of the base case model, we find that incorporating the observed changes in tax
policies substantially improves the model’s ability to replicate the data.
       We have devoted a large fraction of our analysis—much more than that found in a typical
journal article—to a discussion of the mapping between models and data. The key aspect of
quantitative theory, such as the depressions methodology, is the careful comparison of models
and data. To make these comparisons meaningful, we have used our models to determine how to
measure variables, such as productivity, from the data, and we have used national accounting
definitions to determine how to construct variables, such as GDP, from the models in ways that
are comparable to the data. Although our exposition of the four models above may be useful in
other circumstances, the map between a model and data is intrinsically model specific.




                                                 39
Appendix A: Computational Algorithm

         This appendix describes the MATLAB programs “depressions.m” and “solveModel.m”
that solve for the model’s equilibrium by finding the solution to the system of equations derived
in Section 6. These programs, the necessary input files, and the calibration data can be found at
www.greatdepressionsbook.com.

Program Inputs

         The user must provide two files to the program. The first file should be named
“param.txt” and consist of a single column vector of the parameters β , γ , δ , α , g , and KT0 .

The second file should be named “data.txt” and contain a (T1 − T0 ) × 6 matrix of values: levels of

TFP, At , working-age population (in thousands), N t , available hours, N t h , consumption tax
rates, labor tax rates, and capital tax rates. These files must be in a form that can be interpreted
by MATLAB. One method is to enter the data into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and save the
file as a tab delimited file.

Program Output

         Upon successful completion, the program will save a (T1 − T0 ) × 6 matrix of values to the

file “output.xls,” which is a tab delimited file. This file can be opened in Excel for inspection or
to create plots. The data can also be directly manipulated in MATLAB. The variables in the file
are Yt N t , X t Yt , Lt    ( hN ) , C
                                 t      t   Yt , K t Yt , and rt − δ .


Solution Method

         Choosing KT0 +1 , KT0 + 2 ,..., KT1 and LT0 , LT0 +1 ,..., LT1 to satisfy (25) for t = T0 , T0 + 1,..., T1 , and

(26) for t = T0 , T0 + 1,..., T1 − 1 requires solving 2 (T1 − T0 ) − 1 equations in 2 (T1 − T0 ) − 1

unknowns. The accompanying MATLAB program uses Newton’s method to solve the system of

equations. Define the stacked vector of variables x = [ KT0 +1 , KT0 + 2 ,..., KT1 , LT0 , LT0 +1 ,..., LT1 ]′ and

arrange the system of equations so that they are of the form f ( x ) = 0 , where 0 is a

2 (T1 − T0 ) − 1 vector of zeros. The algorithm involves making an initial guess at the variables,



                                                           40
x 0 , and updating the guess by xi +1 = x i − Df ( x i ) −1 f ( x i ) , where Df ( x i ) is the matrix of partial

derivatives of f ( x) evaluated at xi . The system of equations does not have closed-form

expressions for the partial derivatives needed to compute Df ( x i ) , and so the derivatives have to
be evaluated numerically. A solution is obtained when the function, evaluated at the new iterate
of x , has a maximum error less than some value ε , where ε is a small number. Although this
method of solving a system of nonlinear equations can converge to a solution quickly, this
method is not globally convergent and can become stuck away from a zero of f ( x) or may not

converge at all. The initial guess, x 0 , is important. Further details on the implementation of
Newton’s method can be found in Press, Flannery, Teukolsky, and Vetterling (2002).
        To increase the probability of the algorithm converging to the correct answer, we solve a
sequence of models, beginning with a simple version of the model, which we know how to solve,
and progressing to the model that we would like to solve. The first model we solve is the one in
which TFP, population, and available hours are constant and equal to their average values from
1980 to 2005, and the tax rates are all zero. The solution to this problem is relatively easy to
find. The next model takes TFP, population, available hours, and tax rates to be convex
combinations of the constant values used in the initial model and the actual values of TFP,
population, available hours, and tax rates from the data. Let λ be the weight on the constant
values, so that (1 − λ ) is the weight on the values from the data. The algorithm requires

repeatedly decrementing λ and solving the resulting model, each time using the solution to the
model before it as the initial guess. The algorithm proceeds until it solves the case in which
λ = 0 , which corresponds to the model whose solution we desire.
        If the value of investment becomes negative in some period t , we replace the
corresponding equation (26) with equation (27). As we change λ , we check that the inequality
(28) holds. If it does not, we replace the corresponding (27) with (26).




                                                        41
Appendix B: Construction of Tax Rates

       Computing each tax rate requires data on the revenues collected from the tax and the tax
base. The data on the tax bases—consumption, income, and investment—are from the national
income accounts, and the data on the tax revenues collected are from the OECD’s tax revenue
database. A complete description of the data and further details of the tax construction are
provided in the data appendix at www.greatdepressionsbook.com.

Effective Consumption Tax Rates

Rcon ,t = revenue from general taxes on goods and services plus excise taxes

Ct = consumption of household and nonprofit institutions serving households

                                                         Rcon ,t
                                             τ tc =                  .
                                                      Ct − Rcon ,t


Taxes on Household Income

       Taxes on labor and capital are computed in two steps: First, we compute the aggregate
marginal tax rate on household income, τ th . Second, we compute the labor and capital tax rates.


Effective Income Tax Rates

Rinc ,t = revenue from taxes on income, profits, and capital gains of individuals

CEt = compensation of employees

SSEt = employers’ contribution to social security

M t = households’ gross operating surplus and mixed income

δ K tH = households’ consumption of fixed capital

                                                          Rinc ,t
                                 τ th = μ                                .
                                            CEt − SSEt + M t − δ K tH

       The progressivity of the income tax system implies that marginal tax rates are larger than
the average tax rates we are computing. The term μ is an adjustment factor that transforms
average tax rates to marginal tax rates. Following Prescott (2002, 2007), we set μ = 1.6 .


                                                       42
Effective Labor Tax Rate

       To compute labor and capital income taxes, we must assign the income categories in the
data to either capital income or labor income. The problem lies in the category Household Gross
Operating Surplus and Mixed Income. Some of this income is earned by capital and some by
labor. We make the assumption that capital’s share of this income is α , as it is in the aggregate
production function.

Rsoc ,t = total social security contributions

R pay ,t = taxes on payroll and workforce

CEt = compensation of employees

SSEt = employers’ contribution to social security

M t = household gross operating surplus and mixed income

δ K tH = households’ consumption of fixed capital
Tt = taxes less subsidies, as measured in the national accounts

Yt = gross domestic product


                      τ =
                        A
                               (                                             )
                            τ th CEt − SSEt + (1 − α ) ( M t − δ K tH ) + Rsoc ,t + R pay ,t
                                                                                               .
                       t
                                                    (1 − α ) (Yt − Tt )

Effective Capital Tax Rates

δ K t = total consumption of fixed capital

δ K tH = households’ consumption of fixed capital
Rcorp ,t = taxes on income, profits, and capital gains of corporations

R prop ,t = recurrent taxes on immovable property

R fin ,t = taxes on financial and capital transactions

                                 τ thα ( M t − δ K tH ) + Rcorp ,t + R prop ,t + R fin ,t
                             τ =k
                                                                                          .
                               t
                                                α (Yt − Tt ) − δ K t




                                                          43
References

Böckerman, Petri, and Jaakko Kiander. 2002a. Determination of average working time in
Finland. Labour 16 (September): 557–68.

Böckerman, Petri, and Jaakko Kiander. 2002b. Labour markets in Finland during the great
depressions of the twentieth century. Scandinavian Economic History Review 50 (2): 55–70.

Chakraborty, Suparna. 2006. Modeling sudden stops: The role of preferences. Manuscript.
Baruch College, City University of New York.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2005. Sudden stops and output drops.
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95 (May): 381–87.

Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 1999. The Great Depression in the United States from a
neoclassical perspective. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 23 (Winter):
2–24.

Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 2007. A second look at the U.S. Great Depression from a
neoclassical perspective. In Timothy J. Kehoe and Edward C. Prescott, editors, Great
depressions of the twentieth century. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 21–58.

Conesa, Juan Carlos, and Timothy J. Kehoe. 2007. Productivity, taxes, and hours worked in
Spain, 1970–2005. Manuscript. University of Minnesota.

Correia, Isabel, João Neves, and Sergio Rebelo. 1995. Business cycles in a small open
economy. European Economic Review 39 (June): 1089–113.

Cummins, Jason G., and Giovanni L. Violante. 2002. Investment-specific technical change in
the US (1947–2000): Measurement and macroeconomic consequences. Review of Economic
Dynamics 5 (April): 243–84.

Gollin, Douglas. 2002. Getting income shares right. Journal of Political Economy 110 (April):
458–74.

Gordon, Robert J. 1990. The measurement of durable goods prices. University of Chicago
Press.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Enrique Mendoza, and Linda L. Tesar. 2007. Trade and transition
dynamics in the Finnish depression. Manuscript. University of Michigan.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman. 1988. Investment, capacity
utilization, and the real business cycles. American Economic Review 78 (June): 402–17.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. 2000. The role of investment-specific
technological change in the business cycle. European Economic Review 44 (January): 91–115.



                                              44
Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. 1995. Recursive methods for computing equilibria in
business cycle models. In Thomas F. Cooley, editor, Frontiers of business cycle research.
Princeton University Press, 39–64.

Hayashi, Fumio, and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. The 1990s in Japan: A lost decade. Review of
Economic Dynamics 5 (January): 206–35.

Hayashi, Fumio, and Edward C. Prescott. 2007. The 1990s in Japan: A lost decade. In Timothy
J. Kehoe and Edward C. Prescott, editors, Great depressions of the twentieth century. Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 257–86.

Kehoe, Timothy J., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. Great depressions of the twentieth century.
Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (January): 1–18.

Kehoe, Timothy J., and Edward C. Prescott, editors. 2007. Great depressions of the twentieth
century. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Kehoe, Timothy J., and Kim J. Ruhl. 2007. Are shocks to the terms of trade shocks to
productivity? Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 391.

Kiander, Jaakko. 2004. The evolution of the Finnish model in the 1990s: From depression to
high-tech boom. Government Institute for Economic Research (VATT) Discussion Paper 344.

Kiander, Jaakko, and Pentti Vartia. 1996. The great depression of the 1990s in Finland. Finnish
Economic Papers, 9 (Spring): 72–88.

Koskela, Erkki, and Roope Uusitalo. 2004. Unintended convergence: How Finnish
unemployment reached the European level. Labour Institute for Economic Research, Discussion
Paper 188.

Ljunge, Martin, and Kelly S. Ragan. 2004. Who responded to the tax reform of the century?
Manuscript. University of Chicago.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Assaf Razin, and Linda Tesar. 1994. Effective tax rates in
macroeconomics: Cross-country estimates of tax rates on factor incomes and consumption.
Journal of Monetary Economics 34 (December): 297–323.

Ohanian, Lee, Andrea Raffo, and Richard Rogerson. 2006. Long-term changes in labor supply
and taxes: Evidence from OECD countries, 1956–2004. National Bureau of Economics
Research Working Paper 12786.

Prescott, Edward C. 2002. Richard T. Ely lecture: Prosperity and depression. American
Economic Review 92 (May): 1–15.




                                              45
Prescott, Edward C. 2007. Prosperity and depression. In Timothy J. Kehoe and Edward C.
Prescott, editors, Great depressions of the twentieth century. Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, 403–26.

Press, William H., Brian P. Flannery, Saul A. Teukolsky, and William T. Vetterling. 2002.
Numerical recipes in C++: The art of scientific computing. Cambridge University Press.

Ragan, Kelly S. 2005. Taxes, transfers, and time use: Fiscal policy in a household production
model. Manuscript. University of Chicago.

Rebelo, Sergio. 1991. Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth. Journal of Political
Economy 99 (June): 500–521.

Rogerson, Richard. 2007. Taxation and market work: Is Scandinavia an outlier? National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12890.

Ruhl, Kim J. 2004. The elasticity puzzle in international economics. Manuscript. University of
Texas at Austin.




                                              46
                          Table 1

               Base case experiment for Finland:
           Decomposition of average annual changes
          in real output per working-age person (%)

                                                     Model:
                                      Model:         Myopic
                         Data        Base case     expectations
Growth 1980–89
change in Y/N
                             2.92          3.18            3.21
  due to TFP
                             3.13          3.13            3.13
  due to K/Y
                            -0.17          -0.07          -0.08
  due to L/N
                            -0.03          0.12            0.16
Crisis 1989–93
change in Y/N
                            -3.14          -0.48           0.98
  due to TFP
                             0.05          0.05            0.05
  due to K/Y
                             2.77          1.54            1.03
  due to L/N
                            -5.96          -2.08          -0.11
Recovery 1993–2005
change in Y/N
                             3.33          4.09            3.64
  due to TFP
                             4.04          4.04            4.04
  due to K/Y
                            -1.58          -0.38          -0.34
  due to L/N
                             0.87          0.43           -0.06




                             47
                                 Table 2

                 Government sector experiment for Finland:
                  Decomposition of average annual changes
                 in real output per working–age person (%)

                                      Model:                     Model:
                                     Constant      Model:       Taxes and
                          Data        taxes        Taxes       government
Growth 1980–89
change in Y/N                 2.92          3.12        1.20         1.68
  due to TFP                  3.13          2.95        3.18         3.17
  due to K/Y                 −0.17          0.07        0.54         0.67
  due to L/N                 −0.03          0.10       −2.52        −2.17
Crisis 1989–93
change in Y/N                −3.14         −1.16       −5.55        −5.30
  due to TFP                  0.05         −0.09        1.15         0.68
  due to K/Y                  2.77          1.96        2.80         2.66
  due to L/N                 −5.96         −3.03       −9.51        −8.64
Recovery 1993–2005
change in Y/N                 3.33          4.00        4.22         4.23
  due to TFP                  4.04          3.93        3.50         3.69
  due to K/Y                 −1.58         −0.56       −2.07        −2.01
  due to L/N                  0.87          0.64        2.80         2.55




                                     48
                        Table 3

        Investment sector experiment for Finland:
         Decomposition of average annual changes
        in real output per working–age person (%)

                                                 Model:
                                   Model:       Taxes and
                       Data       Base case    government
Growth 1980–89
change in Y/N              2.92                      1.42
                                        2.97
  due to TFP               3.23                      3.16
                                        3.06
  due to K/Y              −0.27                      0.07
                                       −0.53
  due to L/N              −0.03                     −1.81
                                        0.44
Crisis 1989–93
change in Y/N             −3.14                     −4.55
                                        0.22
  due to TFP               0.10                     −0.17
                                       −0.29
  due to K/Y               2.72                      1.41
                                        0.65
  due to L/N              −5.96                     −5.80
                                       −0.14
Recovery 1993–2005
change in Y/N              3.33                      4.51
                                        4.48
  due to TFP               3.74                      3.48
                                        3.83
  due to K/Y              −1.27                     −1.20
                                        0.49
  due to L/N               0.87                      2.23
                                        0.16




                           49
                           Table 4

             Foreign sector experiment for Finland:
            Decomposition of average annual changes
           in real output per working-age person (%)

                                                     Model:
                                      Model:        Exogenous
                         Data        Base case    trade balance
Growth 1980–89
change in Y/N                2.92          3.36            3.55
  due to TFP                 3.15          3.16            3.23
  due to K/Y                -0.19         -0.34           -0.19
  due to L/N                -0.03          0.54            0.51
Crisis 1989–93
change in Y/N               -3.14         -1.60           -0.79
  due to TFP                 0.07         -0.47           -0.82
  due to K/Y                 2.75          2.00            2.38
  due to L/N                -5.96         -3.13           -2.35
Recovery 1993–2005
change in Y/N                3.33          3.97            3.81
  due to TFP                 4.06          4.31            4.47
  due to K/Y                -1.59         -0.62           -0.76
  due to L/N                 0.87          0.27            0.10




                                50
                                                         Figure 1.
                               Real GDP per working-age person in the United States, 1900–2005

                     1600
                       4


                       3
                      800

                                                                            GDP
Index (1900 = 100)




                      400
                       2
                                                                            Trend


                       1
                      200




                       0
                      100




                      -150
                        1900            1920          1940           1960           1980         2000

                                                         Figure 2.
                                   Real GDP per working-age person in Finland, 1900–2005

                       4
                     1600




                       3
                      800                                                    GDP
 Index (1900 = 100)




                       2
                      400                                                             Trend



                       1
                      200



                       0
                      100




                      -150
                        1900            1920          1940           1960           1980         2000




                                                             51
                                                                       Figure 3.
                                          Detrended real GDP per working-age person in Finland
                                            during the depressions of the 1930s and the 1990s

                         105


                                                                                     1930s (T0 = 1928)
                         100
Index (T0 = 100)




                                 95



                                 90



                                 85
                                                                                            1990s (T0 = 1989)

                                 80
                                      0   1          2    3       4            5       6      7            8             9         10
                                                                              t-T0

                                                                       Figure 4.
                                              Growth accounting for the United States, 1970–2005

                                 340


                                 300


                                 260
            Index (1970 = 100)




                                 220


                                 180                                                                       Y/N

                                 140                                                                                   A1/(1−α )

                                 100
                                                                L/ N                              ( K / Y )α /(1−α )
                                  60
                                   1970       1975       1980          1985          1990      1995              2000              2005




                                                                          52
                                                          Figure 5.
                                        Growth accounting for Finland, 1970–2005

                        340


                        300
                                                                                             A1/(1−α )
                        260
Index (1970 = 100)




                                                                                                         Y/N
                        220


                        180


                        140

                                                                                             ( K / Y )α /(1−α )
                        100

                                                                     L/ N
                         60
                          1970   1975          1980       1985         1990          1995        2000             2005



                                                          Figure 6.
                                                  Base case model:
                                 Detrended real GDP per working-age person in Finland

                        130

                        120
                                                      Model with myopic expectations
                        110
   Index (1989 = 100)




                        100                                                        Base case model

                         90

                         80                                             Data

                         70

                         60

                         50
                          1980          1985             1990               1995            2000                  2005




                                                                53
                                             Figure 7.
                                        Base case model:
                          Hours worked per working-age person in Finland

                 30

                                                 Model with myopic
                                                 expectations
                 25
                                                       Base case model
Hours per week




                 20                                              Data




                 15




                 10
                  1980     1985           1990              1995            2000               2005

                                             Figure 8.
                                         Base case model:
                                   Capital-output ratio in Finland

                 4.5


                 4.0

                                                          Data
                 3.5
                                                                         Model with
                                                                         myopic expectations
Ratio




                 3.0
                                                   Base case model

                 2.5


                 2.0


                 1.5
                   1980     1985           1990             1995            2000               2005




                                                  54
                                                   Figure 9.
                                               Tax rates in Finland

                 80


                 70


                 60                       Labor income tax


                 50
Percent




                 40
                                           Consumption tax

                 30


                 20
                                           Capital income tax
                 10
                  1970   1975           1980       1985         1990     1995          2000   2005

                                                   Figure 10.
                                       Government consumption in Finland

                 26




                 24
Percent of GDP




                 22




                 20




                 18
                  1980          1985             1990             1995          2000          2005




                                                        55
                                                       Figure 11.
                                             Model with government sector:
                                  Detrended real GDP per working-age person in Finland

                     130

                     120
                                                                          Model with constant taxes
                     110
Index (1989 = 100)




                              Model with taxes
                     100      and government

                      90                                                 Data

                      80

                      70                                                          Model with taxes

                      60

                      50
                       1980            1985           1990           1995             2000            2005



                                                       Figure 12.
                                             Model with government sector:
                                     Hours worked per working-age person in Finland

                     30

                           Model with taxes and government
                                                                          Model with constant taxes
                     25
Hours per week




                                                                  Data
                     20
                                                                                  Model with taxes


                     15




                     10
                      1980            1985            1990          1995             2000             2005




                                                             56
                                                          Figure 13.
                                                 Model with government sector:
                                                 Capital-output ratio in Finland

                  4.5

                                                   Model with taxes
                  4.0

                                                                  Data
                  3.5
                                                                                         Model with
                                                                                         constant taxes
Ratio




                  3.0
                              Model with taxes
                              and government
                  2.5


                  2.0


                  1.5
                    1980                 1985            1990            1995          2000               2005

                                                          Figure 14.
                                             Relative price of investment in Finland

                        110


                        105


                        100
   Index (1989 = 100)




                        95


                        90


                        85


                        80


                        75
                         1980             1985            1990           1995          2000           2005




                                                                 57
                                                  Figure 15.
                                         Model with investment sector:
                              Detrended real GDP per working-age person in Finland

                     130
                                                        Base case model with investment
                     120

                     110
Index (1989 = 100)




                     100

                      90                                           Data

                      80

                      70

                      60                         Model with investment and taxes and government

                      50
                       1980        1985          1990             1995           2000          2005



                                                  Figure 16.
                                        Model with investment sector:
                                Hours worked per working-age person in Finland

                     30

                                                             Base case model with investment


                     25
  Hours per week




                                                                    Data

                     20




                     15
                                            Model with investment and taxes and government


                     10
                      1980        1985           1990             1995           2000          2005




                                                        58
                                                        Figure 17.
                                          Model with investment sector:
                                          Capital-output ratio in Finland

                     4.5


                     4.0


                     3.5

                                                               Data
Ratio




                     3.0
                                                                                    Base case model
                                                                                    with investment
                     2.5


                     2.0
                                                       Model with investment and taxes and government

                     1.5
                       1980       1985                 1990           1995           2000               2005

                                                        Figure 18.
                                             Relative prices in Finland

                     130




                     120
                              pm ,t (terms of trade)
Index (1989 = 100)




                     110




                     100




                      90
                                     qt (price of consumption-investment relative to exports)

                      80
                       1980       1985                 1990           1995           2000               2005




                                                              59
                                                       Figure 19.
                                               Model with foreign sector:
                                  Detrended real GDP per working-age person in Finland

                     130
                                   Open economy model with exogenous trade balance
                     120

                     110
                                                                                Base case
Index (1989 = 100)




                                                                                open economy model
                     100

                      90

                      80                                     Data

                      70

                      60

                      50
                       1980            1985          1990           1995             2000          2005



                                                       Figure 20.
                                               Model with foreign sector:
                                     Hours worked per working-age person in Finland

                     30
                              Open economy model with exogenous trade balance


                     25
                                                                    Base case open economy model
Hours per week




                     20                                              Data



                     15




                     10
                      1980            1985           1990           1995             2000          2005




                                                            60
                                             Figure 21.
                                     Model with foreign sector:
                                    Capital-output ratio in Finland

              4.5


              4.0
                       Open economy model
                                                          Data
                       with exogenous trade balance
              3.5
Ratio




              3.0

                                          Base case open economy model
              2.5


              2.0


              1.5
                1980         1985           1990            1995         2000   2005

                                             Figure 22.
                                       Trade balance in Finland

              15




              10
Percent GDP




               5




               0




              -5
               1980         1985            1990           1995          2000   2005




                                                   61
                                                     Figure 23.
                           Detrended exogenous productivity in variants of the Finland model

                     120

                     115                                         Open economy
                                                                      A
                     110
                                                                                            Taxes and
                                                                                            government
Index (1989 = 100)




                     105

                     100

                     95
                                                                            Investment
                               Base case
                     90

                     85
                           Open economy
                     80         A/q

                     75
                      1980            1985           1990            1995            2000           2005




                                                            62
