NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL FLOWS TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
THE ALLOCATION PUZZLE
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Olivier Jeanne
Working Paper 13602
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13602

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

We would like to thank Philippe Bacchetta, Chris Carroll, Francesco Caselli, Kerstin Gerling, Peter
Henry, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Pete Klenow, Alberto Martin, Romain Ranciere, Assaf Razin, Damiano
Sandri, Federico Sturzenegger for useful comments and especially Chang-Tai Hsieh and Chad Jones
for insightful discussions. We also thank seminar participants at Stanford University, MIT, Brown
University and Johns Hopkins University, the 2006 NBER-IFM summer institute (Cambridge), 2007
AEA meetings (Chicago) and 2007 CEPR meeting on Global Interdependence (Dublin), the 2007
European Summer Symposium in International Macroeconomics (ESSIM), the First Paris School of
Economics Workshop in International Finance. Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas thanks the NSF for financial
support (grants SES-0519217 and SES-0519242). The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board, its management,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Olivier Jeanne. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation Puzzle
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Olivier Jeanne
NBER Working Paper No. 13602
November 2007
JEL No. F36,F43
ABSTRACT
According to the consensus view in growth and development economics, cross country differences
in per-capita income largely reflect differences in countries' total factor productivity. We argue that
this view has powerful implications for patterns of capital flows: everything else equal, countries with
faster productivity growth should invest more, and attract more foreign capital. We then show that
the pattern of net capital flows across developing countries is not consistent with this prediction. If
anything, capital seems to flow more to countries that invest and grow less. We argue that this result
-- which we call the allocation puzzle -- constitutes an important challenge for economic research,
and discuss some possible research avenues to solve the puzzle.

Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
UC Berkeley
693 Evans Hall, #3880
Economics Department
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu
Olivier Jeanne
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
OJEANNE@imf.org

1

Introduction

Between the years 1980 and 2000, the investment to GDP ratio averaged 32 percent in Korea
and only 2.8 percent in Madagascar. Over the same period, Korea experienced an economic
miracle, with a growth rate of output per worker of 5.4 percent per year, whereas Madagascar was less successful—output per worker declined by 1.3 percent per year. By 2000,
PPP-adjusted output per worker reached $22,022 in Korea and only $1,599 in Madagascar.
Modern growth theory teaches us how to interpret such enormous differences in economic
performance. Hall and Jones (1999) and the subsequent literature on development accounting (see Caselli (2004)) argue conclusively that a substantial share of the differences in output
per worker can be attributed to productivity. Indeed, standard growth decomposition exercises tell us that total factor productivity grew by 4.5 percent per year in Korea between
1980 and 2000, whereas it fell by 1.1 percent per year in Madagascar.
What does this imply for international capital flows? The standard growth model delivers
an unambiguous answer to this question. High productivity growth in countries like Korea
increases the marginal product of capital, which stimulates investment. Korea should have
financed a share of its rapidly growing capital stock with foreign capital. Madagascar,
facing no or little upward growth prospects, should have attracted much less foreign capital.
Consider what happened instead. Between 1980 and 2000, both countries relaxed restrictions
on international financial transactions.1 Yet Korea received almost no net capital inflows.
In Madagascar, by contrast, net capital inflows averaged 6 percent of output.
Figure 1 documents the same pattern across a large number of developing countries. It
shows that the average share of net capital inflows in GDP between 1980 and 2000 (on the
vertical axis) is negatively correlated with the investment-to-GDP ratio (on the horizontal
axis). Far from being outliers, Korea and Madagascar are typical of the cross-country correlation between investment and capital inflows shown in Figure 1. Both countries are close
to the regression line. If investment and capital flows were driven primarily by changes in
1

Chinn and Ito’s (2007) index of financial openness between 1970 and 1989 was 22 in Korea (resp. 15.4
in Madagascar), and 31.6 (resp. 28.6) between 1989 and 2005. The index runs from 0 (less open) to 100
(more open).

1

domestic productivity, as suggested by the development accounting literature, countries that
invest more should receive more capital from abroad. We observe the exact opposite.
Patterns such as Figure 1 are just one illustration of a range of results that point in the
same direction: standard models do not account for the allocation of international capital
flows across developing countries. Capital flows from rich to poor countries are not only low
(as argued by Lucas (1990)), but their allocation across developing countries is the opposite
of the predictions of standard textbook models: capital does not flow more to the countries
that have a higher marginal product of capital. We argue that the pattern of capital flows
across developing countries constitutes a major puzzle and its resolution is a challenge for
international economics. We call it the allocation puzzle.
The allocation puzzle is different from the Lucas puzzle, which is about the small size
of capital flows from rich to poor countries (Lucas (1990)). In terms of Figure 1, the Lucas
puzzle is that capital inflows amount to a relatively small share of GDP on average (3.9 percent in our sample). We will show, in the context of our calibrated model, that the small size
of aggregate capital flows toward developing countries as a whole is not especially puzzling
given the relatively low rate of productivity growth in these countries. This explanation is
consistent with Lucas’ original hypothesis: capital flows to poor countries are low because
these countries are not very productive and face domestic distortions in the return to capital.
Our puzzle is related to the allocation of the capital flows across developing countries
rather than their overall level. Our calibrated open economy growth model predicts large
capital inflows to Asia and large capital outflows from Latin America and Africa. This rather
provocative result reflects a straightforward implication of a standard open economy growth
model: the countries whose productivity declines relative to the rest of the world should
export, not import capital. By contrast, in the data, we observe that capital has flowed to
all three regions, and more so (in proportion of investment or GDP) to Africa and Latin
America than to Asia.
Section 2 presents the model that we use to predict the volume and allocation of capital
flows to developing countries. We use, as a starting point, a simple frictionless small open
2

economy model in the tradition of Ramsey, Cass and Koopmans. The model assumes that
countries start at some distance of the world technology frontier, and may—for reasons
that are outside of the model—catch up or fall behind relative to the frontier. We derive
a closed-form expression showing how the volume of net capital inflows toward a given
country depends on the country’s exogenous characteristics (initial debt, capital scarcity,
and productivity). The model predicts that capital should flow more toward the countries
with higher productivity growth to finance both investment and consumption.
Section 3 then calibrates the model using Penn World Table (PWT) data on investment
and output for 69 developing countries over 1980-2000, a period that is long enough to
look at long-run differences in growth, and during which there was a fair degree of capital
mobility. We find that the average developing country was not very capital scarce in 1980,
and did not catch up relative to the world technology fontier, potentially explaining the small
observed size of capital flows from rich to poor countries. We also find that the cross-country
allocation of capital flows is always the opposite of that predicted by the model: countries
with faster productivity growth attract less capital. This is the allocation puzzle.
Although there are various ways to make the basic model more realistic, we argue in
section 4 that many of these changes do not help explain the allocation puzzle. Lack of
perfect foresight or international financial frictions may mute the volume of international
capital flows, but should not change their direction or their allocation across countries.
Our results are also robust to the introduction of non-reproducible capital (land) into the
model, an extension which Caselli and Feyrer (2007) have shown to be potentially important
in estimating international differences in the return to capital. Finally, we show that the
allocation puzzle is not accounted for by aid flows, whose behavior may not be appropriately
captured by the basic neoclassical model.
What can, then, explain the puzzling allocation of capital flows across developing countries? Although the main purpose of this paper is to establish a puzzle rather than solve it,
we offer in section 5 some thoughts on possible explanations. We distinguish three possible
approaches, which put the spotlight respectively on the link between savings and growth,
the link between trade and growth, and the link between financial development and growth.
3

No attempt is made to discriminate empirically between these explanations—the objective
of that section being merely to propose a roadmap to think about future research rather
than establishing new results.
This paper lies at the confluence of different lines of literature. First, it contributes to
the literature on the determinants of capital inflows to developing countries, and on the role
of capital flows in economic development. Aizenman, Pinto and Radziwill (2004) construct
a self-financing ratio indicating what would have been the counterfactual stock of capital in
the absence of capital inflows. They find that 90 percent of the stock of capital in developing
countries is self-financed, and that countries with higher self-financing ratios grew faster in
the 1990s. Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian (2007) also document a negative cross-country
correlation between the ratio of capital inflows to GDP and growth, and discuss possible
explanations for this finding. Manzocchi and Martin (1997) empirically test an equation
for capital inflows derived from an open-economy growth model on cross-section data for 33
developing countries—and find relatively weak support.
This paper is related to the literature on relationship between growth and the current
account in developing countries. Emerging market business cycles exhibit countercyclical
current accounts, i.e., the current account balance tends to decrease when growth picks up
(see Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)). We show in this paper that the correlation between
growth and the current account is the opposite when it is considered across countries and
over a long time period. Because of the very low frequency at which we look at the data, a
more natural benchmark of comparison is the literature on transitional growth dynamics pioneered by Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992). King and Rebelo (1993) also examine transition
dynamics in a variety of neoclassical growth model. Unlike these papers, we allow countries
to catch up or fall behind relative to the world frontier and focus on the implications of the
theory for international capital flows.
The paper is also related to the literature on savings, growth, and investment. The literature on savings and growth has established a positive correlation between these variables,
which is puzzling from the point of view of the permanent income hypothesis since high-

4

growth countries should borrow abroad against future income to finance a higher level of
consumption (Carroll and Summers (1991), Carroll and Weil (1994)). Starting with Feldstein
and Horioka (1980), the literature has also established a stronly positive correlation between
savings and investment, which seems difficult to reconcile with free capital mobility. The
allocation puzzle presented in this paper is related to both puzzles, but it is stronger. Our
finding is that the difference between savings and investment (capital outflows) is positively
correlated with productivity growth, which means that savings not only has to be positively
correlated with productivity growth, but the correlation must be stronger than that between
investment and productivity growth.
Finally this paper belongs to a small set of contributions that look at the implications
of the recent “development accounting” literature for international economics. Our model
and calibration methods are closely related to that literature—although in this paper we
do not consider human capital explicitly—which has emphasized productivity growth as the
main proximate cause of economic development. This view has implications for the behavior
of capital flows that have not been systematically explored in the literature (by contrast
with investment, whose relationship with productivity is well understood and documented).
In a related contribution that is discussed in more detail in section 4, Caselli and Feyrer
(2007) show that the return to capital, once properly measured in a development accounting
framework, is very similar in advanced and developing countries, which might explain why
we observe so little capital flow from the former to the latter. In Gourinchas and Jeanne
(2006) we use a development accounting framework similar to that in this paper to quantify
the welfare gains from capital mobility—and find them to be relatively small. In this paper,
by contrast, we look at the positive implications of development accounting for the direction
of capital flows. Our paper is the first, to our knowledge, to quantify the level of capital
flows to developing countries in a calibrated open economy growth model and compare it to
the data.

5

2

Capital Flows in the Neoclassical Growth Model

The neoclassical growth framework postulates that the dynamics of growth are driven by
an exogenous productivity path. In this section we derive the implications of this view for
capital flows, i.e., we show how the capital flows to developing countries are determined
by their productivity paths relative to the world technology frontier. For simplicity, we
abstract from global general equilibrium effects and assume that each developing country
can be viewed as a small open economy taking the world interest rate as given. Thus, the
model features only one country, and the rest of the world.

2.1

The model

Consider a small open economy that can borrow and lend at an exogenously given world
gross real interest rate R∗ . Time is discrete and, for the time being, there is no uncertainty.
The population Nt grows at an exogenous rate n: Nt = nt N0 . Like in Barro and Salai-Martin (1995) the population can be viewed as a continuum of identical families whose
representative member maximizes the welfare function:
Ut =

∞
X

β s Nt+s u (ct+s ) ,

(1)

s=0

where ct denotes consumption per capita (more generally, lower case variables are normalized
by population) and u (c) ≡ (c1−γ − 1) / (1 − γ) is a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA)
utility function with coefficient γ > 0. The number of families is normalized to 1, so that
per family and aggregate variables are the same.
The economy produces a single homogeneous good using two inputs, capital and labor,
according to a Cobb-Douglas production function:
Yt = Ktα (At Lt )1−α , 0 < α < 1,

(2)

where Kt is the stock of domestic physical capital, Lt the labor supply, and At the level of
productivity. The labor supply is exogenous and equal to the population (Lt = Nt ). Factor

6

markets are perfectly competitive so each factor is paid its marginal product.
Denote by Rt the marginal product of capital, net of depreciation:
Rt = α (kt /At )α−1 + 1 − δ.

(3)

In order to account for long-run cross country differences in investment rates, we assume
a distortion τ in the return to capital. Specifically, we assume that investors receive only
a fraction (1 − τ ) of the gross return on capital Rt . We call τ the ‘capital wedge’. It is a
short hand for the gap between the gross social return to capital Rt and the private return.
One can interpret τ as a tax on gross capital income, or as the result of other distortions—
credit market imperfections, expropriation risk, bureaucracy, bribery, and corruption—that
would also introduce a ‘wedge’ between social and private returns. In order to focus on the
distortive aspects, the revenue per capita zt = τ Rt kt generated by this wedge are rebated in
a lump sum fashion.
The representative resident issues external debt dt and owns all the domestic capital
kt . We assume perfect financial integration, i.e., the representative resident can borrow and
lend at the world interest rate R∗ . Given our assumptions, the budget constraint of the
representative family is:
Nt ct + Nt+1 kt+1 + R∗ Nt dt = (1 − τ )Rt Nt kt + Nt+1 dt+1 + Nt wt + Nt zt ,

(4)

where wt is the wage, equal to the marginal product of labor (1 − α) ktα A1−α
.
t
The representative resident maximizes the welfare function (1) under the budget constraint (4). The Euler equation,
c−γ
= βR∗ c−γ
t
t+1 ,

(5)

implies that consumption per capita grows at the constant rate (βR∗ )1/γ . In addition, capital
mobility implies that the private return on domestic capital and the world real interest rate
are equal:
(1 − τ ) Rt = R∗ .

7

(6)

Substituting this into the expression for the gross return on capital (3), we obtain that
the capital stock per efficient unit of labor k̃ = k/A is constant and equal to:
∗

k̃t+1 = k̃ ≡



α
R∗ / (1 − τ ) + δ − 1

1/1−α
,

(7)

(‘tilde-variables’ will denote per capita variables in efficiency units: x̃ = X/AN ).
Equation (7) makes clear that the capital wedge τ is the only source of variation in
the steady state capital stock per efficient unit of labor across countries. A higher wedge,
equivalent to a higher implicit tax on capital, depresses domestic capital accumulation and
lowers k̃ ∗ .
The country has an exogenous, deterministic productivity path (At )t=0,..,+∞ , which is
bounded from above by the world productivity frontier,
At ≤ A∗t = A∗0 g ∗t .
The world productivity frontier reflects the advancement of knowledge, which is not country
specific, and is assumed to grow at a constant rate g ∗ .
Domestic productivity could grow at a rate that is higher or lower than g ∗ . In order to
describe how domestic productivity evolves relative to the world frontier, it is convenient to
define the difference between domestic productivity and the productivity conditional on no
technological catch-up,
πt =

At
− 1.
A0 g ∗t

We assume that π = limt→∞ π t is well defined. The limit π measures the country’s long run
technological catch-up relative to the world frontier. If π = 0, the country’s productivity
remains unchanged relative to the world frontier. When π > 0, the country catches up
relative to the frontier. When π < 0, the country falls further behind. Domestic productivity
converges to a fraction (1 + π)A0 /A∗0 of the world frontier, and the growth rate of domestic
productivity converges to g ∗ .2
2

That countries have the same long-run growth rate is a standard assumption. Models of idea flows
such as Parente and Prescott (2000) or Eaton and Kortum (1999) imply a common long-run growth rate of
productivity.

8

Finally, we assume that the world interest rate is given by,
R∗ = g ∗γ /β.

(8)

This, together with the Euler equation (5), implies that domestic consumption per capita
grows at rate g ∗ : ct+1 = g ∗ ct . Although not crucial for our results, this assumption simplifies
the analysis by ensuring that the domestic economy converges toward a steady growth path
in which consumption and output per capita grow at the same rate. Equation (8) holds if the
rest of the world is composed of advanced economies that have the same preferences as the
small economy under consideration, but have already achieved their steady state. This is a
natural assumption to make, given that we explain capital flows by cross-country differences
in productivity, rather than preferences.
A country is characterized by an initial capital stock per capita k0 , debt d0 , population
growth rate n, a productivity path {At }∞
0 , and a capital wedge τ . We assume that all
countries are financially open at time t = 0 and use the model to estimate the size and the
direction of capital flows from t = 0 onward.

2.2

Productivity and capital flows

We will compare the predictions of the model with the data observed over a finite period of
time [0, T ]. Thus it makes sense to focus on cross-country differences in the determinants of
capital flows that are observable in the time interval [0, T ]. We abstract from unobserved future developments in productivity by assuming that all countries have the same productivity
growth rate, g ∗ , after time T .
Assumption 1 (finite-time productivity catch-up) π t = π for t ≥ T.
Next, we need to define an appropriate measure of capital inflows during the time interval
[0, T ]. A natural measure, in our model, is the change in external debt between 0 and T
normalized by initial GDP,
∆D
DT − D0
=
.
Y0
Y0
9

(9)

The normalization by initial GDP ensures that the measure is comparable across countries
of different sizes.3
We obtain the following proposition.
Proposition 1 Under assumption 1, the ratio of cumulated capital inflows to initial output
is given by:
"
#

T 
i
∗ t
X
˜0 h
∆D
d
w̃
+
z̃
k̃ ∗ − k̃0
ng
(ng ∗ )T
T
T
∗
∗
∗
(ng ) + α (ng ) − 1 + π k̃ +
=
(1 − π t /π)
Y0
R∗ t=0 R∗
k̃0α
k̃0
k̃0α
(10)
∗α
∗ ∗
where w̃ = (1 − α) k̃ and z̃ = τ / (1 − τ ) R k̃ .
Proof. See appendix A
Equation (10) implies that a country without capital scarcity (k̃0 = k̃ ∗ ), without initial
debt (d˜0 = 0) and without productivity catch-up (π t = π = 0) has zero capital flows. The
first term on the right-hand side of (10),
k̃ ∗ − k̃0
∆Dc
=
(ng ∗ )T ,
Y0
ye0

(11)

results from the initial capital scarcity k̃ ∗ − k̃0 . Under financial integration, and in the absence
of financial frictions or adjustment cost of capital, the country instantly borrows and invests
precisely the amount k̃ ∗ − k̃0 . We call this term the convergence term.
The second term,

i
∆Dt
d˜0 h ∗ T
=
(ng ) − 1 ,
Y0
ỹ0

(12)

reflects the impact of initial debt in the presence of trend growth (ng ∗ > 1). In the absence
of productivity catch-up the economy follows a steady growth path in which external debt
remains a constant fraction of output. Expression (12) corresponds to the cumulated debt
inflows that are required to keep the debt-to-output ratio constant.
3

Our conclusions are robust to using alternate measures of foreign borrowing. For example, capital inflows
could be measured as the average ratio of net capital inflows to GDP or as the change in the ratio of net
foreign liabilities to GDP. Appendix A.2 shows that the predictions of the model are qualitatively the same
for the three measures of capital flows. Moreover, we show in the appendix that if the allocation puzzle is
observed with measure (9) then it must also hold with the two other measures. This is another reason to
use measure (9) as a benchmark when we look at the data.

10

Finally, the third term in (10) reflects the impact of the productivity catch-up. It can be
decomposed into two terms, each with an intuitive interpretation. The first term,
∆Di
k̃ ∗
= π (ng ∗ )T ,
Y0
ỹ0

(13)

represents the external borrowing that goes toward financing domestic investment. To see
this, observe that since capital per efficient unit of labor remains constant at k̃ ∗ , capital per
capita needs to increase more when there is a productivity catch-up. Without productivity
catch-up, capital at time T would be k̃ ∗ NT A0 g ∗T . Instead, it is k̃ ∗ NT AT . The difference,
π k̃ ∗ NT A0 g ∗T , normalized by output ỹ0 A0 N0 , is equal to the right-hand side of (13).
The second term,
t
T 
X
∆Ds
w̃ + z̃
πt 
ng ∗ 
∗ T
,
= π ∗ (ng )
1−
Y0
R ỹ0
R∗
π
t=0

(14)

represents the change in external debt brought about by changes in domestic saving. It is
tied to the time path of disposable income wt + zt . In general, this term depends on the
productivity path π 1 , π 2 , ..., π T . For simplicity we assume that the path for the ratio π t /π is
the same for all countries and satisfies π t ≤ π.
Assumption 2 (common relative convergence paths) π t = πf (t) where f (·) is common
across countries and satisfies f (t) ≤ 1 and limt→∞ f (t) = 1.
Under assumption 2, we can rewrite equation (14) as,
t
T 
X
ng ∗
∆Ds
w̃ + z̃
∗ T
(1 − f (t)) ,
= π ∗ (ng )
Y0
R ỹ0
R∗
t=0
which is proportional to the long-run productivity catch-up π. Faster relative productivity
growth implies higher future income, leading to an increase in consumption and a decrease in
savings.4 Since current income is unchanged, the representative domestic consumer borrows
on the international markets.
4

Obviously, savings can decrease at the same time as investment increases because of capital inflows.
The Fisherian separation of savings and investment is at the core of the economics of capital flows in the
neoclassical growth model. By contrast, in a closed economy, faster productivity growth leads to additional

11

This results in the following corollary.
Corollary 1 Consider two countries A and B, identical except for their long-run productivity catch-up: π A < π B . Under assumptions 1 and 2, country A receives strictly less capital
inflows than country B :
∆DB
∆DA
<
Y0
Y0
To summarize, the investment and consumption channels lead to the same prediction—
that countries growing faster should borrow more.
The simplicity of the relationship between productivity and capital flows is in part driven
by the assumptions of the model. First, we assume perfect international financial integration.
In reality, financial frictions may limit severely—perhaps eliminate altogether—the ability of
developing countries to borrow in order to smooth consumption profiles. Yet, we would argue
that, while international financial frictions may be important, they are unlikely to reverse
the direction of capital flows, or the sign of their correlation with productivity growth. In
the presence of international financial frictions, countries will be able to borrow less. But
countries with higher productivity growth should still be willing to borrow more, not less,
than countries with lower productivity growth. International financial frictions can reduce
the predicted size of capital inflows, but cannot make capital flow more towards the countries
that invest less—or flow less toward the countries that invest more.
Second, equation (14) assumes perfect foresight: the path of future productivity is known
with certainty as of time t = 0. Uncertainty about the future path of productivity would
dampen the willingness of the domestic household to borrow against future income. We will
consider a variant of the model with stochastic productivity in section 4.1. Again, while this
may affect the magnitude of capital flows, it should still be the case that countries that grow
more should borrow more.
Lastly, the assumption that the economy is populated by infinitely-lived consumers removes demographic effects from the model. Models with overlapping generations could
investment only if it successfully mobilizes national savings through higher interest rates. This is the main
reason our results are different from Chen, Imrohoroglu and Imrohoroglu (2006) who study the Japanese
saving rate from the perspective of a closed economy.

12

deliver different predictions for the aggregate relationship between saving and growth, and
thus modify the implications of the model for capital flows. For instance, in Modigliani’s
original life cycle model, faster growth may increase aggregate savings by raising the saving of richer young cohorts relative to the dissaving of poorer older cohorts. As we have
mentioned in the introduction, other models have been developed to explain the positive
association between faster growth and national saving that is observed in the data. We will
discuss that literature in section 5. Let us simply note, for now, that when looking at the
quantitative predictions of the model, we should take the investment component (13) more
seriously than the savings component (14).

3

Capital Flow Accounting and Calibration

We look in this section whether the data support the model’s prediction concerning capital
flows. To be more specific, we investigate whether developing countries with faster productivity growth and larger initial capital scarcity receive more capital inflows. This requires, for
each country, estimates for the levels of initial capital scarcity and for productivity growth.
We focus on the period 1980-2000. This choice of period is motivated by two considerations. First, we cannot start too early because countries need to be financially open over
most of the period under study. Indicators of financial openness indicate a sharp increase
starting in the late 1980s and early 1990s. For instance, the Chinn and Ito (2007) index
indicates an average increase in financial openness from 31.3 in 1980 to 42.5 in 2000 for the
countries in our sample.5 Second, we want as long a sample as possible, since the focus is
on long-term capital flows. Results over shorter periods may be disproportionately affected
by financial crisis or by fluctuations in the world business cycle. Our final sample consists
of 69 developing countries: 66 non-OECD countries, as well as Korea, Mexico and Turkey.6
A certain number of model parameters are common across countries. We assume that
a period is a year. We adopt logarithmic preferences (γ = 1) and set the discount factor β
5

The index is normalized to run from 0 (most closed) to 100 (most open).
We will sometimes refer to the countries in our sample simply as non-OECD countries. For a small set
of countries, the sample period starts later and/or end earlier, due to data availability. The list of countries
and sample period are reported in appendix C.
6

13

to 0.96.7 Next, we set the depreciation rate δ to 6 percent, and the capital share of output
α equal to 0.3.8 Lastly, the growth rate of world productivity g ∗ is set to 1.017, the annual
multifactor productivity growth observed on average in the U.S. between 1980 and 2000.
Given these parameter values, the world real interest rate is equal to R∗ − 1 = 5.94 percent
per year.
The country-specific data are the paths for output, capital and productivity. Those data
come from Version 6.1 of the Penn World Tables (Heston, Summers and Aten (2004)). The
capital stock Kt is constructed with the perpetual inventory method from time series data
on real investment (also from the PWT).9 From (2), we obtain the level of productivity At
as (yt /ktα )1/(1−α) and the level of capital stock per efficient unit of labor k̃t as (kt /yt )1/(1−α) .10
We measure n as the annual growth rate of the working-age population. Under assumption 1, we can measure π as Ā2000 /(g ∗20 Ā1980 ) − 1, where Āt is obtained as the trend component of the Hodrick-Prescott filter of At . This detrending removes short term fluctuations
in productivity due to mismeasurement or business cycle factors.11
The next step consists in constructing the steady state capital level k̃ ∗ . From equation
(7), this is equivalent to constructing the capital wedge τ . Our approach is to calibrate the
capital wedge so as to match exactly investment rates in the data. The next proposition
characterizes the average investment rate between 1980 and 2000.
Proposition 2 Given an initial capital stock k̃0 , productivity catch-up π, and capital wedge
τ , the average investment-output ratio between t = 0 and t = T − 1 can be decomposed into
The value of γ matters only for the level of R∗ , given in equation (8). Conditional on R∗ , γ does not
matter for the direction and size of capital flows.
8
This assumption will be relaxed in section 4. Recent estimates by Gollin (2002) suggest that the capital
share is roughly constant within countries, and varies between 0.2 and 0.4.
9
See Caselli (2004) for details. Following standard practice, we set initial capital to I/ (gi + δ) where I
is the initial investment level from the PWT and gi is the rate of growth of real investment for the first 10
years of available data.
10
We measure output and capital per working-age capita using data on the fraction of the population of
working age (typically ages 15 to 64) from the World Bank.

11
S
U S 1/20
. To set the coefficient of the HP filter,
Consistent with this approach, g ∗ is equal to ĀU
2000 /Ā1980
we impose that the frequency gain of the filter be equal to 70 percent at the frequency corresponding to
an eight-year cycle. This choice mitigates end-point problems and concentrates on long run productivity
growth.
7

14

the following three terms:
1 k̃ ∗ (τ ) − k̃0
π ∗
s̄k =
+
k̃ (τ )1−α g ∗ n + k̃ ∗ (τ )1−α (g ∗ n + δ − 1).
α
T
T
k̃0

(15)

Proof. See appendix A.
Equation (15) has a simple interpretation. The first term on the right-hand side corresponds to the investment at time t = 0 that is required to put capital at its equilibrium
level. This is the convergence component. The second term reflects the additional investment required by the productivity catch-up. The last term is simply the usual formula for
the investment rate in steady state, with productivity growth g ∗ . It corresponds to the
investment required to offset capital depreciation, adjusted for productivity and population
growth.12
Solving numerically (15), we obtain the capital wedge τ as a function of the observed
average investment rate s̄k , productivity catch-up π and population growth n. Appendix C
reports the values of s̄k , π, n and τ for each country in our sample. Everything else equal, our
calibration approach assigns a high capital wedge to countries with low average investment
rate.
Our approach to constructing τ assumes that countries are perfectly integrated. Although
international financial frictions could bias our estimates of τ , this bias should not affect
the model’s predictions for the direction of capital flows. In the case of a capital-scarce
country where financial frictions maintain the domestic interest rate above the world level,
the observed investment rate will be lower than under perfect financial integration, leading
us to overestimate the capital wedge τ and thus underestimate the level of capital inflows
needed to equalize returns. Symmetrically, in the case of a capital abundant country the
bias induced by financial frictions should lead us to underestimate the capital outflows. The
important point is that while there is a downward bias in the size of capital flows, the model
still predicts accurately their direction and relative magnitude.
12

Observe that when g ∗ = n = 1, this last term simplifies to δ k̃ ∗(1−α) = δ k̃ ∗ /ỹ ∗ .

15

3.1

Capital accumulation

With these caveats in mind, Table 1 decomposes the observed investment rate s̄k into the
three components of equation (15). This decomposition yields a number of interesting results.
First, as is well known, investment rates vary widely across regions. They also vary with
income levels, increasing from 8.6 percent for low income countries to 28.5 percent for highincome non-OECD countries. By construction, the model accounts exactly for observed
differences in average investment rates. We view this as a strength of our approach: since
the model is designed to reproduce the change in the capital stock over the long run for a
large number of countries, we can assess precisely whether the drivers of capital accumulation
are also the drivers of observed capital flows.
Table 1 also contains interesting information on the factors driving capital accumulation
across countries. First, the table indicates that most of the variation in the investment
rate is accounted for by the trend component, which itself is strongly correlated with the
capital wedge τ (reported in column 5). The average capital wedge is relatively large, at
11.6 percent, and decreases with income levels from 18.8 percent to 1.6 percent. To a first
order of approximation, the countries with a high investment rate are those that maintain a
high capital-to-output ratio because of a low capital wedge.
The convergence and productivity growth components (columns 2 and 3) account for
a relatively small share of the investment rates on average. The small contribution of the
convergence component is explained by the fact that the initial capital gap was relatively
small on average at the beginning of the sample period (k0 /k ∗ = 0.98). But this average
masks significant regional disparities between Asia and Latin America, which were capital
scarce (k0 /k ∗ = 0.87 and 0.94 respectively), and Africa, which was capital abundant (k0 /k ∗ =
1.07). Because the countries that were capital-scarce in 1980 also tended to have a higher
productivity growth rate in the following two decades, the cumulated contribution of the
productivity and convergence components can be significant. This is most apparent if one
compares Asia and Africa—the productivity and convergence components explain more than
half of the difference in the investment rate between the two regions.

16

Finally, the estimates of π reported in column 6 show that there is no overall productivity
catch-up with advanced countries (π is negative on average). Yet, closer inspection reveals an
interesting geographical pattern. There is some productivity catch-up in Asia, with π = 0.19,
while Latin America and Africa fell behind.13 Accordingly, the contribution of productivity
to investment is positive for Asia (1.6 percent), but negative for Africa and Latin America
(-1.2 percent and -2.7 percent respectively).

3.2

Capital flows

We now compute, for each country, the level of capital inflows predicted by the model—the
right-hand side of equation (10)—and compare the model predictions with the data. There
is one measurement difficulty to solve, however, before we can proceed with this comparison.
The Penn-World Tables do not not provide PPP-adjusted estimates of capital flows and
external liabilities that are comparable to the output and capital data that we have used to
calibrate the model.
The reader is referred to Appendix B for a detailed explanation of how we constructed
PPP-adjusted measures of capital flows. We measure net capital inflows in current US dollars
using International Financial Statistics data on current account deficits, keeping with the
usual practice that considers errors and omissions as unreported capital flows. The main
point is the choice of an appropriate price index to convert this measure into constant
international dollars, the unit used in the Penn World Tables for real variables. In principle,
the trade and current account balances should be deflated by the price of traded goods,
but the Penn World Tables do not report such price indices. We chose instead the price
of investment goods reported in the Penn World Tables. This seems to be a good proxy
because investment goods are mostly tradable—as suggested by the fact that their price
vary less across countries than that of consumption goods. The PPP adjustment will tend
to reduce the estimated size of capital flows relative to output in poor countries, because
those countries have a lower price of output (see Hsieh and Klenow (2007)).
13

There are exceptions to this pattern. For instance, we find π = −0.34 for the Philippines, 0.28 for Chile
and 0.47 for Botswana. See appendix C.

17

One advantage of our PPP-adjusted estimates of cumulated capital flows is that they
can be compared to the measures of output or capital accumulation used in the development
accounting literature. The allocation puzzle, however, does not hinge on the particular
assumptions that we make in constructing those estimates. The deflator chosen for the
PPP-adjustment of capital flows affects the volume but not the direction of capital flows.14
The theory can be tested using various measures of capital flows, which all deliver the same
broad message as the results presented in this section.
We present our estimates of observed and predicted net capital inflows in Table 2. The
estimates for the predicted capital flows are constructed under the assumption that the
productivity catch-up follows the linear process: f (t) = min (t/T, 1) . Column 1 reports
observed net capital inflows, as a fraction of initial output, ∆D/Y0 . The size of cumulated
capital inflows is small, around 33 percent of 1980 output.
Column 2 reports the total predicted net capital inflows based on equation (10). Predicted
capital flows are often an order of magnitude larger than realized flows. More importantly,
they often have the wrong sign. For instance, the model predicts that the average developing
country in our sample should have exported a quantity of capital amounting to 2.5 times
its initial output. While Lucas (1990) argued that the volume of capital flowing from rich
to poor countries seemed puzzingly low, our results rather suggest that given the absence
of productivity catch-up and high level of distortions, capital should have flown out of the
average developing country in our sample.15
Why is there such a discrepancy between the model and the data? The answer lies
in columns 3-6, which report the various components of (10). Column 3 indicates that
developing countries should have borrowed 7 percent of initial output on average to equate
domestic and foreign private returns on capital at the beginning of the sample period. This
is a small amount, less than one fourth of the observed capital inflows. Likewise, the trend
14

We used the price of output as a deflator for current account balances in a previous version of this paper,
and obtained similar results.
15
The results for average cumulated capital flows are different if the cross-country averages are weighted
by GDP or population. Then, we find that the average developing country should receive capital inflows,
because of the large weights of China and India. Whereas the predictions of the model for average capital
flows are sensitive to outliers, we found that the allocation puzzle is robust to the different weighting schemes.
The results are also qualitatively unchanged if we use the median instead of weighted averages.

18

component reported in column 6 is also relatively small and similar in magnitude to observed
flows.
Most of the difference between the model-predicted and the observed capital flows come
from the investment and savings components reported in columns 4 and 5. As discussed
earlier, both terms increase with the productivity catch-up parameter π. The model implies
that, everything else equal, capital should flow to the countries that catch up relative to the
world technology frontier (π > 0), and flow out of the countries that fall behind (π < 0).
The average developing country in our sample falls in the second category (π = −0.1) and
thus should have exported capital. The capital outflows coming from lower investment are
sizeable (29 percent of initial output) and those that come from lower savings are very large
(2.6 times initial output), reflecting the high sensitivity of consumption-savings choices to
future income in a perfect foresight model.
For reasons discussed earlier, we should not expect the model to predict very precisely
the volume of capital flows to specific countries. Sovereign risk, financial frictions or uncertainty about future productivity will limit the extent to which countries rely on foreign
capital. However, the neoclassical growth model should do a good job of predicting the
broad direction of capital flows. This is where the model fails in a systematic and interesting
way. The observed allocation of capital flows across developing countries is the opposite
of the one predicted by the model. Consider first the allocation of capital across regions.
We would expect net capital inflows to Asia, the only region that catches up in terms of
productivity. Indeed, Table 2 reports that the investment component of capital inflows to
the average Asian developing country should represent 81 percent of its initial output. Yet
Asia borrowed, over that period, only 12.5 percent of its initial output (col. 1).
By contrast, consider Africa. With an initial abundance of capital and a relative productivity decline, the model predicts large capital outflows. Indeed, Table 2 indicates that the
outflows related to the investment and convergence components amount to 42 percent and
28 percent of initial output respectively (columns 4 and 3). Yet Africa received more than
40 percent of its initial output in capital flows. Similarly, capital flows to Latin America
amounted to 37 percent of its initial output, in spite of a significant relative productivity
19

decline.
The same pattern is evident if we group countries by income levels rather than regions.
According to Table 1, poorer countries experienced lower productivity growth and so should
export more capital. Indeed, Table 2 shows that predicted capital inflows increase with
income level from -492 percent of output for low income countries to 828 percent of output
for high-income non-OECD countries. Observed capital inflows run in the exact opposite
direction: actual capital flows decrease with income per capita, from 58 percent of output
for low income countries to -54 percent for high-income non-OECD countries.
Figure 2 summarizes the puzzle. It reports actual against predicted capital flows. One
observes immediately that most countries are located in the ‘wrong’ quadrants of the figure,
with predicted capital outflows and observed capital inflows, or vice versa. Figure 3 plots
observed capital flows against the three determinants identified in Proposition 1: the capital
gap (k ∗ − k0 ) /k0 , initial debt d0 /y0 , and productivity catch-up π. While observed capital
flows are positively (although weakly) correlated with the first two components, we find
strong evidence against the predictions of the model regarding productivity: countries with
faster productivity growth attract less capital inflows.16 This is the allocation puzzle.
We ran a number of straightforward robustness checks.17 First, we checked that our
results were robust to the exclusion of African countries (which arguably may be too poor to
export capital while maintaining subsistence levels of consumption). Second, we started the
analysis in 1970 instead of 1980. The sample is much smaller (30 countries), but the pattern
of capital flows is very similar. Third, we split the sample according to whether Chinn and
Ito’s (2007) index of financial account openness is above or below the sample median. One
would a priori expect a better fit between the model and the data for more financially open
countries. Yet the results are similar for both groups of countries.18
16

The figure reports the fitted values from an OLS regression. The regression coefficients are significantly
negative for the productivity catch-up. They are not significant for the capital gap or the initial debt.
17
Results are available upon request. The following section presents additional robustness checks.
18
The index of Chinn and Ito (2007) does not differentiate between inflows and outflows. Hence it is
possible that it is too crude a measure of capital market liberalization. As pointed out to us by Peter Henry,
financial frictions can account for our results if countries with π > 0 face restrictions on inflows, whereas
countries with π < 0 face restrictions on outflows.

20

To summarize, standard growth theory can account for cross-country differences in capital
accumulation, once we take into account cross-country differences in productivity and capital
markets distortions. The same theory makes a strong and counterfactual prediction about
the direction of capital flows: the countries that grow faster should rely more on foreign
financing. In fact, the countries that grow faster tend to receive less capital flows. The
puzzle here is not that developing countries receive little capital from advanced countries,
as Lucas argued. Rather, it is the allocation of capital across developing countries that
contradicts the theory in a fundamental way.

4

Robustness

Can the textbook model be rescued in a simple way? This section explore some alternatives:
introducing uncertainty about future productivity or non-reproducible capital in the model,
and controlling for international aid flows. The upshot is that our central result is robust to
these extensions.

4.1

Uncertainty and permanent productivity shocks

We emphasized earlier the importance of the assumption of perfect foresight for the saving
side of the model. Under perfect foresight, agents tend to borrow or lend heavily against
a certain future income. Uncertainty about the path of future productivity should dampen
the willingness of the domestic representative agent to borrow or lend.
We now consider what happens when agents expect future productivity growth to remain constant and equal to g ∗ . This is a reasonable approximation, in light of Easterly,
Kremer, Pritchett and Summers (1993) finding that output growth rates are unpredictable,
and uncorrelated across decades. In order to abstract from the complications associated
with precautionary savings, we solve the model under certainty equivalence and assume that
agents always expect productivity to grow at rate g ∗ with certainty. Under this assumption
we obtain the following result.

21

Proposition 3 If agents always expect productivity to grow at rate g ∗ the ratio of cumulated
capital inflows to initial output, ∆Dn /Y0 = [DT − D0 ] /Y0 , is given by:
T
i
∗
∆Dn
k̃ ∗ − k̃0 ∗ T
d˜0 h ∗ T
∗ (g n)
=
(g
n)
+
(ng
)
−
1
+
π
k̃
.
Y0
k̃0α
k̃0α
k̃0α

(16)

Proof. See appendix A.
The only difference between (16) and (10) is that the consumption smoothing term has
disappeared. The intuition is straightforward: when productivity is expected to grow at
rate g ∗ , the consumption-savings choices are the same as in the steady growth path with
no productivity catch-up. Productivity influences capital flows only through the investment
term.
Column 7 in Table 2 reports estimates of ∆Dn /Y0 , as the sum of columns 3, 4 and 6.
The orders of magnitude are closer to the data. Another difference with our previous results
is that the average developing country is now predicted to receive capital inflows (although
significantly less than the actual amount). However, the allocation puzzle still stands. As
shown in Figure 4, the predicted and actual net capital inflows remain negatively correlated.

4.2

Non-reproducible capital

In a recent paper, Caselli and Feyrer (2007) argue that, while naive estimates of the marginal
product of capital vary enormously across countries, the returns to capital are essentially
the same once the estimates are adjusted for cross country differences in non-reproducible
capital and in the relative price of investment and consumption goods. This adjustment is
especially important for developing countries that have a larger share of natural capital (in
particular land) in total capital. Their result offers another resolution to the Lucas puzzle:
if substantial differences in capital-output ratio coexist with marginal product equalization,
then we should expect little, if any, capital flows between countries.
This paper adopts a different approach, based on the wedge between the private and
social marginal returns to capital. The cross country distribution of the private marginal
return to capital is compressed by the wedge τ . To illustrate, the top panels of Figure 5
22

report the naive estimate of private returns (left), defined as RN = αY /K − δ, and the
wedge-adjusted return (right), RW = (1 − τ ) (1 + RN ) − 1, against 2000 income per capita.
The left-hand side top panel indicates enormous variation in the naive estimate, between 3.6
percent (Singapore) and 104 percent (Uganda), with a mean of 17.5 percent. By contrast, the
wedge-adjusted return varies between -2.5 percent (Nigeria) and 14 percent (Malawi) with a
mean of 4.7 percent. The amount of compression is remarkable, given that the capital wedge
is not calibrated to ensure private returns equalization. Our results thus parallel those of
Caselli and Feyrer (2007): private returns to capital appear remarkably similar. This result
explains why there is no Lucas puzzle according to our estimates.
We now check the robustness of our results to allowing for non-reproducible capital.19
We start by modifying the production function (2) as follows:
k
Yt = Ktαk X αl L1−αk −αl A1−α
,
t

where X represents non-reproducible capital (assumed to be constant) and αl denotes the
share of non-reproducible capital in output. Notice that this production technology is iso1/(1−αk )
and write output as
morphic to (2) if we define a composite factor Zt = X αl Lt1−αk −αl
Yt = Ktαk (At Zt )1−αk . Non-reproducible capital matters, however, for estimating the capital
share αk .
The production function is calibrated as follows. Like Caselli and Feyrer (2007), we obtain
an estimate of αw = αk + αl , the total share of capital (reproducible and non-reproducible),
from Gollin (2002) supplemented by Bernanke and Gürkaynak (2001), as one minus the
labor share. The private return to reproducible capital is (1 − τ ) (1 + αk Yt /Kt − δ) while the
x
private return to non-reproducible capital is (1 − τ ) (αl Yt /Xt + Ptx ) /Pt−1
where Ptx denotes

the price of non-reproducible capital in terms of the final good.20
In steady state, both returns must be equal and the rate of price appreciation must equal
19
In this paper, we do not consider systematic variation across countries in the price of investment goods.
See Chatterjee and Naknoi (2007) for an analysis of capital flows along this line.
20
We assume that the capital wedge applies equally to all forms of capital and that non-reproducible
capital does not depreciate.

23

x
= gy . Solving for αk , we obtain:
the rate of growth of real output: Ptx /Pt−1



P xX K
αk = αw − (1 − gy − δ)
. ,
Y
W

(17)

where W = P x X + K denotes total wealth (natural and reproducible). This formula has
a simple interpretation. If there is no natural capital (X = 0 and W = K), it boils down
to αk = αw . With non-reproducible capital, two adjustments take place. First, only a
fraction K/W of total capital income αw Y goes to reproducible capital. This is the first
term in brackets. Second, a faster growth rate gy or higher depreciation rate δ mean a
faster price appreciation and a larger private return on non-reproducible capital relative to
reproducible capital. In both cases, returns on both types of capital can only be equated
if the reproducible capital share αk increases. This is the second term in brackets.21 We
follow Caselli and Feyrer (2007) and obtain estimates of P x X from World Bank (2006). Our
estimated adjusted capital shares are reported in appendix C.
The bottom two panels of Figure 5 report the estimate of private returns to capital
once we adjust the share of reproducible capital. The bottom left panel reports estimates
of private returns without the capital wedge. We find returns varying between 4.4 percent
(Thailand) and 29.5 percent (El Salvador), with a mean of 10.08 percent. Once we take into
account the capital wedge, the returns are further compressed.22 We find returns varying
between 0.7 percent (Nigeria) and 11.5 percent (Malawi), with a mean of 4.9 percent.
Adjusting for non-reproducible capital does not change the essence of our results. Table 3
reports the predicted and actual capital flows in the adjusted model.23 The predicted capital
inflows remain negative on average, and the model predictions for the allocation of capital
flows by income levels or by regions remain at odds with the data. Figure 6 shows the same
variables as Figure 3 for the model with non-reproducible capital. Again, predicted capital
flows are negatively correlated with productivity growth.
21
These last two corrections are absent in Caselli and Feyrer (2007) who assume a common depreciation
rate and price appreciation for reproducible and non-reproducible capital.
22
The capital wedges are recomputed for the model with non-reproducible capital to match the observed
investment rates. The adjustment for natural capital reduces the average level and variance of our capital
wedge estimates. The mean capital wedge is now only 4.5 percent.
23
The actual capital flows are not the same as in 2, because the sample of countries is slightly smaller.

24

4.3

Official aid

The basic neoclassical framework may not be appropriate to predict official aid flows because
aid is not necessarily allocated to the countries with the highest expected returns on capital.
On the one hand, if aid has any effectiveness the flows of development aid should be positively
correlated with productivity growth. On the other hand, there is a selection bias, as the
countries that have received aid flows over long period of time are often those that have
failed to develop. In addition, the components of aid that are justified by humanitarian
reasons should be negatively correlated with growth. The large literature on development
aid has generally failed to find a significant relationship between aid and growth (see Rajan
and Subramanian (2005)).
That the neoclassical growth model does not capture well the determinants of aid flows
does not necessarily invalidate its predictions for net capital flows. If we modeled aid as
a lump-sum transfer to the representative agent in the model of section 2, then aid would
immediately leave the country, as the representative agent would find it optimal to invest
it abroad given the lack of domestic investment opportunities. Because of the fungibility of
aid this would be true even if aid were earmarked to finance certain class of expenditures,
such as investment. The aid inflow would be offset by an outflow of exactly the same size,
and the predictions of the model would remain valid for net capital flows.
Things might be different, however, in the presence of financial frictions. Then aid
could be used to relax some financial constraints and to finance an increase in domestic
expenditures above and beyond what can be financed by private capital flows. Or capital
controls could prevent aid inflows from being completely offset by a capital outflow. In those
cases, aid would not be neutral and its impact on the level of net capital flows should be
examined.
We now examine how aid inflows are correlated with the model’s predicted capital flows.
Our measure of official aid flows is the net overseas development assistance (net ODA) from
the Development Assistance Committee (DAC). This measure is available for all countries
in our sample, except Taiwan. According to Roodman (2006), DAC counts total grants and

25

concessional development loans and subtracts principle repayments on these loans (hence the
‘net’).24 As shown in Appendix B, it is possible to compute the PPP-adjusted cumulated
net ODA flows normalized by initial GDP using the same method as for net capital flows.
To see how far aid flows can go in explaining the puzzle, we make the (extreme) assumption that those flows were not offset at all by other types of capital flows. That is, we assume
that in the absence of aid flows the counterfactual net capital flows would have been equal
to the observed net capital flows ∆D minus the aid flows ∆B,
∆D0
∆D − ∆B
=
.
Y0
Y0
Under this assumption, removing aid flows might eliminate the puzzle, to the extent that
these flows are negatively correlated with the determinants of private capital flows. Table
4 reports the results for the aid-adjusted capital flows. Since net ODA flows are always
positive in our sample (all developing countries are net recipients), ∆D0 is always smaller
than ∆D. As a result, the average developing country is found to export capital net of
aid flows (23 percent of initial output, on average). The correlations between aid-adjusted
capital flows and the determinants of capital flows are reported in Figure 7. The correlation
becomes negative for capital scarcity and remains negative for productivity growth, although
no longer significantly different from zero for the latter. A comparison of Figures 3 and 7,
reveals that aid flows must be negatively correlated with productivity growth.
We conclude that official aid flows play a role in explaining why the correlation between
capital inflows and productivity growth is negative: many countries with poor productivity
performance are also net official aid recipients. However, aid flows per se do not resolve
the allocation puzzle. As Table 4 shows, Asia exports capital while the model predicts
substantial capital inflows. Moreover, Figure 7 demonstrates that the observed aid-adjusted
capital flows are at best unresponsive to differences in long term productivity growth.
24

Our results are remain unchanged if we use instead Roodman’s (2006) Net Aid Transfer measure.

26

5

Discussion

This section discusses some possible approaches to the resolution of the allocation puzzle.
It is meant as a tentative roadmap for future research, not as a definitive attempt to push
forward a particular explanation.25 We first look at the puzzle from the point of view of the
literature on savings and growth. We then discuss the possible role of international trade
and that of domestic financial frictions.
The allocation puzzle can be summarized in terms of the cross-country correlations between savings, investment and growth. Let us consider the following three variables in a
sample of developing countries: g, the average growth rate of productivity; s the average
savings rate and i the average investment rate. The net capital outflows are measured by the
difference between the savings rate and the investment rate, s−i. The allocation puzzle is the
finding that capital outflows are positively correlated with the growth rate of productivity
across countries:
cov(g, s − i) > 0,
or equivalently, that the savings rate is more correlated with productivity growth than the
investment rate:
cov(g, s) > cov(g, i).

(18)

We argued that this is a puzzle for the simple neoclassical open-economy model of growth,
which predicts that the left-hand side of equation (18) is negative while the right-hand side
is positive.

5.1

Savings and growth

We already know from the literature on savings and growth that the model’s first prediction,
cov (g, s) < 0, is at odds with the data. Empirically, the savings rate is positively correlated
with growth (see, e.g., Mankiw et al. (1992)), and the explanations that have been put
25

Indeed, the explanations reviewed below are not mutually exclusive, and are often complementary.
Moreover, the most relevant explanation could depend on the countries or the regions.

27

forward in the literature for this positive correlation may help us to explain the allocation
puzzle.
One such class of explanations considers the causality from savings to growth. Note that g
is the growth rate in productivity, not output per capita, so the mechanism must involve some
endogeneity of domestic productivity to domestic savings. This is the case in a number of
closed-economy models of endogenous growth, but this feature does not easily survive perfect
capital mobility, which makes domestic savings a small component of the global savings pool.
For domestic savings to increase growth in the open economy, there must be a friction that
prevents domestic savings and foreign savings from being perfect substitutes. An example of
a model with those features is Aghion, Comin and Howitt (2006), in which domestic savings
matters for innovation because it fosters the involvement of domestic intermediaries with a
superior monitoring technology.
Another class of explanations considers the causality from growth to savings.26

In

Modigliani’s (1970) life cycle model faster growth raises aggregate savings by increasing
the saving of younger richer cohorts relative to the dissaving of older poorer cohorts. Other
authors have pointed to a number of problems with the life-cycle model, and put forward
an alternative theory based on consumption habit ( Carroll and Weil (1994), Carroll et al.
(2000) ).
Whether the models discussed above can explain the allocation puzzle is an open question
for future research. The answer is not obvious a priori: those models can account for a
positive correlation between savings and growth, but cannot necessarily explain why this
correlation is larger than that between investment and growth. The challenge is to explain
why cov(s, g) is larger than cov(i, g) when the averages are taken over long periods of time.

5.2

Trade

Another way of presenting the allocation puzzle is that the ratio of net exports to GDP is
positively correlated with the productivity growth rate across countries. Looking at this from
26

Carroll, Overland and Weil (2000) present evidence suggesting that the causality runs from growth to
savings.

28

the perspective of trade, the allocation puzzle is consistent with the view in development
economics that emphasizes the importance of a competitive sector as an engine of modernization and growth (see Rodrik (2006) for a recent exposition). This also seems consistent with
the pattern of capital flows observed in the recent period, in which the developing countries
that grew the fastest (the Southeast Asian emerging market countries) were also those that
had the largest trade surpluses.
Developing a dynamic general equilibrium model of this view is beyond the scope of
this paper, but one can speculate on the assumptions and properties that such a framework
would have. For instance, suppose that productivity take-offs originate in the tradable sector
before spilling over to the nontradable sector. Then, the initial phase of the take-off should be
associated with a surge in net exports, and capital outflows.27 One could add a “mercantilist”
twist to the story by assuming that the country aims to maintain a competitive real exchange
rate so as to preserve and develop its export sector during the take-off phase. This could be
achieved by repressing domestic demand, using capital controls or other forms of domestic
financial repression. Those factors would magnify the size of the capital outflows associated
with the economic take-off.
To restate the argument in the terms of the previous section, developing countries with
higher productivity growth g tend to be countries in which the tradable sector is larger
relative to the nontradable sector. Because domestic demand is constrained by the relative
underdevelopment of the nontradable sector, these countries also have a higher savings rate
s. The allocation puzzle would be explained if savings increase more than investment in the
productivity take-off.
It remains to be seen whether a calibrated model designed along those lines can explain
the cross-country correlation between growth and capital flows that we observe in the data,
and whether other implications of the model (e.g., for the relative sizes of the nontradable
27

In equilibrium this would happen only under some conditions. On the one hand the consumption of
tradables would be held back by the low supply of nontradables. On the other hand, the consumption
of tradables should be stimulated by the real exchange rate appreciation associated with the take-off. Net
exports should increase if the elasticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable goods is sufficiently
low relative to the elasticity of intertemporal substitution of consumption (see Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996,
chapter 4)).

29

and tradable sectors, and for the real exchange rate) fit the facts.

5.3

Domestic financial frictions

International financial frictions that increase the cost of external finance relative to domestic
finance cannot explain the puzzle: as mentioned earlier, they can mute the absolute size of
capital flows, not change their direction. But domestic financial frictions might be able to
do so, because of the impact they have on the relationship between savings, investment and
growth. As shown by Gertler and Rogoff (1990) and Matsuyama (2004), domestic financial
frictions can reverse the direction of capital flows between rich and poor countries. It would
be interesting to know whether they might have the same effect between high-growth and
low-growth countries.
Low domestic financial development may constrain domestic demand—and increase domestic savings—in several ways. First, it constrains the residents’ ability to borrow against
future income or store value in sound financial instruments (see Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2007)). Second, it constrains their ability to insure efficiently and encourages precautionary savings (see Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2007)). Further, an inefficient
financial intermediation system should also reduce the responsiveness of investment to productivity growth.
In terms of our previous discussion, and taking productivity growth g as an exogenous
determinant of savings and investment, we would expect to find that cov(g, s) is decreasing
with the level of financial development, while cov(g, i) is increasing with the level of financial
development. Thus cov(g, s − i) would be decreasing with the level of financial development,
and could be positive for countries with a low level of financial development. For instance,
in Caballero et al. (2007), financially underdeveloped countries run larger current account
surpluses if they grow faster. The explanation for the allocation puzzle, then, would be that
the correlations in our sample are determined by financially underdeveloped countries. Some
of these countries would have high growth in spite of their financial underdevelopment (e.g.,
China), whereas others would remain trapped in a path with low growth.28 The allocation
28

This association seem at odd with the fact that financial development seems good for growth (King and

30

puzzle would result from cov(g, s − i) > 0 conditional on low financial development.
This explanation takes a different angle than, but is not inconsistent with, the other
two. Domestic credit constraints have been mentioned as a possible explanation in the
literature trying to explain the positive correlation between saving and growth (Carroll and
Weil (1994)), and also as a way of maintaining a competitive real exchange rate (Jeanne
(2007)).

6

Concluding Comments

This paper establishes a puzzling stylized fact: capital tends to flow more toward countries
with lower productivity growth and lower investment. This is puzzling for neoclassical models
of growth—in fact, this makes one wonder if the textbook neoclassical framework is the
right model at all to think about the link betwee international financial integration and
development.
Part of the puzzle is accounted for by aid flows, but this is far from the whole story.
We have discussed three lines of explanations that seem the most promising to us for future
research: one focuses on the relationship between savings and growth, the second one gives
the key role to trade, while the last one emphasizes domestic financial underdevelopment.
It seems important to know more about which channels explain the puzzling behavior of
capital flows to developing countries if one wants to understand how international financial
integration helps economic development.
Levine (1993)). However one must control for the initial level of development. The least developed countries
tend to be less developed financially, but they have more scope for catching up.

31

References
Aghion, Philippe, Diego Comin, and Peter Howitt, “When Does Domestic Saving
Matter for Economic Growth?,” NBER Working Papers 12275 June 2006.
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is
the Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2007, 115 (1), 69–102.
Aizenman, Joshua, Brian Pinto, and Artur Radziwill, “Sources for Financing Domestic Capital – Is Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing Countries?,” NBER
Working Papers 10624 July 2004.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, New-York: McGraw
Hill, 1995.
Bernanke, Ben and Refet Gürkaynak, “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw, Romer
and Weil seriously,” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics
Annual, MIT Press Cambridge MA 2001, pp. 11–72.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “An Equilibrium Model of “Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, forthcoming 2007.
Carroll, Christopher D. and David N. Weil, “Saving and Growth: A Reinterpretation,”
in “Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy” June 1994, pp. 133–192.
and Lawrence H. Summers, “Consumption Growth Parallels Income Growth: Some
New Evidence,” in B.D. Bernheim and John B. Shoven, eds., National Savings and Economic Performance, Chicago University Press 1991.
, Jody Overland, and David N. Weil, “Saving and Growth with Habit Formation,”
American Economic Review, June 2000, 90 (3), 341–355.
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” NBER Working
Paper 10828 October 2004.
and James Feyrer, “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2007, 122 (2), 535–568.
Chatterjee, Sirsha and Kanda Naknoi, “The Marginal Product of Capital, Capital
Flows and Convergence,” mimeo, Purdue University June 2007.
Chen, Kaiji, Ayse Imrohoroglu, and Selahattin Imrohoroglu, “The Japanese Saving
Rate,” American Economic Review, December 2006, 96, 1850–1858(9).
Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito, “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” Mimeo, U.
of Wisconsin May 2007.

32

Easterly, William, Michael Kremer, Lance Pritchett, and Lawrence Summers,
“Good Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1993, 32, 459–483.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “International Technology: Theory and Measurement,” International Economic Review, 1999, 40 (3).
Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka, “Domestic Saving and International Capital
Flows,” Economic Journal, June 1980, 90 (358), 314–29.
Gertler, Mark and Kenneth Rogoff, “North-South lending and endogenous domestic
capital market inefficiencies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1990, 26 (2), 245–266.
Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110
(2), 458–474.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, “The Elusive Gains From International
Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (3), 715–741.
Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output Per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1), 83–
116.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, “Penn World Table Version 6.1,”
October 2004. Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania
(CICUP).
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,”
American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 562–585.
Jeanne, Olivier, “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much of a
Good Thing?,” in “Brookings Papers on Economic Activity” Spring 2007, pp. 1–55.
King, Robert G and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, 108 (3), 717–37.
and Sergio T Rebelo, “Transitional Dynamics and Economic Growth in the Neoclassical
Model,” American Economic Review, September 1993, 83 (4), 908–31.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations
Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,”
CEPR Discussion Papers 5644 April 2006.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?,” American Economic Review, 1990, 80, 92–96.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics
of Economic growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 407–38.
33

Manzocchi, Stefano and Philippe Martin, “Are Capital Flows Consistent with the
Neoclassical Growth Model? Evidence from a Cross-section of Developing Countries,”
Economie Internationale, 1997, 72, 7–24.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, “Financial Market Globalization, Symmetry-Breaking, and Endogenous Inequality of Nations,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (3), 853–884.
Mendoza, Enrique, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Victor Rios-Rull, “Financial Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” mimeo University of Maryland January
2007.
Modigliani, Franco, “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Savings and Intercountry Differences in
the Savings Ratio,” in J.M. Volpe M. FG. Scott and W. Eltis, eds., Induction, Growth and
Trade. Essays in Honor of Sir Roy Harrod, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970, pp. 197–225.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, Foundations of International Macroeconomics,
Cambridge: MIT PRess, 1996.
Parente, Stephen and Edward Prescott, Barriers to Riches, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2000.
Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian, “Foreign Capital and
Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2007, pp. 153–230.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Arvind Subramanian, “Aid and Growth: What Does the
Cross-Country Evidence Really Show?,” NBER Working Papers 11513 August 2005.
Rodrik, Dani, “Industrial Development: Stylized Facts and Policies,” mimeo, Kennedy
School of Government November 2006.
Roodman, David, “An Index of Donor Performance,” Working Paper 67, Center for Global
Development November 2006.
World Bank, “Where is the Wealth of Nations?,” Report, Washington DC: The World
Bank 2006.

34

(1)
Total
s̄k
13.47
8.56
14.06
15.69
28.52

(2)
Convergence

(3)
Productivity

(4)
Trend

0.13
-0.14
0.29
0.40
0.20

-0.93
-1.56
-1.64
-1.35
5.52

Africa
Latin-America
Asia

10.27
13.40
19.59

-0.66
0.39
1.34

except China and India
China and India
except Africa

13.40
15.76
16.24

0.13
0.40
0.82

Average Investment Rate
(percent of output)
Non-OECD countries
Low Income
Lower Middle Income
Upper Middle Income
High Income (Non-OECD)

35

(6)
Catch-up
π
-0.10
-0.22
-0.15
-0.06
0.54

(7)
Obs.

14.27
10.26
15.42
16.64
22.79

(5)
Wedge
τ
11.58
18.76
8.84
6.13
1.62

-1.20
-2.67
1.61

12.12
15.69
16.64

16.00
8.50
6.90

-0.17
-0.24
0.19

32
20
17

-1.05
3.02
-0.70

14.33
12.34
16.13

11.62
10.35
7.77

-0.12
0.53
-0.04

67
2
37

69
27
23
13
6

Table 1: Decomposition of Average Investment Rates between 1980 and 2000, percent of GDP. Convergence:
Productivity: Tπ k̃ ∗(1−α) g ∗ n; Trend: k̃ ∗(1−α) (g ∗ n + δ − 1). Unweighted country averages.

1 k̃∗ −k̃0
;
T ỹ0

(3)
∆Dc /Y0

(4)
∆Di /Y0

(5)
∆Ds /Y0

(6)
∆Dt /Y0

32.77
58.08
37.02
12.94
-54.43

(2)
∆Dp /Y0
(3)–(6)
-255.21
-491.94
-358.64
-80.48
827.99

7.13
-11.04
17.38
22.85
15.50

-28.77
-50.47
-62.62
-40.99
225.15

-260.06
-457.39
-338.16
-98.65
577.59

Africa
Latin-America
Asia

40.97
36.89
12.48

-452.75
-478.74
379.61

-28.14
20.96
57.25

-42.38
-100.07
80.75

except China and India
China and India
except Africa

33.65
3.21
25.67

-289.49
893.39
-84.36

7.00
11.39
37.63

-33.85
141.57
-16.99

Capital Flows
(percent of initial output)
Non-OECD countries
Low Income
Lower Middle Income
Upper Middle Income
High Income (Non-OECD)

(1)
∆D/Y0

36

(8)
Obs.

26.49
26.96
24.76
36.31
9.75

(7)
∆Dn /Y0
(3)+(4)+(6)
4.85
-34.55
-20.48
18.18
250.40

-410.36
-435.02
228.69

28.14
35.40
12.92

-42.39
-43.72
150.92

32
20
17

-289.89
739.14
-130.07

27.24
1.29
25.07

0.39
154.25
45.71

67
2
37

69
27
23
13
6

Table 2: Predicted and actual capital flows between 1980 and 2000, in percent of initial output. ∆D/Y0 is the observed ratio.
Predicted capital flows ∆Dp /Y0 given by (10). Convergence component ∆Dc /Y0 given by (11). Investment component
∆Di /Y0 given by (13). Saving component ∆Ds /Y0 given by (14). Trend component ∆Dt /Y0 given by (12). Linear
specification for f (.): f (t) = min(t/T, 1). Unweighted country averages.

(3)
∆Dc /Y0

(4)
∆Di /Y0

(5)
∆Ds /Y0

(6)
∆Dt /Y0

38.79
61.55
43.33
20.95
-54.51

(2)
∆Dp /Y0
(3)–(6)
-310.53
-504.76
-396.42
-130.74
667.36

12.24
-9.72
17.51
24.40
63.18

-39.10
-42.09
-68.68
-50.23
183.59

-311.35
-478.62
-370.83
-142.43
401.72

Africa
Latin-America
Asia

40.68
47.79
23.86

-511.50
-544.93
361.53

-22.81
20.77
66.85

-50.09
-111.53
73.15

except China and India
China and India

39.98
3.06

-349.95
872.27

12.27
11.29

-45.04
139.03

Capital Flows
(percent of initial output)
Non-OECD countries
Low Income
Lower Middle Income
Upper Middle Income
High Income (Non-OECD)

(1)
∆D/Y0

37

(8)
Obs.

27.68
25.67
25.58
37.51
18.86

(7)
∆Dn /Y0
(3)+(4)+(6)
0.82
-26.14
-25.59
11.69
265.64

-466.33
-492.28
207.14

27.72
38.11
14.40

-45.17
-52.65
154.39

28
19
15

-345.75
720.63

28.56
1.33

-4.21
151.64

60
2

62
22
23
13
4

Table 3: Predicted and Actual Capital Flows between 1980 and 2000, in percent of initial output. The predicted capital
flows are computed using the model with non-reproducible capital. Unweighted country averages.

Official Aid
Capital Flows
(percent of initial output)
Non-OECD countries
Low Income
Lower Middle Income
Upper Middle Income
High Income (Non-OECD)

(2)
∆B/Y0

(3)
∆Dp /Y0

(4)
∆Dn /Y0

(5)
Obs.

-23.17
58.08
37.02
12.94
-54.46

58.43
106.34
35.39
15.88
16.31

-275.96
-491.94
-358.64
-80.48
762.39

1.71
-34.55
-20.48
18.18
256.78

68
27
23
13
5

Africa
Latin-America
Asia

-45.16
13.59
-25.16

86.13
23.30
46.92

-452.75
-478.74
331.08

-42.39
-43.72
146.69

32
20
16

except China and India
China and India

-23.64
3.21

59.86
10.96

-311.40
893.39

-2.91
154.25

66
2

38

(1)
∆D0 /Y0

Table 4: Predicted and Actual Capital Flows between 1980 and 2000, percent of initial output.

.15
.1

MOZ
JOR

Capital Inflows/GDP
0
.05

COG
MLI
MWI SYR
TZA
PNG TUN
SEN
GHA
LKA
TGO
BEN BFA DOM
MDG
NER
UGA
EGY
BOL PAK
AGO
CRI
RWA
NPL PER
ETHHTI
TTO MAR
CIV
HND ECU
NGA
SLV
CHL
IDN
GAB
MEXIRN
JAM
GTM
TUR
CMR
MUS PHL
BGD
COL
KEN
IND
ARGBRA
PAN
PRY
URY
FJI
CHN
ZAF

ISR
CYP
THA
MYS

KOR

-.05

VEN

BWATWN
HKG

-.1

SGP

0

.1

.2
Investment/GDP

.3

.4

2

Figure 1: Average ratios of capital inflows and investment rates to GDP, 1980-2000.

1
Actual Capital Inflows
-1
0

JOR
RWA

THA

NPL

TGO CIV

CHL
SEN
BFA
PAK
ECU
AGO
BEN
PER MLI
KEN
MWI
BOL
ISR
MYS
HND
TZA
NER
TUN
CYP
COL DOM
CRIPRYGHA
LKA IDN
UGA
ARG
MOZ
FJI
MEX
GTM
MDG
TUR
IND
CMR
COG
MAR
PHL
PNG
ETH
MUS
BGD HTI
BRA
TTO PAN
IRN
SLV
NGA
URY
GABSYR
JAM
EGY
ZAF
VEN

CHN
KOR

HKG

TWN
BWA

-2

SGP

-20

-10

0
Predicted Capital Inflows

10

20

Figure 2: Predicted and actual capital inflows (as a share of initial GDP), 1980-2000.

39

2
actual capital inflows
-2
-1
0
1

THA
TGONPL
CIV
SEN CHL
BFA
PAK
ECU
AGO
BEN
MLI
KENTUN
MWI
BOL
ISR PER
NER
TZA
HND
MYS JOR IDN
COL
CRI
GHA CYP
DOM
PRY
LKAMOZ
UGA
ARG
FJI
GTM
MEX
MDG
TUR
IND
CMR
COG MUS
MAR
PHL
PNG
ETH
PAN
BGD
BRA
HTI
TTO
IRN
SLV
NGA
URY
SYR
GAB
JAM
EGY
ZAF
VEN CHNKOR
HKG

RWA

TWN
BWA
SGP

0

.5
capital gap

1

1.5

actual capital inflows
-2
-1
0
1

2

-.5

NPL THA
TGO
CIV
CHL
SEN
BFAPAK
ECU
AGO
BEN
MLI
PER
KEN
BOL
MYS
ISR MWI
NER
HND
TZA
TUN
CYP
COL
JOR
IDN
LKA
CRI
PRY
GHA
DOM
UGA
ARG
MOZ
FJI
GTM
MEX
MDG
TUR
IND
CMR
MAR
COG
PHL
RWA
PNG
ETH
MUS
BGD
HTI
BRA
TTO
IRN
SLV
NGA
URY
SYR
GAB
EGY
ZAF
CHN VEN
KOR

PAN
JAM

HKG
TWN
BWA
SGP

0

.5
initial debt

1

1.5

1

1.5

actual capital inflows
-2
-1
0
1

2

-.5

THA
TGOCIV NPL
SEN
CHL
BFA
PAK
AGO
ECU
BEN
MLI
PER
KEN MWI
BOL
ISR
MYS
HND
TZA
NER
TUN
CYP
COL
JOR
IDN
CRI
LKA
PRY
GHA
DOM
UGA
ARG
MOZ
FJI
MEX
GTM
MDG
TUR
IND MUS
CMR
MARBGDHTICOG
PHL
RWA
PNG
ETH
PAN
TTO
BRA
IRN
SLV
NGA
SYRURY
JAM
EGY
ZAF GAB
CHN
VEN
KOR
HKG
TWN
BWA
SGP

-.5
0
.5
long run productivity catch-up

Figure 3: Actual capital inflows (as a share of initial GDP) against their determinants:
capital gap (k ∗ − k0 ) /k0 , initial debt to GDP ratio (d0 /y0 ) , and productivity catch-up (π),
1980-2000.

40

2

CIV

THA

NPL

1

CHL
SEN BFA
PAK
ECU AGO
BEN
MLI
PER
KEN
MWIHND ISR
BOL
NER
TUN
CYP
COL
JOR
CRI
PRY
GHA
DOM LKA IDN
UGA
ARG
FJI
MOZ
MEX
GTM
MDG
TUR
IND
CMR
COG
MARPHL
RWA
PNG
ETH
MUS
PAN
BRA
HTI
TTO BGD
IRN
SLV
NGA
URY
SYR
GAB
JAM
EGY
ZAF

TZA

Actual Capital Inflows
-1
0

TGO

MYS

CHN

VEN

KOR
HKG

TWN
BWA

-2

SGP

-4

-2
0
2
Predicted Capital Inflows (Permanent Shocks)

4

6

Figure 4: Predicted and actual capital inflows (as a share of initial GDP). Model with
permanent productivity shocks. 1980-2000.

41

1
wedge adjusted return
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

EGY
GHA
BEN
SEN
CIV
MLI
NER
MWI GTM
SLV
KEN
SYR
BGD
CMR
AGO
PAK
IND DOMZAF
TGO
BOL
BFA
COG
GAB TTO MUS
BWA
LKA
COL
PNG
PRY
TUN
FJI
NGA
MAR
URY
NPL
JOR
TWN
CHN
PHL
IDN CRI
HND
IRN
CHL
TUR
ARG
MEX
BRA
VEN
CYP
MYS
TZA ECU
PER
PAN
JAM
ISR
KOR
THA

20000

30000

share adjusted return
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

MWI
COG
GHA
NER
CIVSYR
IRN
EGY
TZA
MDG
FJI
GAB
ZAF
MLI
MOZ
SEN
DOM
BEN
TTO MUS
ETH
VEN
T
UN
CYP
AGO
KEN
BGD
PER
SLV
ARG
PHL
JAM
CRI
BRA
URY
MAR
IND
MEX
ISR
PNG
LKA
BOL
PAK
BWA
NPL
ECU
GTM
KOR
CHN
THA
TWN
MYS
CPAN
OL
CHL
RWA
TUR
JOR
BFA
HND
PRY
CMR
IDN
TGO
UGA
NGA

0

10000

20000

SGP
HKG

30000

1

10000

1

0

HKG
SGP

SLV BWA
MUS
MOZ
ZAF
PRY
ETH
MAR
SEN
GHA
GTM
TUN URY
BGD
JOR
EGY
PHL
BEN
PAK
MWI
DOM
CIV
KEN
MDG
COL
COG
FJI MEX
RWA
SYR
CHL
TGO
CHN
PER
BFA
NPL
MLI
BOL
ECU
LKA
IDN
TTO
MYS
TUR
GAB
JAM
CRI
IRN
VEN
BRA
HND
IND
CMR
ARG
NER
KOR
ISR
NGA
PAN
THA

0

10000
20000
Real GDP per capita

SGP
HKG

30000

wedge and share adjusted return
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

1
.8

ETH
RWA

0

MDG
MOZ

naive return
.2
.4
.6

UGA

MWI
COG
GHA
IRN
ZAF
CIV
FJI
NER
EGY
GAB
DOM
SEN
SYR
MLI
TTO MUS
MDG
BEN
MOZ
VEN
TUN
ETH
KEN
BGD
PER
SLV
ARG
PHL
JAM
CRI
BRA
URY
IND
MAR
MEX
BOL
LKA
ISR
PAK
GTM
BWA
RWA
NPL
ECU
KOR
CHN
THA
COL
PAN
MYS
BFA
CMR
TUR
CHL
HND
JOR
TGO
PRY
IDN
NGA

0

10000
20000
Real GDP per capita

Figure 5: Various estimates of the private return on capital, 1980-2000.

42

SGP
HKG

30000

2
actual capital inflows
-2
-1
0
1

THA
NPL
SEN
CHL
CIV
BFA
MWI
TGO
PAK
ISRECUPER
BEN
MLI
HNDLKAMYS
BOL
COGKEN
TUN
NER
JAM
COLCRI
PAN
JOR
DOM
PRY
IDN
GHA MUS
FJI
MEX
ARG
MOZ
GTM
BRA PHL
MAR
MDG
CMR
IND
TUR
BGD
RWA
URYIRN ETH
NGA
TTO
SLV
EGY
SYR
ZAF
GAB
VEN
KOR
CHN
HKG
BWA
SGP

0
capital gap

.5

1

2

-.5

actual capital inflows
-2
-1
0
1

THA
NPL
SEN
CHL
C
IV ECUMWI
BFAMLI
TGO
PAK
ISR
BEN
PER
HND
BOL
CRICOG
TUN
MYS NER
LKA
KEN
COL
JOR
DOM
PRY
IDNMAR
GHA
FJI
MEX
MOZ
ARG
GTM
BRA
PHL
MDG
CMR
IND
MUS
TUR
RWA
BGD
ETH
URY
TTO
SLV
IRN NGA
EGY
SYRGAB
ZAF
VEN
KOR
CHN

JAM
PAN

HKG
BWA
SGP

0
initial debt

.5

1

actual capital inflows
-2
-1
0
1

2

-.5

THA
NPL
CIV SEN
CHL
BFA
TGO
MWI
ECU
PAK
ISR
PER
BEN
MLI
HND
BOL
CRI
TUN
COG
MYS
NER
KEN
LKA
COL
JAM
JOR
PAN
PRY
IDN
GHA
MEX
FJIDOM
MOZ
ARG
GTM
BRA
PHL
M
AR
MDG
CMR
IND
MUS
TUR
RWA
BGD
ETH
URY
NGA
TTO
SLV
IRN
EGY
ZAF
GABSYR
VEN
KOR

CHN

HKG
BWA
SGP

-.5
0
.5
long run productivity catch-up

1

Figure 6: Actual land-adjusted capital inflows (as a share of initial GDP) against their
determinants: capital gap (k ∗ − k0 ) /k0 , initial debt to GDP ratio (d0 /y0 ) , and productivity
catch-up (π), 1980-2000. Adjusted labor share.

43

1
actual capital inflows
-3
-2
-1
0

THA
CHL
AGO
ECU
PER
MYS
CIV ARG COL
CYP
MEX
PAK
TUN
DOM TUR
IDN
PRY
CRI
GTM
IND
BRA
TTO
IRN
PAN
PHL
CMR
COG ZAF
URY
NGA
FJI
MUS
ISR
MAR
MDG
SYR
LKA
BOL CHN
TGO
VEN
GHA GAB
EGY SLV
KOR MOZ
JAM
HTIHND
KENNER
SEN
BGD HKG
UGA
BEN
MLI
ETH
TZA
NPL
JOR
PNG
MWI
SGP

1
actual capital inflows
-3
-2
-1
0

0

.5
capital gap

THACHL
AGO
ECU
PER
MYS
COL
CIV
CYP
ARG
MEX
PAKTUN
DOM
PRY
IDN
CRI
GTM
TUR
IND
BRA
IRNTTO
PHL
CMR
URY
COG
NGA
FJI
MUS
ISR
MAR
MDG
ZAF
SYR
LKA
SLV
GAB
BOL
TGO
VEN
CHN
MOZ
GHA
HND
EGY
KOR
HTI
NER
KEN
SEN
BGD
HKG RWA
UGA
BEN
ETHMLI
TZA
NPL
JOR PNG

1

1.5

PAN
JAM

MWI
SGP
BFA
BWA

-.5

1

BFA

BWA

-.5

actual capital inflows
-3
-2
-1
0

RWA

0

.5
initial debt

1

1.5

1

1.5

CHL THA
AGO
ECU COL
PER
MYS
CIV
CYP
ARGIDN
MEX
TUN PAK
PRY
CRI
TURDOM
GTM
IND
BRA
TTO
IRN
PHL
PAN
CMR
URY
COG
NGA
FJI
ISR
MUS
MDG
ZAF
SYR
LKA
BOLMAR
GAB
SLV
TGO
VEN
MOZ
CHN
HND
EGY
KOR
JAM GHA HTI
NER
SEN
KEN
BGD
HKG
RWATZA
UGA
BEN
MLI
ETH
NPL
JORPNG
MWI
SGP
BFA
BWA

-.5
0
.5
long run productivity catch-up

Figure 7: Observed aid-adjusted capital inflows (as a share of initial GDP) against their
determinants: capital gap (k ∗ − k0 ) /k0 , initial debt to GDP ratio (d0 /y0 ) , and productivity
catch-up (π), 1980-2000.

44

A
A.1

Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.

The ratio of the debt increase to initial GDP is given by,
DT − D0
deT AT NT − de0 A0 N0
deT (g ∗ n)T (1 + π) − de0
∆D
=
=
=
.
e
Y0
Y0
A0 N0 e
k0α
k0α

(19)

e e∗ e
At the beginning of time 0 external debt jumps from de0 to de+
0 = d0 + k − k0 to finance the initial
capital gap. Note that although output is produced with the equilibrium level of capital e
k ∗ from
∗
e
period 0 onward, we normalize debt by the level of output before capital has jumped to k .
We then compute deT . Let us denote by gt = At /At−1 the growth rate of productivity. Dividing
kt = e
k ∗ gives
the budget constraint (4) by Nt At and using Nt+1 /Nt = n, At+1 /At = gt+1 , e
e
ct + ngt+1 e
k ∗ + R∗ det = R∗ e
k ∗ + ngt+1 det+1 + w
e + ze,

(20)

where the wage and transfer per efficiency unit of labor are constant and given by w
e = (1 − α)e
k ∗α
τ
and ze = 1−τ
R∗ e
k∗ .
After time T the economy is in a steady growth path with gt+1 = g ∗ , det = deT and e
ct = e
cT .
Equation (20) implies
w
e + ze − e
cT
deT = e
k∗ + ∗
.
(21)
R − ng ∗
The next step is to compute e
cT = cT /AT = c0 g ∗t /(1 + π)A0 g ∗t = e
c0 /(1 + π). The level of
net wealth per capita at the beginning of period 0 is k ∗ − d+
=
k
−
d
0
0 . Integrating the budget
0
constraint (20) gives the intertemporal budget constraint,
+∞ 
+∞ 
X
X
n t
n t
c
=
(wt + zt ) + R∗ (k0 − d0 ).
t
R∗
R∗
0

0

Using ct = A0 e
c0 g ∗t and wt + zt = (w
e + ze)A0 (1 + π t )g ∗t this equation implies
∗

∗

e
c0 = (R − ng )


+∞ 
1 X ng ∗ t
(1 + π t )(w
e + ze) + e
k0 − de0
R∗
R∗

!
.

(22)

t=0

Using this expression to substitute out e
cT = e
c0 /(1 + π) from (21) gives

T −1 
e
k0 − de0
1 w
e + ze X ng ∗ t
∗
e
e
dT = k −
+
(π − π t ) .
1+π
1 + π R∗
R∗

(23)

t=0

Finally, using this expression to substitute out deT from (19) gives the expression in Proposition 1.


45

A.2

Comparing different measures of capital inflows.

In the main text we measured capital inflows by the ratio of cumulated capital inflows to intial
GDP:
DT − D0
m1 =
.
Y0
Our results are robust to using other measures of foreign borrowing. For example, capital inflows
could be measured as the average ratio of net capital inflows to GDP over the period [0, T ],
m2 =

T −1
1 X Dt+1 − Dt
.
T
Yt

(24)

t=0

This is the measure we used to introduce the allocation puzzle in Figure 1. Another possible
measure of capital inflows is the change in the ratio of net foreign liabilities to GDP between time
0 and time T ,
DT
D0
m3 =
−
.
(25)
YT
Y0
We show that these measures are all increasing with the productivity catch-up π, under assumptions 1 and 2 and the additional requirement that f (t) increases with t. We have already
shown this property for m1 . We now show that m2 and m3 are also increasing with π. First we
derive a closed-form expression for det and show that it is increasing with π for any time t. The
budget constraint (20) can be rewritten:
 w
ng ∗ 1 + πf (t + 1)  e
e + ze − e
ct
det − e
k∗ = ∗
.
dt+1 − e
k∗ +
∗
R
1 + πf (t)
R
Iterating forward then gives:
det = e
k∗ +


+∞ 
X
ng ∗ s 1 + πf (t + s) w
e + ze − e
ct+s
.
∗
∗
R
1 + πf (t)
R
s=0

Then using (1 + πf (t + s))e
ct+s = e
c0 and expression (22), one can substitute out e
c0 from the
expression above to obtain,
det = e
k∗ +

+∞ 

X
π
1 + πf (t)
s=0

ng ∗
R∗

s
(f (t + s) − f (s))

e
w
e + ze
k0 − de0
−
,
∗
R
1 + πf (t)

(26)

which is increasing with π, for any t, provided that the second term is positive and the third term
is negative. The second term is positive because f (·) is increasing monotonically. The third term
is negative if external debt is not larger than the stock of capital at time 0 (de0 ≤ e
k0 ).
Next, let us show that m2 and m3 are increasing with π. This is very easy to show for m3 since
m3 =

deT
de0
−
.
e
k ∗α e
k0α

46

The only term that depends on π is deT , which is increasing with π. Measure m2 can be written
m2 =

T
−1
X

(gt+1 det+1 − det ).

t=0

Then using gt+1 = g ∗ (1 + πf (t + 1))/(1 + πf (t)) and (26) to substitute out det and det+1 we obtain
(after some manipulations):
gt+1 det+1 − det =




+∞ 
X
ng ∗ s ∗
π
∗ 1 + πf (t + 1)
∗
e
g
−1 k +
(g (f (t + 1 + s) − f (s))
1 + πf (t)
1 + πf (t)
R∗
s=0

e
w
e + ze
k0 − de0
∗
− (f (t + s) − f (s))
−
(g
−
1)
.
R∗
1 + πf (t)
On can check that all the terms on the righ-hand side are increasing with π. Hence m2 is increasing
with π too.
The predictions of the model, therefore, are qualitatively the same for the three measures of
capital flows. However, there is a sense in which those predictions are more robust for measure (9)
than for measures (24) and (25). If the allocation puzzle is observed with measure (9) then it must
also hold with the two other measures. The opposite may not be true. This is another reason to
use measure (9) as a benchmark when we look at the data.
We will now assume that m1 , m2 and m3 are functions of π that could be different from the
functions derived in the model. One could say that the puzzle is stronger with measure 1 than
with measure 2 if having the puzzle for measure 1 implies that we have it for measure 2 too, i.e.,
if the fact that m1 is decreasing with π implies that m2 is also decreasing with π. We denote this
relationship by m1  m2 . Then, under the simplifying assumption that debt accumulation is a
constant fraction of GDP (that is Dt+1 − Dt = m2 Yt for t = 0, .., T − 1), we can establish the
following ordering,
m1  m2  m3 .
Using Yt = (1 + πf (t))nt Y0 we have
DT = D0 + m2 Y0

T
−1
X

(1 + πf (s))(g ∗ n)s .

s=0

Using the definition of m1 we have
T −1

m1 =

X
DT − D0
= m2
(1 + πf (s))(g ∗ n)s .
Y0
s=0

It follows that if m1 is decreasing with π, so is m2 , which establishes m1  m2 . As for m3 it can

47

be written,
D0 + m2 Y0
m3 =
=

T
−1
X

(1 + πf (s))(g ∗ n)s

D0
s=0
−
,
(1 + π)(g ∗ n)T Y0
Y0


T
−1
X
1 + πf (s) ∗ s−T
D0
1
−
1
+
m
(g n)
.
2
∗
T
Y0 (1 + π)(g n)
1+π
s=0

If m2 is decreasing with π, so is m3 , which establishes m2  m3 .

A.3

Proof of Proposition 2.

For t ≥ 1 we have
skt =

Kt+1 − (1 − δ) Kt
At+1 Nt+1 e
k ∗ − (1 − δ) At Nt e
k∗
=
= (gt+1 n + δ − 1) e
k ∗(1−α) .
∗α
e
Yt
At Nt k

In period 0 this expression is augmented by a term reflecting that the level of capital per efficiency
unit of labor jumps up from e
k0 to e
k ∗ at the beginning of the period,
sk0 = (g1 n + δ − 1) e
k ∗(1−α) +

e
k∗ − e
k0
K0∗ − K0
= (g1 n + δ − 1) e
k ∗(1−α) +
.
α
e
Y0
k0

The average investment rate between t = 0 and t = T − 1 can be written,
sk =

t=T −1
t=T −1
1 X
1 k̃ ∗ − k̃0
1 X
skt =
+
(gt+1 n + δ − 1) k̃ ∗(1−α) ,
T
T k̃0α
T
t=0
t=0

=

1 k̃ ∗ − k̃0
+ (ḡn + δ − 1) k̃ ∗(1−α) ,
T k̃0α

=

1 k̃ ∗ − k̃0
+ (ḡ − g ∗ ) nk̃ ∗(1−α) + (g ∗ n + δ − 1) k̃ ∗(1−α) ,
T k̃0α

Pt=T −1
gt+1 is the average productivity growth rate. Under the additional assumption
where ḡ = T1 t=0
that π is small, ḡ can be expressed as a function of π as

ḡ = g ∗
≈ g∗

t=T −1
1 X 1 + π t+1
,
T
1 + πt

1
T


t=0
t=T
X−1

(1 + π t+1 − π t ) ,

t=0

= g∗ 1 +

π
,
T

where the first line uses the definition of π t , and the last equality uses π T = π and π 0 = 0. We can

48

then write s̄k as
s̄k =

1 k̃ ∗ − k̃0
π
+ k̃ ∗(1−α) g ∗ n + (g ∗ n + δ − 1) k̃ ∗(1−α) .
T k̃0α
T



A.4

Proof of Proposition 3.

The proof is similar to that of Proposition 1. The only difference is that the consumption path
is determined as if future productivity were growing at rate g ∗ . This implies that consumption at
time t is given by an equation similar to (22) with π set to zero:
!

+∞ 
1 X ng ∗ t
∗
∗
∗
e
ct = (R − ng )
(w
e + ze) + e
k − det ,
R∗
R∗
t=0
∗ e∗

∗

= w
e + ze + (R − ng )(k − det ).
Using this expression to substitute e
ct out of (20) gives,
e
k ∗ − det+1 =
=

g ∗ e∗ e
(k − dt ),
gt+1
1 + πf (t) e∗ e
(k − dt ).
1 + πf (t + 1)

Iterating from t = 0 to t = T gives
e
k ∗ − deT =

1 e
1 e∗ e+
(k − d0 ) =
(k0 − de0 ).
1+π
1+π

Using this expression to substitute out deT from (19) gives (16). 

B

Measuring PPP-adjusted Capital Flows.

For a given country, data expressed in constant international dollars (the unit used in the Penn
World Tables for real variables) can be converted into current US dollars by multiplying them by
the deflator,
CGDPt
,
Qt = Pt
RGDPt
where CGDPt (RGDPt ) is domestic GDP expressed in current (constant) international dollar and
Pt is a price deflator. The ratio CGDP/RGDP operates the conversion from constant international
dollar into current international dollar, and P operates the conversion from current international
dollar into current US dollar. We define the deflator P as the price of investment goods reported
in the Penn World Tables, for reasons given in section 3.2. Multiplying a variable in constant
international dollar, X, by the deflator Q gives its value in terms of current US dollars, X $ = QX.
The deflator Q can be used to obtain PPP-adjusted estimates of the observed cumulated capital
inflows ∆D. To do this, we start from the external accumulation equation (in current US dollars):

49

DT$ = D0$ −

PT −1
t=0

CA$t ,29 and use the formulas DT = DT$ /QT and D0 = D0$ /Q0 to obtain:

∆D =

1
1
−
QT
Q0



D0$ −

T
−1
X
t=0

CA$t
.
QT

(27)

The estimate of the initial net external debt in US dollar (D0$ ) is obtained from Lane and MilesiFerretti (2006)’s External Wealth of Nations Mark II database (EWN), as the difference between
(the opposite of) the reported net international investment position (NIIP) and the cumulated errors
and omissions (EO) cumulated between 1970 and 1980.30 The same approach is used to construct
estimates of the initial debt output ratio d0 /y0 , which we need to compute the right-hand-side of
(10).
To obtain PPP-adjusted cumulated aid flows, we compute:
T
−1
X
N ODA$t
∆B
=
,
Y0
Y0 QT
t=0

where N ODA∗t is the current U.S. dollar value of the net overseas assistance in year t from all
donors. We can then construct a measure of cumulated flows, net of official aid flows:
∆D0
∆D − ∆B
=
=
Y0
Y0



1
1
−
QT
Q0

29



T −1

D0$ X CA$t + N ODA$t
−
.
Y0
Y0 QT
t=0

Alternatively, one could use Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006)’s estimate of the net external
position in year 2000. The difference between the two estimates lies in the treatment of valuation
effects due to asset price and currency movements. The size and relative importance of these
valuation effects has increased over time. We do not attempt to incorporate these effects in this
paper.
30
In keeping with usual practice, we interpret errors and omissions as unreported capital inflows.

50

C

Data

Table 5: Data for 66 non-OECD countries, as well as Korea, Mexico and Turkey. The
last three columns report the share of reproducible capital income αk , the naive (RN ) and
wedge-adjusted (RW ) returns for the case with non-reproducible capital described in section
4.2.
Start

End

sk (%)

g(%)

n(%)

τ (%)

π

αk

RN (%)

RW (%)

Angola
Argentina
Bangladesh
Benin
Bolivia

1985
1980
1980
1980
1980

1996
2000
2000
2000
2000

6.16
15.84
10.41
8.00
8.38

-2.32
0.83
1.73
-0.00
-0.23

2.85
1.49
2.62
3.02
2.46

12.92
2.90
13.99
19.41
12.51

-0.36
-0.15
0.02
-0.28
-0.32

.
0.25
0.22
0.16
0.19

.
6.61
15.48
14.84
9.87

.
6.14
6.02
6.99
5.28

Botswana
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Chile

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

1999
2000
2000
1995
2000

16.95
18.00
10.33
8.72
17.32

3.84
0.43
0.11
-1.22
2.88

3.56
2.38
2.41
2.80
1.85

11.07
2.70
14.50
17.74
6.57

0.47
-0.23
-0.27
-0.37
0.28

0.43
0.28
0.19
0.13
0.32

27.71
7.50
10.33
6.75
11.36

4.79
5.88
3.27
3.28
3.22

China
Colombia
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Cyprus

1982
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000
1996

19.58
11.79
12.95
15.30
23.57

4.81
0.74
3.17
-0.58
5.59

1.82
2.61
2.90
3.02
1.08

7.69
11.42
6.78
6.21
1.43

0.74
-0.18
0.28
-0.36
0.84

0.26
0.24
0.21
0.22
.

10.40
12.14
11.88
7.81
.

4.26
3.73
10.18
5.80
.

C^
ote d’Ivoire
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

5.74
13.26
16.50
7.42
7.10

-1.40
1.57
-0.47
2.73
-1.01

3.70
2.61
3.08
2.62
2.28

17.09
9.82
3.40
23.81
16.90

-0.46
-0.02
-0.27
0.24
-0.41

0.15
0.23
0.34
0.13
0.32

13.71
13.83
9.75
15.26
29.54

8.45
7.52
4.29
7.89
6.03

Ethiopia
Fiji
Gabon
Ghana
Guatemala

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
1999
2000
2000
2000

4.17
12.64
11.53
6.11
7.35

-0.50
1.10
1.14
1.14
0.26

2.61
1.65
2.44
3.40
2.76

32.68
5.83
8.61
17.44
18.65

-0.35
-0.10
-0.10
-0.10
-0.25

0.11
0.25
0.17
0.16
0.19

17.74
12.04
8.45
16.11
15.88

6.57
8.39
7.86
9.36
4.89

Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China
India
Indonesia

1980
1980
1980
1980
1981

1998
2000
2000
2000
2000

5.46
12.91
25.31
11.95
16.91

2.25
-1.26
3.56
3.04
1.74

2.09
3.44
1.87
2.33
2.46

31.63
8.35
2.49
13.01
9.75

0.14
-0.46
0.41
0.31
0.00

.
0.23
0.31
0.15
0.26

.
7.37
6.41
7.43
9.51

.
2.84
3.52
5.73
1.71

Iran, Islamic Rep.
Israel

1980
1980

2000
2000

19.84
24.97

-0.07
1.88

3.10
2.72

1.20
0.09

-0.28
0.03

0.24
0.31

7.76
5.52

9.10
5.26

Country

continued on next page

51

Table 5 continued from previous page
Country

Start

End

sk (%)

g(%)

n(%)

τ (%)

π

αk

RN (%)

RW (%)

Jamaica
Jordan
Kenya

1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000

15.39
15.57
8.33

-0.62
-1.12
0.76

1.80
5.09
3.70

0.25
9.98
14.43

-0.37
-0.44
-0.18

0.34
0.31
0.19

7.70
15.22
13.22

5.84
2.91
6.39

Korea, Rep.
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

34.05
2.75
9.24
24.42
7.83

4.13
-1.50
1.84
2.65
-0.08

1.83
2.84
2.64
3.07
2.44

-0.08
38.59
10.56
4.31
18.46

0.61
-0.47
0.04
0.21
-0.29

0.35
0.07
0.18
0.31
0.12

6.12
12.71
14.50
8.74
9.80

4.32
6.92
11.54
3.54
7.19

Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

11.96
18.13
12.74
3.07
15.45

3.85
-0.74
0.86
-2.52
0.64

1.62
2.95
2.75
1.93
2.29

11.66
3.34
7.91
36.89
8.65

0.53
-0.39
-0.16
-0.56
-0.18

0.38
0.36
0.34
0.10
0.24

27.99
11.75
17.46
19.16
10.31

9.08
5.38
5.62
6.81
4.65

Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

1995
2000
2000
2000
1999

6.65
8.31
11.34
18.36
11.18

-1.58
-1.82
3.20
0.09
-0.19

3.28
2.93
2.57
2.64
2.86

13.88
14.90
14.14
3.00
9.34

-0.38
-0.50
0.34
-0.28
-0.29

0.11
0.16
0.22
0.27
.

6.19
4.98
14.82
5.11
.

7.89
0.69
5.02
3.69
.

Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Rwanda
Senegal

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

12.78
18.02
14.95
4.34
6.50

0.31
-1.20
-0.40
-2.99
0.03

3.23
2.63
2.73
2.96
2.88

11.90
1.14
5.84
33.93
19.25

-0.24
-0.44
-0.34
-0.62
-0.28

0.33
0.37
0.35
0.08
0.17

17.89
10.39
15.17
11.55
16.68

1.95
6.03
5.92
4.54
7.31

Singapore
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

1996
2000
2000
2000
1997

44.14
9.52
13.45
11.64
19.05

4.29
-0.25
1.33
1.69
5.42

2.94
2.86
1.91
3.92
1.56

-2.48
9.24
10.57
13.04
8.24

0.50
-0.33
-0.06
0.00
0.84

0.47
0.29
0.20
0.17
.

9.05
18.39
9.41
11.60
.

6.54
8.58
5.19
7.42
.

Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia

1980
1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

18.89
31.30
7.47
10.18
14.41

-1.39
3.64
-2.71
-0.76
2.19

3.27
2.18
2.92
1.57
2.89

-0.96
0.04
16.06
10.06
7.83

-0.46
0.46
-0.59
-0.39
0.09

.
0.31
0.20
0.18
0.30

.
4.42
11.04
9.09
15.81

.
4.00
1.80
7.02
6.80

Turkey
Uganda
Uruguay
Venezuela, RB

1980
1980
1980
1980

2000
2000
2000
2000

16.87
2.84
11.65
14.35

0.54
0.86
2.37
-1.48

2.76
2.65
0.66
2.86

5.96
51.47
7.61
1.71

-0.21
-0.15
0.15
-0.47

0.28
.
0.29
0.28

8.32
.
13.46
7.51

3.31
.
5.85
6.78

52

