NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CANADA'S PIONEERING EXPERIENCE WITH A FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE IN THE 1950s:
(HARD) LESSONS LEARNED FOR MONETARY POLICY IN A SMALL OPEN ECONOMY
Michael D. Bordo
Ali Dib
Lawrence Schembri
Working Paper 13605
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13605

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

The authors would like to thank Robert Lafrance, James Powell, John Murray and Anna Schwartz
for their helpful comments as well as seminar participants at the 2005 CEA conference in Hamilton,
at the 2006 SOEGW conference in Rimini, at Carleton University, at Ryerson Uiversity, and at the
Bank of Canada. We are grateful as well for the research assistance of Ryan Felushko, Tamara Gomes,
Taha Jamal, André Poudrier and Jonathan Hoddenbagh. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and not of the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Michael D. Bordo, Ali Dib, and Lawrence Schembri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Canada's Pioneering Experience with a Flexible Exchange Rate in the 1950s:(Hard) Lessons
Learned for Monetary Policy in a Small Open Economy
Michael D. Bordo, Ali Dib, and Lawrence Schembri
NBER Working Paper No. 13605
November 2007
JEL No. E32,E37,F31,F32,N01
ABSTRACT
This paper revisits Canada's pioneering experience with floating exchange rate over the period 1950-1962.
It examines whether the floating rate was the best option for Canada in the 1950s by developing and
estimating a New Keynesian small open economy model of the Canadian economy. The model is
then used to conduct a counterfactual analysis of the impact of different monetary policies and exchange
rate regimes. The main finding indicates that the flexible exchange rate helped reduce the volatility
of key macro-economic variables. The Canadian monetary authorities, however, clearly did not understand
all of the implications of conducting monetary policy under a flexible exchange rate and a high degree
of capital mobility. The paper confirms that monetary policy was more volatile in the post-1957 period
and Canada's macroeconomic performance suffered as a result.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Ali Dib
Bank of Canada
234 Wellington St.
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1A 0G9
adib@bank-banque-canada.ca

Lawrence Schembri
Bank of Canada
234 Wellington Street
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1A 0G9
lschembri@bank-banque-canada.ca

Reflections on Canada’s Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies: 1950-62
Milton Friedman:
“…floating rates are not a guarantee of sensible internal monetary policy.
… All floating rates do is make it possible for you to have a sensible
internal monetary policy without considering the rest of the world.”
“The reason Canada went off floating rates [in 1962] was because they
were working so well, and their internal monetary policy was so bad.”
Milton Friedman (1967, p. 122)
Robert Mundell:
“Whether insulation is achieved or not depends on the precise behaviour
of the monetary authorities”
“...the tight monetary policy … suggests a faulty understanding of how the
advantages of a flexible exchange rate system can be exploited.”
Robert Mundell (1964, p. 82 and p. 85)
James Coyne (Governor, Bank of Canada, 1955-61):
On the definition of “tight monetary policy”:
“To the extent that the phrase might be taken to imply a contraction in the
availability of money, it is not applicable. In this sense of the phrase there
has never been a ‘tight monetary policy’ in Canada….”
James Coyne (1958, Bank of Canada Annual Report 1957, p.15)
“[I] have always felt a special responsibility as Governor …to protect the
value of the Canadian dollar.”
James Coyne (July 10, 1961 testimony before the Canadian Senate, p.
340)1

1

The Canadian Senate defeated the Government bill declaring the position of Governor of the Bank of
Canada vacant on July 14, 1961; nonetheless, Coyne resigned immediately thereafter.

1

1. Introduction
On September 30 1950, the Canadian government took the bold step of allowing
the Canadian dollar to float, which meant leaving the Bretton Woods par value system
less than five years after its establishment.2 This action marked the beginning of the first
policy experiment with a flexible rate by an industrialized country in the postwar period. 3
Canada’s decision to adopt a flexible exchange rate in 1950 was bitterly criticized by the
IMF because Canada was a founding and integral member of the IMF and the Bretton
Woods system, and IMF officials were concerned that other member countries might
follow suit. Milton Friedman, in contrast, cited the Canadian situation in the late 1940s as
one highly amenable to floating in his famous 1953 article “The Case for Floating
Exchange Rates”. 4 In this article, he argued that a floating exchange rate provides two
key benefits -- insulation from external shocks and monetary independence. Canadian
officials subsequently used Friedman’s article and these arguments as an intellectual
justification for their choice of exchange rate regime.
Despite the fact that Canada’s flexible exchange rate remained remarkably stable
for more than 10 years (indeed, perhaps it was too stable), the experiment ended in May
1962 amidst a storm of controversy over the recent management of domestic monetary,
exchange rate and fiscal policies. This political uproar forced the resignation of James
Coyne, the Governor of the Bank of Canada. His dismissal over his conduct of monetary
policy was unprecedented among industrial countries and it initiated far-reaching reforms
to clarify the relationship between central banks and governments, their political
masters.5 Furthermore, the relatively poor performance of the Canadian economy and the

2

The floating rate period actually began the following Monday on October 3, 1950. Canadian commercial
banks established an interbank market for foreign exchange over the weekend.
3
Earlier experiences with floating include the U.S. Greenback 1862-1878; Austria-Hungary 1896-1914;
and the U.K. 1931-1939.
4
Although the essay was written in 1950, Friedman had in 1948 engaged in a radio debate at the University
at Chicago with Deputy Governor Donald Gordon and Professor W.A. McIntosh (Queen’s University) in
which he strongly advocated that Canada float rather than impose currency controls to protect reserves.
Powell (2005) provides further details.
5
The Bank of Canada Act was amended so that in the event of a disagreement over monetary policy, the
government would have to issue and publish a directive to the Governor and the Governor would be forced
to resign.

2

controversy over monetary and fiscal policy served as the inspiration for Mundell’s
contribution to the Mundell-Fleming model.6 7
Friedman’s view of the Canadian experience with a floating exchange rate over
this period is neatly summarized by the second quote given above: the flexible rate was
successful to the extent that it behaved much as Friedman had expected given the
fundamentals, but that its ultimate demise was due to misguided monetary policy. James
Coyne, on the other hand, felt his monetary policies were anything but misguided; he was
committed to low inflation and maintaining the value of the dollar. Although these two
goals could be simultaneously achieved with a tight monetary policy, such a policy was
often inconsistent, especially in the short run, with achieving a full employment level of
output when the economy experienced export and fiscal demand shocks.
The purpose of this paper is to revisit Canada’s experience with a floating rate
from 1950-62 to re-evaluate the conduct of monetary policy under a flexible exchange
rate and a high degree of capital mobility. Such reconsideration is timely because the
implementation of monetary policy under a flexible exchange rate and mobile capital is
an important issue in a world where more and more small open economies are adopting
floating rates and global financial markets are becoming more integrated. In particular,
the role of the exchange rate in the transmission of monetary policy, the appropriate
response of monetary policy to exchange rate movements and the choice of a nominal
anchor are critical monetary policy questions. In this regard, useful lessons can be drawn
from Canada’s early experience with floating rates. In addition, Canada’s decisions in
1950 and 1962 to change exchange rate regimes provides useful insights in the debate on
the choice of exchange rate regimes, which has been revived recently in the international
policy arena for emerging market countries, for potential euro zone members and also
6

See Gordon (1961) for a detailed analysis of the Bank of Canada’s controversial monetary policies during
the Coyne era. Mundell’s research on the small open economy model and the assignment problem were
motivated by Canada’s monetary and fiscal problems. Mundell’s research clearly showed that under a
flexible exchange rate, tight monetary policy and expansionary fiscal were inimical to a full employment
level of output in a small open economy. See Mundell (1964) and Bordo, Gomes and Schembri (2007) for
further details.
7
The ruling Diefenbaker Conservative government was elected in 1958 in a landslide; it was defeated in
the 1963 election primarily because of Canada’s poor economic performance stemming from mistaken
monetary and fiscal policies.

3

with respect to Canada’s current adherence to a floating exchange rate coupled with
explicit inflation targets versus some form of credibly fixed exchange rate with the U.S.
dollar.8
The paper makes an important contribution to the earlier literature on Canada’s
flexible exchange rate experience in the 1950s by developing and estimating a dynamic
general equilibrium model of the Canadian economy in order to conduct a counterfactual
analysis of the impact of different exchange rate and monetary policies, in particular the
monetary policy of James Coyne, on the performance of the Canadian economy. The
theoretical model is largely based on the recent work of Gali and Monacelli (2005) and is
estimated using Bayesian techniques as in Smets and Wouters (2003) and Lubik and
Schorfheide (2007).
Two counterfactual experiments are conducted. The first assumes that the
monetary policy of the period until 1956 (the “pre-Coyne” period) is maintained
throughout the sample period and the second assumes that Canada remained on a fixed
exchange rate over the 1950─62 period rather than adopting a floating rate. The adoption
of the pre-Coyne monetary policy would have reduced the volatility of output and interest
rates by allowing the inflation rate to adjust more fully to endogenous shocks. Had the
pre-Coyne monetary policy been in place throughout the sample period, it is likely that
Canada would not have returned to the Bretton Woods par value system in 1962, only to
abandon it for good in 1970. The second experiment shows that had Canada remained on
a fixed exchange rate and essentially followed U.S. monetary policy over this period the
volatility of output and inflation could have increased significantly. Thus, even though
the monetary policy in the post-1957 (“Coyne”) period is found to be highly volatile, it
was still better than having a fixed exchange rate.
The paper also considers the following specific questions related to the Canadian
dollar: What explains the behaviour of the floating Canadian dollar over this period, and
in particular, its remarkable stability? How well did it reflect movements in underlying
fundamentals? Did the floating exchange rate insulate the Canadian economy from
8

For references on the recent debate in Canada see Lafrance and Schembri (2003).

4

external shocks? Was the apparent stability due to the absence of shocks? These
questions are addressed in the historical narrative section of the paper and as well as by
simulation results derived from the estimated DSGE model.
The unique Canadian experiment with a flexible exchange rate sparked extensive
research, most of which was published in the 1960s and early 1970s in an era when the
Bretton Woods par value system was undergoing severe strains and debates raged about
feasible alternatives.9 This earlier literature on the Canadian experience focused on the
merits of floating exchange rates by analyzing whether the regime’s performance was
satisfactory in terms of the stability of the exchange rate, the overall macroeconomic
performance of the Canadian economy, the ability of the flexible rate to provide
insulation from external shocks, and the amount of monetary independence actually
achieved under the flexible rate regime. Following Friedman’s arguments on stabilizing
speculation, much of the research focused on the first issue, the stability of the exchange
rate and the role of short-term capital movements. The consensus opinion from this
research was that, on the whole, the Canadian experience was successful, and this finding
was used to make the case for generalized floating and the dismantling of the par value
system between 1971 and 1973.10
Our general conclusion is similar to that of the older literature in the qualitative
sense that our research indicates that Canada’s flexible rate performed reasonably well in
terms of helping the Canadian economy adjust to shocks. Its effectiveness in this regard
was hindered by monetary and fiscal policies that sometimes prevented this adjustment
because the Canadian authorities did not fully understand the impact of their policies in
an environment of a flexible exchange rate and capital mobility. Our results are generally
consistent with Friedman’s and Mundell’s opening quotes: namely, that the Canadian
floating rate experiment demonstrated that a flexible rate combined with a sensible
monetary policy allowed the exchange rate to play a stabilizing role in the face of
external asymmetric shocks; as a result, Canada’s economic performance over
approximately the first half of the period, 1950-56, was reasonably good. Over the second
9

See Yeager (1976) for a useful critical survey of the older literature.
The United Kingdom and West Germany also considered the adoption of a floating rate in the 1950s, but,
in the end, both decided against it.

10

5

half of the period, 1957-1962, however, the evidence indicates monetary policy under
Governor Coyne was sometimes too tight and the government reacted to the growing
output gap by expanding fiscal policy which only made matters worse. The resultant high
unemployment set in motion the political unrest that led to Coyne’s departure. Had
Coyne’s monetary policy focused solely on maintaining low and stable inflation, rather
than also attempting to achieve a strong Canadian dollar and other goals, the outcome
would have been superior.11 Coyne and other Canadian officials, however, were not alone
in their mistaken beliefs about the effects of monetary and fiscal policies under a flexible
exchange rate and capital mobility because they were not well understood until the
pioneering work of Mundell and Fleming.12
In the next section of the paper, we review the history of Canada’s exchange rate
and monetary policy experience in the 1950s and the debates over the floating exchange
rate regime and the conduct of monetary policy. In Section 3 the behaviour of the floating
Canadian dollar is examined in more detail. In Section 4 a DSGE model of the Canadian
economy is developed, then estimated and used to conduct counterfactual exercises. The
final section provides some concluding remarks on lessons learned from Canada’s
floating rate experience.
2. Historical Background
In this section, we provide an overview of Canada’s exchange rate and monetary
policy experience from 1950 to 1962. In particular, we summarize the historical
experience and highlight the key issues. Monetary policy in Canada over this period was
primarily directed by the Bank of Canada, which was established in 1935 by the Bank of
Canada Act. The Act, however, did not clearly define the independence of the Bank of
Canada over the conduct of monetary policy. This lack of clarity would become a
significant political issue toward the end of the floating rate period as pressure on the
government for a change in the direction of monetary policy mounted. Graham Towers
11

Coyne also wanted to reduce Canada’s “dependence” on foreign capital (Coyne’s words). There is some
evidence that he used tight monetary policy by trying to raise domestic savings rates in a failed attempt to
reduce such inflows.
12
Haberler (1937) developed many of the ideas that were later formalized by Mundell and Flemming. See
Bordo and James (2001) for more details.

6

served as Governor of the Bank of Canada for the first 20 years of its existence from
1935-1954. He was succeeded by James Coyne who was eventually forced to resign by
the government in July 1961, six months before the end of his seven-year term,
essentially over differences between Coyne and the government concerning domestic
economic policy, including fiscal and commercial policy as well as monetary policy.
Both the U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada have a relatively diffuse
legal mandate, but compared to the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Canada was much less
transparent in the years immediately after World War II. The ultimate responsibility for
Canadian monetary policy rested solely with the Governor and so, in contrast to the
Federal Reserve, there are no minutes from meetings to explain the process by which
monetary policy decisions were reached.13 Information was provided via the Bank’s
annual report, speeches by the Governor, parliamentary testimony and a limited number
of other publications. Moreover, unlike the Federal Reserve, the Bank did not
consistently employ a small set of well-defined indicators/intermediate targets for
monetary policy such as free reserves in the banking system.14
In our review of the annual reports of the Bank of Canada, speeches by the
governor and secondary sources, it appears that monetary policy over the period was
guided by the principles of maintaining low inflation and relatively stable output growth.
In addition to measures of inflation and economic activity, the Bank also considered a
variety of other indicators such as commercial bank cash reserves, market interest rates,
and measures of aggregate liquidity such as bank loans. The notion of an intermediate
target does not appear initially, but later short-term market interest rates are used as the
Bank Rate, the rate at which chartered banks can borrow from the Bank of Canada, is
linked to the Treasury Bill rate. The implementation of monetary policy changed over the
period as financial markets developed. Initially, moral suasion and quantitative
restrictions on commercial bank lending were used and then open market operations and
changes in the Bank Rate became the preferred instruments to influence short-term
market interest rates.
13

Although the monetary policy at the Bank of Canada has become much more transparent, the Governor
remains solely responsible for its conduct.
14
See Romer and Romer (2002).

7

The Canadian federal government was responsible for exchange rate policy and
made the decisions to change the exchange rate parity rates and the exchange rate regime
after World War II.15 To some extent these decisions were more transparent than the
monetary policy decisions of the Bank of Canada because they were debated in
Parliament. Although the government (Department of Finance) and the Bank of Canada
had different responsibilities in terms of economic policy there was regular consultation
between them, especially on exchange rate and monetary policy.
Prelude: 1946-50
Canada allowed its currency to float in October 1950 after two unsuccessful
attempts to establish a sustainable Bretton Woods par value. In July 1946, the Canadian
dollar was revalued from a wartime discount with the U.S. dollar to parity. It soon
became evident that this rate was too high and beginning in 1948 official reserves began
to decline with the consequent deflationary pressure. In September 1949, Canada
followed the U.K. and 30 other countries and devalued its currency back to the pre-July
1946 level of U.S 90.9¢. International economic conditions, however, soon changed in
favour of Canada’s exports and this rate became too low; there were strong capital
inflows beginning in 1949 and continuing into 1950 (reflecting the demand for Canadian
resources for the Korean War, which began in June 1950) and these led to a significant
increase in international reserves, bank reserves, and the money supply. To offset this
inflationary pressure, the authorities decided to float the Canadian dollar rather than try to
pick another par value only to find out, as in 1946 and 1948, that it was no longer
appropriate. The decision to float was presented as a temporary move, presumably with a
return to the par value system once a new ‘fundamental equilibrium’ had been reached.16

15

The federal government also is responsible for international reserves, which are held in the Exchange
Fund Account, and thus, for foreign exchange market intervention as well. The Bank of Canada, as the
financial agent for the government, actually performs the intervention.
16
In a speech on October 20, 1952, the Conservative Minister of Finance, Douglas Abbott, said, “At some
future time conditions may develop in Canada in which it would be appropriate to establish a fixed rate of
exchange for the Canadian dollar”. See Binhammer (1964, p. 639) and Yeager (1976, p. 544) for further
details.

8

1950-51: Transition to a Free Float
Figure 1 shows that over the next 18 months the Canadian dollar appreciated
markedly from 90.9¢ to $1.02, a 12% increase. This rapid appreciation has largely been
explained as a consequence of continued massive capital inflows - largely FDI from the
U.S. to develop Canada’s natural resources (Yeager 1976, p. 544) as shown in figure 2.
The Korean War boom was associated with very rapid real growth (see figure 3), which
put upward pressure on Canadian interest rates and provided further support for the
appreciating currency.
When the floating rate period started in October 1950, foreign exchange controls
were still in place in Canada and an active market for short-term government securities
did not exist, neither did an overnight market for reserves. Chartered banks rarely
borrowed from the Bank of Canada and so the Bank Rate, which was perhaps the most
visible instrument of monetary policy, was largely ineffective in influencing monetary
conditions. For example, in October 1950, it was raised to 2% from 1.5% and it
remained at that level until February 1955, when it was reduced back to 1.5% (Figure
5b). As a consequence, monetary policy was also conducted through various forms of
open market operation involving government securities and government deposits held by
the chartered banks, and by moral suasion and direct regulation to influence the volume
of chartered bank lending.
In this vein, special direct restrictions on consumer and bank credit were adopted
in 1950 and 1951 to help the Bank cope with the abrupt inflationary pressure stemming
from the Korean War expansion in the United States. The U.S. expansion also caused
commodity prices to rise sharply which induced a huge capital inflow into Canada (See
figure 2 and 8); this inflow not only forced Canada to adopt a floating rate, but also
served to greatly expand the money supply. In addition, the prices of many Canadian
products, which are commodity based, also increased; although the Canadian dollar
appreciated over this period, the appreciation did not offset the effect of the U.S. dollar

9

commodity price increase. CPI inflation was 6% in 1950 and rose to over 10% in 1951
(figure 4), and much of it was driven by food prices.17
1952-56: The Textbook Case
The 1952-56 period was the heyday of the floating regime; the Canadian dollar
traded at a substantial premium relative to the U.S. dollar (figure 1) and FDI-driven
capital inflows continued (figure 2). With the exception of the 1953-54 recession, growth
continued to be high, inflation remained relatively low, and monetary policy and the
exchange rate were generally countercyclical.
By the end of 1951, inflationary pressure was waning. Exchange controls were
lifted in December 1951, and direct restrictions on consumer and bank credit were
removed in 1952.18 The economy grew rapidly in 1952, yet CPI inflation turned slightly
negative, as the price level had stabilized after the decline in commodity prices from their
peak in 1951. In 1953, inflation was virtually zero, and the economy grew more slowly,
especially in the latter half of the year.
The Bank of Canada took several important steps in 1953 towards encouraging
the development of a broad and active market in treasury bills by shifting from a
biweekly to a weekly auction, increasing the range of maturities to 273 days and by
entering into purchase and resale agreements with dealers of government securities. This
latter innovation along with the change to the Bank Act in 1954, which raised the primary
(i.e., noninterest bearing) reserve requirement from 5% to 8%, spurred the establishment
of a day-to-day loan market among the bank and investment dealers as banks became
more interested in managing their reserves and the investment dealers were able to use
the purchase and resale agreements to obtain cash from the Bank of Canada. Banks were
also allowed to enter the residential mortgage market.
The period of slow growth in Canada, which began in the second half of 1953, in
part as a result of reduced defense expenditures on both sides of the border, continued
17

Inflation is measured year over year from December.
Canada was the second country after the United States to remove exchange and capital controls after
WWII. Indeed, the removal in 1951 restored the situation to what it was before WWII. See Powell (2005)
for further details.

18

10

through most of 1954 and inflation remained close to zero. Interest rates also remained
relatively low and so in February 1955 the Bank Rate was reduced to 1.5% because the
Bank felt that this rate should be more “flexible and bear a closer (but not fixed) relation
to other short-term interest rates”.19 Indeed, this change marked the beginning of more
frequent use of the Bank Rate as an instrument of monetary policy.
The Canadian, and, to a lesser extent, U.S. economies, grew strongly through the
rest of 1955, 1956 and into 1957. Investment boomed in both countries and in Canada it
was centred on the development of natural resources. The new investment required
higher imports, which were financed by large inflows of foreign direct investment. As
aggregate demand grew, inflation pressures began to mount and for the first time in the
floating rate period, the inflationary pressure was domestic in origin. Although inflation
was again almost zero in 1955, it jumped to 3% in 1956. The Bank reacted by offering
increased resistance to the expansion in bank credit through open market sales. As a
result of the higher demand for credit for investment, market interest rates rose and the
Bank Rate was increased repeatedly: 5 August 1955 to 2% and then to 2.25% and 2.75%
on 12 October and 18 November 1955. Because the banks were making more use of the
lending window to meet reserve requirements, the increases were affecting interest rates
at the short term. Meetings with the banks were held in September and November 1955
to moderate the “excessive” use of bank credit by some borrowers. The banks also agreed
to maintain voluntarily, starting 31 May 1956, a minimum liquid asset ratio (cash, Bank
of Canada deposits, day-to-day loans and treasury bills) of 15% to deposits in addition to
the 8% primary reserve requirement. In 1956, the Bank Rate was again raised on three
occasions until it reached 3.5 % by October. In November, the decision was made that the
Bank Rate would float and be equal to 25 basis points more than the Treasury bill rate
established at the weekly auction and at the end of 1956, the Bank Rate closed at 3.92%,
which represented an increase of almost 250 basis points over less than 23 months.
Over the 1950-56 period, monetary policy seemed to be reasonably effective in
stabilizing the Canadian economy against the inflationary pressures stemming from the
19

Quote taken from a public statement by the Bank of Canada February 14, 1955 and published in the
1955 Annual Report (p.7).

11

Korean War and then less so during the recession that occurred after the war ended. The
exchange rate also moved in a countercyclical fashion. (See Figures 1 and 3) Graham
Towers retired as Governor of the Bank of Canada at the end of 1954 and James Coyne
began his tenure in January 1955. Although the economy continued to grow from 1956
into 1957, higher interest rates and a stronger dollar, which had appreciated by almost 7
percent over 1955 and 1956 to a premium of 4 U.S. cents by end of 1956, were starting to
have an impact. These were the seeds of the later controversy surrounding the conduct of
Canadian monetary policy.
1957-60 Deteriorating Performance and Questionable Policies
In 1957, the economy began slowing down after more than two years of rapid
growth. Because this slowdown was marked by a sharp increase in the rate of
unemployment, from 4% to 7% (See Figure 7), observers began to question the wisdom
of Canadian monetary policy, especially as the Bank continued to tighten monetary
conditions until August of 1957 with the Bank Rate rising to 4.33% and the Canadian
dollar appreciating to a peak of US$1.06 at the same time. This further tightening seemed
unwarranted since the signs of a slowdown were apparent as the inflation rate started to
decline early in 1957 and ended up the year at 2.2%, down from 3% in 1956.
These criticisms were further supported by the fact that the Canadian economy
seemed to slow well before the U.S. economy indicating that the source of the adverse
shock was not foreign, but domestic (i.e., tight monetary policy). Indeed, Canada’s
economic performance during the 1957-58 recession was probably worse than that of the
United States as growth was slower and unemployment higher. Controversy also swirled
around the money supply figures provided in the 1957 Annual Report. Gordon (1961, 11)
argued that the Bank broke with IMF data reporting guidelines and used a “shallow
statistical trick” to hide the fact that money supply had, in fact, increased over the last
four months of the year by four times less than the Bank reported in the 1957 Annual
Report. Indeed, the tone of the 1957 Annual Report (and subsequent Annual Reports
while Coyne was Governor) changed; they became more defensive and responded

12

directly to criticisms with phrases such as “there has never been a tight monetary
policy.”20
The Bank also argued that the increase in the unemployment rate was due to
structural factors, in particular, the rapid growth of the labour force because of massive
immigration and a higher labor force participation rate. The structural argument, which
can be interpreted as an increase in the natural rate of unemployment, should not be
immediately dismissed. The unemployment rate in the United States also increased by
almost the same amount as the recession deepened into 1958. Although the United States
was not the recipient of the same degree of immigration, the two countries shared a
similar demographic profile and were undergoing comparable socio-economic changes
that likely had similar effects on labour force participation and other aspects of the labour
market behaviour. Hence, it would not be unreasonable for the natural rate of
unemployment to have increased in both countries.
The trough in the recession in both countries was reached in the spring of 1958
and large scale monetary expansions helped both economies recover quickly; interest
rates in Canada fell as the Bank Rate declined from 3.92% at the end of 1957 to a low of
1.91% in July of 1958. These monetary expansions were mainly the result of efforts in
both countries to convert or rollover into longer maturities government bonds that were
issued to finance WWII defense expenditures and were coming due shortly.
The central banks intervened to keep interest rates low to make the new issues
look more attractive to private investors. As both economies rebounded in the second half
of 1958, interest rates rose sharply to levels that existed at the beginning of year,
especially in Canada as the recovery there was much stronger. In the 1958 Annual
Report, the Bank blamed the higher interest rates on higher expected future inflation
(investor “inflation psychosis”, p. 3). The Bank argued that these expectations were based
on the facts that inflation in 1958 was slightly higher than in 1957 (2.5% versus 2.2%)
despite the trough of the recession being in 1958 and that the Canadian federal and
provincial governments were running “large-scale” fiscal deficits. The critics, however,
20

Bank of Canada 1957 Annual Report (p. 15).

13

blamed the higher rates on monetary policy that was too tight. Since neither side had the
benefit of Mundell’s later work, neither recognized that under a floating rate,
expansionary fiscal policy would also contribute to higher interest rates and a stronger
Canadian dollar. The currency appreciated by roughly 2% in 1958 and remained at a
substantial premium to the U.S. dollar.
Who was right, the Bank or its critics? Inflation in 1959 fell to 2.0% from 2.5% in
1958 despite the fact that the strong recovery continued in Canada through to till the end
of 1959. Either the Bank was right that Canadian investors were suffering from inflation
psychosis and simply overestimated inflation in 1959 or it was the Bank that suffered
from inflation psychosis and tightened monetary policy in the expectation of a rise in
inflation, which did not materialize. The evidence seems to point to the latter as the Bank
continued to push up short-term interest rates over the first eight months of 1959 (the
Bank Rate increased by 257 basis points from 3.85% to 6.41% over this short period),
without much evidence of any significant inflationary pressure. A significant spread
developed in Canada-U.S. interest rates, especially in the first half of 1959, and the dollar
appreciated further in 1959 by another 1%. The unemployment rate fell during 1959, but
remained higher than the U.S. level.
It seemed that the Federal Reserve also feared higher future inflation in 1959 and
1960, and it increased its discount rate as well, but less dramatically than the Bank of
Canada. The impact of this tightening was felt in 1960 as both economies grew more
slowly and inflation fell to 1.3 percent in Canada. The unemployment rate increased
sharply from 6.5% at the beginning of 1960 to 8.7% by the end of the year. In the 1960
Annual Report (pp. 15-16), the Bank attempted to shift the blame for the slower growth
and higher unemployment from its own policies to “serious structural distortions and
inadequacies in the Canadian economy” and argued that more employment and output
could be created by measures aimed at reducing the current account deficit (e.g., raising
tariffs, encouraging higher domestic savings and less government spending.) For Coyne,
the most significant inadequacy was Canada’s “undue” dependence on foreign capital
that arose, in his view, because of excessive domestic spending (p.7, Annual Report
1958). Thus he felt it was not appropriate to provide easier access to credit to encourage

14

further excesses. He, however, failed to recognize that higher interest rates only served to
make Canada a more attractive destination for foreign capital. Indeed, the Bank of
Canada’s deliberate pursuit of a tight monetary policy increased interest rate spreads, as
Canadian short-term rates rose well above their U.S. counterparts (see figure 5a), and this
caused portfolio capital inflows to increase to more than offset declines in FDI relative to
the levels seen during the Korean war period, when commodity prices were strong and
Canadian natural resources were in high demand (figure 2). Coyne’s views on Canada’s
economic inadequacies and the tight monetary policy that he implemented in order to
address them were heavily criticized by the academic community (Gordon, 1961).21
The rising unemployment rate and Coyne’s contentious arguments, which were
repeated in several speeches in 1960 and 1961, embarrassed the government and created
substantial political pressure to remove Coyne. In May of 1961 the government reacted
by introducing legislation to declare the position of the Governor of the Bank of Canada
vacant.
In summary, the Bank of Canada’s tight monetary policy in the last half of the
floating rate period was excessive; the Bank’s overarching fears of higher future inflation
never materialized because the Bank did not understand the effectiveness of monetary
policy under a floating exchange rate and high degree of capital mobility. Tighter
monetary policy served to appreciate the exchange rate and lower inflation by reducing
economic activity and the cost of imported goods. In addition, these systematic inflation
forecast errors may have been due to two factors: inadequate appreciation of the growth
in potential output caused by investment and labour force growth, and the fact that the
private sector’s inflation expectations were often much better grounded than the Bank’s.
1961-62 Transition to a Pegged Exchange Rate
With the resignation of James Coyne, Louis Rasminsky became Governor.
Rasminsky accepted the position conditional on a clarification of the responsibility for
21

Coyne’s views on Canada’s excessive dependence on foreign capital were consistent with the
growing political backlash against FDI and the perceived growing U.S. domination of the
Canadian economy during this period.

15

monetary policy between the central bank and the government that he drafted, known as
the directive principle. This principle stated that under normal circumstances the Bank of
Canada was responsible for monetary policy, but if a conflict between the Bank and the
government arose, the government was required to issue a specific directive to the
Governor which would be published in the Canada Gazette (the record of the Parliament)
and the Governor would have to resign. The government accepted the principle and it
was incorporated into the 1967 revision to the Bank of Canada Act. The directive
principle was an important achievement because it clearly specified the independence of
the central bank for monetary policy and the procedure to be followed in the event of a
conflict between the central bank and the government. The extraordinary forced
resignation of a central bank governor and the adoption of the directive principle had an
impact on policies governing central banks in the rest of the world as the principle was
adopted in several other countries, including Australia.22
Unfortunately, Rasminsky’s accomplishment with the directive principle was
overshadowed in his first year of office by the government’s bungled attempts to reflate
the economy and depreciate a floating rate that eventually brought about an exchange rate
crisis, which required IMF intervention. In response to the relatively high unemployment,
the government’s 1961 budget promised a host of expansionary fiscal policy measures. In
his budget speech of June 19, 1961, the Minister also declared his desire to see a
depreciation of the Canadian dollar (not comprehending that the expansionary fiscal
policy would have the opposite effect.) To this end, the Bank of Canada was instructed to
begin official sales of Canadian dollars from the Exchange Fund Account, which were
not sterilized, and this caused the money supply to expand. The Canadian dollar soon
declined from a premium of approximately 1% on the U.S. dollar in July of 1961 to a
discount of CDN 3¢ less than two months later (see figures 1, 5 and 6). Additional
intervention in September 1961 led to a further drop in the Canadian dollar to a 5¢
discount. This was followed several months later in April 1962 by a speculative attack on
the dollar. To stem the free fall, the government announced a devalued peg at 92.5¢ U.S.
Speculation continued unchanged, however, and it took an austerity program and an

22

For a survey of the experience in other similar central banks, see Tuladhar (2005).

16

IMF/U.S./UK rescue of slightly more than U.S. $1 billion in June 1962 to restore
stability.
Many observers view this episode as the consequence of the Minister of Finance’s
clumsy attempt to influence the value of the dollar. The change in strategy from laisserfaire to manipulation led to a change in market sentiment that precipitated a currency
crisis and a much greater depreciation than was initially sought.
3. The Behaviour of the Exchange Rate
This section focuses on two issues: the remarkable stability of the Canadian dollar
over the floating period, 1950-62, and the related issue of whether this relatively stable
exchange rate actually helped insulate the Canadian from external shocks. Over the 12
year period, the dollar fluctuated in a narrow range of 13¢ U.S., from a low of U.S. $ 0.93
in early 1950 to a peak of U.S. $1.06 in August 1957. If we focus on the core period,
1952-60, the range was much smaller, only 6¢ U.S., from U.S. $1.00 in early 1952 to
U.S. $1.06 in August 1957. Moreover, high frequency fluctuations were very mild and
orderly. Over the whole period, the average day-to-day change was 0.08 percent and only
5% of the daily changes over the whole floating rate period exceed one quarter of a
percent (Poole 1967).
Several explanations have been put forward to rationalize the exchange rate’s
stability. Many attributed it to stabilizing speculation by agents who believed that
movements in the rate were temporary (Poole 1967, Marsh 1969, Yeager 1976). This
evidence was seen as being consistent with the original assertion by Friedman (1953) that
speculation under a floating exchange rate would necessarily be stabilizing in order to be
profitable. Others attributed it to the coincidence of Canadian with U.S. cyclical positions
and monetary policies (Hawkins, 1968, p. 31) (see figures 3, 4 and 5a).
It has also been argued that official intervention operations served to stabilize the
value of the Canadian dollar, but the literature has concluded that official intervention did
not play a significant role in stabilizing the nominal exchange rate. Although the
Exchange Fund Account was used to intervene often in the 1952-60 period – the degree
of intervention was limited and simply offset short-run fluctuations to maintain an orderly
17

foreign exchange market (Plumptre 1970, p.4). Net monthly changes in official reserves
were less than 20 million dollars in the majority of months when intervention occurred
(Wonnacott 1965, Yeager 1976, Report of the Royal Commission on Banking and
Finance 1964, Binhammer 1964).
Several observers, including Plumptre (1970, p. 6), argue that the relative stability
of the floating Canadian dollar was due, in part, to the absence of large shocks during this
period.23 This is a plausible argument because for most of this period, Western European
countries were rebuilding from the devastation of the Second World War and the two
North American economies were content to produce and sell them what they needed, lend
them the money to pay for it, and also to absorb much of their surplus labour. Thus, it
was a period of growth and relative prosperity. Evidence provided in the next section of
the paper from the estimated DSGE model indicates that the structural shocks
experienced by the Canadian economy during the floating rate period in the 1950s were
generally smaller than those found in subsequent decades.
In summary, the Canadian dollar was relatively stable over this period, not only
because shocks were relatively small and to some degree common to both the Canadian
and U.S. economies as evinced by the close correlation of their business cycles, but also
likely because capital was relatively immobile globally (capital flows between Canada
and the United States were the glaring exceptions). In addition, it is important to
recognize Canada was the only major industrialized country that was floating at this time
– all other major countries had pegged rates to the U.S. dollar.
In addition, to giving the domestic authorities control over monetary policy, the
other main benefit of a floating rate is its ability to shelter the domestic economy from
external shocks. As noted earlier, the Canadian floating rate was very stable, when
compared to recent experience of the industrialized countries, and this was despite two
sizable recessions. This stability has led some observers to conclude that Canada’s

23

Plumptre (1970) also notes that when the Canadian dollar floated in 1930s, its movements were
relatively stable as well.

18

experience in the 1950s did not provide overwhelming evidence on the postulated
insulation properties of a floating rate. Wonnacott (1965) compares exchange rate
movements with price level changes and shifts in unemployment and concludes that the
evidence that the flexible rate provided insulation from external shocks is mixed at best.
McLeod (1965) reaches a similar conclusion for price movements; he argues that
Canadian inflation performance was about the same as that of the United States over the
floating rate period.
Unfortunately, the qualitative bivariate analysis that these authors conduct is
incomplete and does not provide an adequate counterfactual analysis. In particular, it is
likely that exchange rate adjustment to movements in U.S. export demand was hindered
by weakly countercyclical domestic monetary policy. Mundell (1964), McLeod (1965),
and Dunn (1971) argue that Canadian monetary policy was much less countercyclical
than U.S. monetary policy in the two coincident recessions of 1953-1954 and 1957-58
(figure 3). Not only was the response of Canadian monetary policy and short term rates
weaker, but also slower (figure 5a). The fact that the peak to trough movements in output
over these two business cycles was larger in Canada than in the United States (figure 3) is
consistent with this view. Consequently, the Canadian dollar tended to appreciate when
the U.S. authorities eased monetary policy earlier and more aggressively than their
Canadian counterparts, and as a result, the exchange rate appeared not to provide much
insulation for the Canadian economy in the face of U.S. economic slowdowns and
reductions in export demand.
The impact of this higher interest differential was felt by the Canadian dollar.
Because there was a high degree of capital mobility between Canada and the United
States, there is much evidence that indicates that the Canadian dollar was very sensitive
to the short-term interest rate differential in the 1950s.24 Thus, the tighter Canadian
monetary policy in the second half of the floating period held the Canadian dollar above
parity with the U.S. dollar, thus reducing the domestic and world demand for Canadianproduced traded goods and slowing economic activity.

24

See for example, Caves and Reuber (1971).

19

To analyse further the impact of this apparent shift in monetary policy on the
Canadian economy, we conduct a counterfactual analysis in the next section of the paper.

4. Counterfactual Analysis
In this section, we conduct two counterfactual experiments to examine the
economic impact of Canadian monetary and exchange rate policies in the 1950s. The first
involves eliminating the apparent shift in monetary policy that took place over the second
half of the sample by maintaining the monetary policy that prevailed in the first half
throughout the floating rate period. The second experiment consists of assuming that the
fixed exchange rate parity of 1950 is not abandoned in favour of a flexible exchange rate.
To perform these experiments we proceed in the following steps: firstly, we develop a
small theoretical DSGE model of the Canadian economy, secondly, we estimate the key
parameters using a Bayesian technique, thirdly, we econometrically extract the shocks
that prevailed during this period, fourthly, we conduct the experiments by modifying the
monetary and exchange rate polices as required and then simulating the model, adding
back the shocks that actually took place and finally by calculating and comparing the
variances of the key macroeconomic variables in the data with those generated by the
model with the counterfactual policies.
The model
We use a structural small open economy model for Canada, similar to the one
used in Lubik and Schorfheide (2007), which is a simplified version of Gali and
Monacelli (2005).25 The log-linear model consists of an IS equation for a small open
economy, a New-Keynesian Philips curve equation, an equation determining the nominal
exchange rate, and a Taylor-type monetary policy rule. We assume that the evolution of

25

See Gali and Monacelli (2005) for a detailed derivation of the model. The full specification of our model
is given in Appendix 5.

20

the terms of trade is exogenous and the economy is disturbed by four additional domestic
and world shocks.26
As shown in Gali and Monacelli (2005), the consumption Euler equation leads to
the following IS-curve equation for a small open economy:
yt = Et yt +1 − [τ + α (2 − α )(1 − τ )]( Rt − Etπ t +1 ) + ρ A dAt

+ α [τ + α (2 − α )(1 − τ )]Et Δqt +1 + [α (2 − α )(1 − τ ) / τ ]Et Δy *t +1 ;

(1)

where 0 < α <1, is the share of imports in domestic consumption, which is a natural
measure of the degree of openness of the economy, and τ > 0 is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution. Note that if α = 0, equation (1) reduces to its closed economy
variant. The endogenous variables yt, Rt, and πt denote aggregate output (normalized for
technological growth)27, the nominal interest rate, and the consumer-Price- Index (CPI)
inflation rate, respectively; while the exogenous variables, dAt,, Δqt, and y*t, denote the
technological growth rate, changes in terms of trade, and world output, respectively. The
terms of trade, qt , is defined as the relative price of exports in terms of imports and we
assume that its first difference form, Δqt, evolves exogenously, because Canada is
assumed to be a small open economy.
These exogenous variables evolve according to the following first-order
autoregressive processes:
dAt = ρ A dAt −1 + ε At ,

(2)

Δqt = ρ q Δqt −1 + ε qt ,

(3)

and
y * t = ρ y y * t −1 + ε yt ,

(4)

where ρA, ρq, and ρy are autoregressive coefficients; ε At , ε qt, and ε yt are random shocks
normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviations σ A , σ q, and σ y,
respectively. The output growth rate computed from the data is defined as ΔYt = Yt - Yt-1 =
yt - yt-1 + dAt, where Yt is the logarithm of real aggregate output.

26
27

All the variables in the model are
Aggregate output is normalized for trend productivity growth to ensure stationarity.

21

We introduce price stickiness by assuming Taylor-price setting, in which only a
fraction of firms producing domestic goods are allowed to change their prices each period
with an exogenous probability. Under this assumption, the New-Keynesian Phillips curve
is given by:

π d t = βEtπ d t +1 +

κ
( yt − y p t ),
[τ + α (2 − α )(1 − τ )]

(5)

where 0<β<1 is the discount factor; πdt is Producer-Price-Index (PPI) inflation—defined
as the rate of change in the index of domestic goods prices— and (yt - ypt) is the output
gap, and ypt is potential output when prices are fully flexible. In the context of a small
open economy, Lubik and Schorfheide (2007) show that potential output can be derived
as a linear function of foreign output:
y pt = −

α (2 − α )(1 − τ ) *
y t.
τ

(6)

The parameter κ > 0 depends on the model’s other structural parameters, such as the price
stickiness parameter and labor supply and demand elasticities. In the estimation, this
parameter is treated as a structural parameter of the model.
Gali and Monacelli (2005) derive the following equation that relates CPI inflation,
πt, to PPI inflation, πdt, and changes of the terms of trade, Δqt:

π t = π d t − αΔqt .

(7)

Therefore, the equation for the exchange rate, et, can be derived from the definition of the
CPI assuming that the uncovered interest rate parity and relative PPP always hold:

Δet = π t − (1 − α )Δqt − π * t ,

(8)

where π*t is the world inflation rate that evolves exogenously according to the following
AR (1) process,

π * t = ρ π π * t −1 + ε πt ,

(9)

where ρπ is an autoregressive coefficient and επt is a random shock normally distributed
with mean zero and standard error σ π.28

28

Similarly, the nominal exchange rate equation (8) could be written in terms of PPI inflation as

Δet = π d t − Δqt − π * t .
22

The terms of trade enters in first difference form since it is changes in relative
prices that affect inflation and real variables via the definition of the CPI. By opting for
this specification, we are assuming that the Canadian exporters had no market power in
the international markets and the prices of internationally traded goods were completely
exogenous to the Canadian economy.
We assume that the Bank of Canada followed a Taylor-type rule to conduct its
monetary policy. Thus, it managed short-term interest rates to respond to fluctuations of
CPI inflation, output, and the exchange rate. This rule allows us to simply compare the
reaction of the monetary authorities to inflation, output, and exchange rate variations
during the pre- and post-Coyne periods. The monetary policy rule is described by:
Rt = ρ R1 Rt −1 + ρ R 2 Rt − 2 + ψ 1π t + ψ 2 y t + ψ 3 Δet −1 + ε Rt ,

(10)

with all policy coefficients greater than or equal 0, except ρR2. The two first terms on the
right-hand side are the smoothing terms introduced to match the persistence in the
nominal interest rate, with ρR1 and ρR2 are smoothing coefficients; the terms εRt is a zeromean, serially uncorrelated monetary policy shock with standard deviation σR. It is an
unsystematic component of monetary policy interpreted as an exogenous monetary policy
shock. The parameters ψ1, ψ2, and ψ3 measure the responses of the monetary authority to
inflation, output, and nominal exchange rate variations.29 A unique equilibrium exists
as long as the sum of ρR1, ρR2, ψ1, and ψ3 is larger than unity. This monetary policy rule is
similar to the one used in Lubik and Schorfheide (2007).

Estimation Procedure and Results

The model of a small open economy given above by equations (1), (5), (7), (8),
and (10) can be solved using the Blanchard and Kahn (1980) procedure to obtain a statespace representation. Its structural parameters are estimated using the Bayesian
estimation techniques that update prior distributions for the parameters using the actual
data. This approach, which is described in Schorfheide (2000) and widely used in
estimations of DSGE models, is system-based and fits the solved DSGE model to a
29

We assume that the central bank reacted to the lag of the first difference of the nominal exchange rate to
avoid the endogeneity problem and because we use monthly data to estimate model’s structural parameters.

23

vector time series; and its estimation is based on the likelihood function generated by the
model. In addition, prior distributions incorporate additional information into the
parameter estimation.
The model has five shocks, so we use five aggregate time series in the estimation
to avoid the singularity problem. The data series are monthly and consist of the growth
rate of the Canadian industrial production index as a measure of real output growth, the
nominal 90-day T-Bill interest rate, the CPI inflation rate, the nominal exchange rate, and
the terms of trade. The CPI inflation rate measures the monthly year-over-year changes in
the consumer-price index. The terms of trade is defined as the price of domestic goods in
terms of foreign goods. All of the series are demeaned before estimation.
The vector of observable variables, zt, is composed of real output growth, the
nominal interest rate, the CPI inflation rate, and the first differences in the nominal
exchange rate and the terms of trade. Therefore, zt is given by
′
z t = [ΔYt , it , π t , Δet , Δqt ] ,

which is a 5x1 vector of observable variables and ZT ={ z1, …, zT } represents a 5xT data
matrix of T observations on zt. The structural parameters of the model are in a 17x1
vector θ. The linear structural model can be reduced to a state-space representation for zt.
Under the assumption that all the structural shocks are normally distributed and
uncorrelated, we obtain a likelihood function L(θ|ZT) that can be evaluated using the
Kalman filter described in detail in Hamilton (1994, chapter 13).
To implement the Bayesian approach, a prior distribution of the parameters is
assumed with a density p(θ). The advantage of the Bayesian technique over other
estimation methods is that by setting prior densities we can attach implicit weights to the
prior information on the structural parameters. Then the data given by ZT are used to
update the prior distribution using the likelihood function. The posterior distribution
based on Bayes theorem is:
p (θ | Z ) =
T

L(θ | Z T ) p (θ )

∫ L(θ | Z

T

) p (θ )dθ

24

.

(11)

The Bayesian simulation technique, described in Schorfheide (2000), generates
random posterior draws of the parameters that are used in the simulation of the model.
This approach allows us to estimate structural parameters of the model and at the same
time extract the structural shocks.
Canada had a flexible exchange rate for the period 1950M10-1962M5. Exchange
controls remained in place until the end of 1951 and an active money market was not
established until 1953 (Watts, 1993). Therefore, we estimate the model over the relevant
flexible exchange rate period 1952M1 to 1961M2 and over two subsamples.30 The first
is the pre-1957 period from 1952M1 to 1956M12; the second covers the post-1957 period
from 1957M1 to 1961M12, which corresponds to Coyne period.31 The estimates of
monetary policy parameters in the two subsamples allow us to compare the degree of the
reaction of the monetary authority to inflation, output, and nominal exchange rate
fluctuations.
Table 1 shows the prior distributions assumed for the structural parameters of the
model. The priors used for the monetary policy parameters are the instrumental variable
(IV) estimates that do not impose the model restrictions.32 These priors are estimated
using the relevant floating rate period that covers 1952M1-1961M12. For the priors of
the remaining structural parameters, β, α, τ, and κ, we employ values similar to those used
in Lubik and Schorfheide (2007) for Canada.
Table 2 reports the estimation results of the monetary policy parameters. We
focus our empirical analysis on the estimates of the monetary policy parameters in the
pre- and post-1957 periods. The priors of the monetary policy parameters are assumed to
be the same for the three samples; that is, they are treated symmetrically a priori. The
prior of equal monetary policy pre- and post-1957 does not hold. Indeed, we find
significant heterogeneity in the reaction of the monetary authority across the two periods.
The estimates show that monetary policy did not respond very strongly to inflation and
30

The estimation sample starts in 1952M1 because the Bank of Canada abandoned exchange control in
December 1951.
31
Since we use monthly data, there are 60 observations in each subsample.
32
The prior for the autoregressive coefficient and standard deviations in the exogenous processes are
recovered from the least-squared (LS) estimation of different laws of motion using the actual data.

25

output fluctuations during the pre-1957 period, as the estimates of the coefficients ψ1 and
ψ2 are 0.06 and 0.015, respectively; while the response to nominal exchange rate changes
was slightly more aggressive with ψ3 equal 0.084. Note that the estimate of the first
smoothing coefficient, ρR1, is 0.925, implying stronger persistence in monetary policy in
the pre-1957 period; while the estimates of ρR2 is negative and not statistically significant.
On the other hand, the estimates of policy rule parameters for the post-1957
period indicate that the monetary authority responded more aggressively to inflation,
output, and nominal exchange rate variations. The estimates of the coefficients ψ1, ψ2,
and ψ3 are larger at 0.23, 0.06, and 0.11, respectively. The estimate of the first smoothing
coefficient, ρR1, is about 0.86, implying lower persistence in monetary policy in the post1957 period compared to the pre-1957 period. It is important to note that the estimated
standard error of unsystematic monetary policy shocks, σR, is 0.22% in the pre-1957
period and 0.62% during the post-1957 period, indicating that monetary policy shocks, in
general, were much more volatile in the post-1957 period than in pre-1957 period.
Table 3 reports the estimates of the remaining non-monetary policy parameters.
The estimates values of α, τ, and κ, are very similar in the three samples, indicating some
stability in the estimation of these parameters across the three periods. The estimates of
these parameters are close to those estimated in Lubik and Schorfheide (2007). The
estimates of the discount rate, β, are 0.9992 and 0.998 in the pre- and post-1957 periods,
respectively. These monthly discount rates translate into estimated annual real interest
rates of 1% and 2.4% in the two periods, respectively. These estimates imply that average
real interest rates were much higher (2.4 times) in the post-1957 period compared to pre1957 period. Technology and world output shocks are similarly persistent and more
volatile in the two periods, while terms of trade and world inflation were more volatile in
pre-1957 period.
Counterfactual simulations

In order to perform counterfactual simulations of the model, we need to identify
and extract the historical shocks that disturbed the economy over the counterfactual
period so that they can be re-introduced when the counterfactual model is simulated. For
26

our rational expectations model, we can use the model’s state-space representation to
extract a record of the structural innovations given by {ε At , ε Rt , ε qt , ε yt , ε πt ); t = 1,..,T,
which can then be used to simulate the model. We extract the historical shocks for the
post-1957 period that covers 1957M1 to 1961M12, and for the entire floating period that
runs from 1952M1 to 1961M12. The parameter estimates for the two periods reported in
Tables 2 and 3 are used in this procedure. Our approach extends the methodologies used
by Boivin and Giannoni (2006) and Leigh (2004) in their counterfactual analysis done for
the U.S. and Japanese monetary policies, respectively. Our model is more complex and
includes structural (as opposed to nonstructural) shocks.
Figure 9 shows the extracted historical shocks for the entire floating rate period.
What is noteworthy from these figures is that the volatility of the extracted interest rate
shocks increases in the second half of the floating rate period (which is the shaded area of
the figure), reflecting the instability in monetary policy noted earlier. The volatilities of
the other shocks are relatively stable throughout the period.
We conduct two counterfactual experiments, over both the post-1957 and entire
floating rate periods. The first counterfactual simulation imposes the pre-1957 monetary
policy over the post-1957 period, as well as over the entire sample period; this
experiment is called the pre-1957 MP model. With this counterfactual simulation, we
investigate what would have happened to the Canadian economy had the pre-1957
monetary policy been in place during the second half of the sample period. It is important
to note that the pre-1957 monetary policy consists of two components. The systematic
component represented by the monetary policy rule and the unsystematic component
represented by the estimated structural interest rate shocks. Both are incorporated into the
counterfactual simulation. The second counterfactual experiment assumes that instead of
having a flexible rate, Canada had had a fixed exchange rate for the entire sample and for
the post-1957 period only; this experiment is called the Fixed NER model. This is an
interesting experiment because some it could be argued that given the observed instability
of monetary policy during the Coyne period, Canada might have been better off had it
had a fixed exchange rate. In this simulation, we assume that the goal of monetary policy

27

is to keep the exchange rate fixed; thus, Canadian interest rates are assumed to equal U.S.
rates.33
Before examining the impacts of these counterfactual simulations on the volatility
of the key macroeconomic variables, it is important to note from the outset that
conducting counterfactual experiments in economics is problematic because a controlled
experiment is impossible. To conduct the simulation, we must assume that some of the
parameters remain constant, when in fact we know that some would likely have changed
had a different monetary policy or exchange rate regime been in place because agents
would have re-optimized. Thus, by leaving the parameters unchanged we are biasing the
volatilities upwards in the counterfactual simulations because agents would have likely
acted in a way to mitigate welfare-reducing volatility. 34
In conducting the counterfactual experiments, we simulate the estimated models
with the new assumptions regarding the conduct of monetary and/or exchange rate
policies. We also incorporate the extracted historical structural shocks in an attempt to
duplicate the actual economic circumstances that occurred during the sample periods. In
the case of the pre-1957 monetary policy counterfactual experiment, we do not employ
the structural interest rate shocks from the post-1957 period, but use simulated shocks
that have the same characteristics as the shocks that occurred during the pre-1957 period.
This allows us to incorporate the unsystematic component of monetary policy, as was
discussed earlier.
Table 4 reports the second moments, the standard errors in percentage, of the
simulated series of the key variable in the counterfactual experiments and compares them
to the data. Panel A of Table 4 gives the results for the post-1957 period, while Panel B
of Table 4 reports the results for the entire floating period. (These results are also
illustrated with the plots in figures 10 and 11.) In the case of the pre-1957 monetary

33

In both counterfactual experiments, we use the same estimates of the model’s structural parameters as
estimated over the entire floating or post-1957 periods including the monetary policy parameters. The only
exception is that the parameter ψ3, the coefficient on the exchange rate in the monetary policy rule, is set
equal to 5, in the second experiment to reflect the commitment to maintain the fixed exchange rate.
34
We have also conducted counterfactual simulations using the estimates of the model’s parameters
obtained from the entire sample period and there are no significant changes in the main results.

28

policy experiment, the volatility of output falls in both samples relative to the actual data.
This finding is significant because the assumption of unchanged parameters biases
upward the volatility of output in the experimental results. Although the volatilities of
nominal interest rates are roughly the same, the volatility of inflation is higher reflecting
the less aggressive inflation coefficient in the estimated pre-1957 monetary policy rule.
Moreover, the volatility of the exchange rate is also higher which reflects the fact that
under the pre-1957 policy rule there is more scope for the flexible exchange rate to adjust
to structural shocks thereby helping to stabilize output. Because this model is linearized
around steady state values, our comparison is based solely on second moments, but in
fact, the different monetary policies also likely affected the level of output growth in the
steady state. In particular, interest rates were generally much higher during the post-1957
period (See Figure 5b). Hence, had the pre-1957 monetary policy been in force,
unemployment would have lower, and output growth higher.
Under the second counterfactual experiment of a fixed nominal exchange rate, the
volatilities of all the variables (except the exchange rate) increase dramatically. Although
these volatilities are biased upwards given the assumption of unchanged parameters, they
suggest that the flexible exchange rate regime was successful in stabilizing the Canadian
economy, even during the post-1957 period when monetary policy was more volatile.
Table 5 reports volatilities and autocorrelation functions of key simulated
variables (output, the nominal interest rate, inflation, and the first difference of the
nominal exchange rate) and compares them to those observed in the data. This exercise
is another way of evaluating the performance of our model. For the three estimated
periods, the model generates volatilities that are close to those in the data. This close fit
occurs because all these series are used in the estimation of the structural parameters of
the model. In addition, the simulated autocorrelations of the three estimation periods are
very close to those observed in the data, except for the exchange rate in the post-1957
period. These results indicate that the model largely captures the salient features of the
data.

29

Finally, to address the issue of whether the remarkable stability of the Canadian
dollar during the floating rate period was due to the relative absence of sizable structural
shocks, the model was used to extract structural shocks for subsequent floating rate
decades. Table 6 compares the volatilities of these extracted structural shocks across
these periods. The key finding is that the volatilities of the shocks during the 1950’s
were generally lower than those experienced during the periods 1972M1-1981M12,
1982M1-1911M12, 1992M1-2001M12, the main exception being the world output shock.
Interestingly, the volatility of unsystematic monetary shocks was relatively low in the
1950s and this level of stability is almost being attained during the most recent inflation
targeting period in Canada.

5. Concluding Remarks

The purpose of this paper has been to revisit Canada’s pioneering experience with
floating exchange rate over the period 1950─1962 and to reconsider the evidence and
extensive commentary with the benefit of 40─50 years of improvements in the tools of
economic analysis and in our understanding of how monetary policy works in an open
economy. Our goal is to draw useful lessons for the conduct of monetary policy today.
One key observation is that Canada’s floating exchange rate in the 1950s behaved very
much like the exchange rate today; it was driven largely by interest rate differentials and
by commodity prices. The interesting question is whether the floating rate was the best
option for Canada in the 1950s. There is little doubt that in September 1950, when the
Canadian dollar was under incredible pressure to appreciate, the float was the correct
choice because it removed the speculative pressure that pegged rates often induce and it
sheltered Canada from U.S. inflationary pressures.35 Our counterfactual analysis indicates
that relative to a fixed exchange rate, the flexible rate helped reduce the volatility of key
macroeconomic variables, despite the fact the Canadian monetary authorities clearly did
not understand all of the implications of conducting monetary policy under a flexible
exchange rate and a high degree of capital mobility.
35

Mexico, in contrast to Canada, maintained a pegged rate and the inflation rate increased sharply to
double-digit levels. See Murray et al. (2003) for more details.

30

The other counterfactual experiment suggests that had monetary policy not
changed during the Coyne period, the Canadian economy would likely have performed
much better. The policy was not only more volatile, but also produced higher interest
rates. Consequently, output was more volatile and growth was likely slower because
higher interest rates also generated a more appreciated exchange rate. This
misunderstanding of the conduct of a monetary policy under a floating rate, unfortunately
led to the demise of this regime.
Nonetheless, Canada’s floating exchange rate experience in 1950s was a very
useful policy experiment; it demonstrated (and inspired Mundell to show theoretically)
that monetary policy is a relatively powerful policy instrument under a floating rate; it
also showed that for a flexible rate to work effectively as a stabilizing mechanism, as
Friedman argued, monetary policy should not be the source of economic disturbances,
but should work in tandem with the exchange rate to facilitate adjustment.

31

References

Bank of Canada. Annual Reports. Various years.
Bank of Canada. 1954, 1958. Statistical Summary: financial supplement.
Bank of Canada. 1960, 1963. Statistical Summary: supplement.
Binhammer, H.H. 1964. Canada’s foreign exchange problems: A review. Kyklos
17(4): 636─653.
Blanchard J.-O. and C. Kahn. 1980. The solution of linear difference models under
rational expectations. Econometrica 48: 657─80.
Boivin J. and M.P. Giannoni. 2006. Has monetary policy become more effective?
The Review of Economics and Statistics 88:445─62.
Bordo, M. and H. James. 2001. The Adam Klug Memorial Lecture: Haberler versus
Nurkse: The case for floating exchange rates as an alternative to Brettton
Woods. NBER working paper #8545. October.
Bordo, M., T. Gomes and L. Schembri. 2007. Canada and the IMF: Trailblazer or
prodigal son? Preliminary draft, International Department, Bank of Canada.
Canada. Royal Commission on Banking and Finance. 1964.
Caves, R.E. and G.L. Reuber. 1971. Capital Transfers and Economic Policy:
Canada, 1951─62. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dunn, R.M. Jr. 1971. Canada’s Experience with Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates
in a North American Capital Market. Washington & Montreal: National
Planning Association & Private Planning Association of Canada.
Friedman, M. 1953. The case for flexible exchange rates. In Essays in Positive
Economics, 157─203. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, M., D. Gordon and W.A. Mackintosh. 1948. Canada and the Problems of
World Trade. A Radio Discussion. The University of Chicago Roundtable.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, M. and R. Roosa, 1967. The Balance of Payments: Free versus Fixed
Exchange Rates. AEI Rational Debate Seminar. Washington, D.C.: American
Enterprise Institute.
Gali J. and T. Monacelli. 2005. Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a
small open economy. Review of Economic Studies 72:707─34.
32

Gordon, H.S. 1961. The economists versus the Bank of Canada. Toronto: Ryerson
Press.
Haberler. G. 1937. Prosperity and Depression: A Theoretical Analysis of Cyclical
Movements. Geneva: League of Nations.
Hamilton J.D. 1994. Times Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hawkins, R.G. 1968. Stabilizing forces and Canadian exchange-rate fluctuations. In
G. H. Hartley and R.G. Hawkins (eds.) The Stability of Flexible Exchange
Rates – The Canadian Experience. Graduate School of Business
Administration. New York University. The Bulletin. Nos. 50─51.
Lafrance, R. and L. Schembri. 2003. A tale of two dollars: The choice of Canada’s
currency. Bank of Canada Working Paper #2003─12.
Leigh D. 2004. Monetary policy and the dangers of deflation: Lessons from Japan.
Ph.D. Thesis. Department of Economics, Johns Hopkins University.
Lubik T. and F. Schorfheide. 2007. Do central banks respond to exchange rate
movements? A structural investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics 54:
1069─1087.
Marsh, D.B. 1969. Canada’s experience with a floating exchange rate: A vindication
of free markets in exchange. In R.Z. Aliber (ed.) The International Market for
Foreign Exchange. New York: Praeger.
McLeod, A.N. 1965. A Critique of the Fluctuating-Exchange-Rate Policy in Canada.
Graduate School of Business Administration. New York University. The
Bulletin. No. 34─35.
Mundell, R.A. 1964. Problems of monetary and exchange rate management in
Canada. National Bank Review 2 (September): 77─86.
Murray, J, P. St-Amant, and L. Schembri. 2003. Revisiting the case for flexible
exchange rates in North America. North American Journal of Economics and
Finance 14: p.207─240.
Plumptre, A.F.W. 1970. Exchange rate policy: Experience with Canada’s floating
rate. Essays in International Finance, No. 81. Department of Economics.
Princeton University.

33

Poole, W. 1967. The stability of the Canadian exchange rate, 1950─62. Canadian
Journal of Economics 33: 205─217.
Powell, J. 2005. A History of the Canadian Dollar. Ottawa: Bank of Canada.
Romer, C. and D. Romer. 2002. A rehabilitation of monetary policy in the 1950s.
American Economic Review 92: 121─127.
Schorfheide F. 2000. Loss function-based evaluation of DSGE models. Journal of
Applied Econometrics 15, 645─670.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters. 2003. An estimated stochastic dynamic general
equilibrium model of the Euro Area. Journal of the European Economic
Association 1: 123─75.
Tuladhar, A. 2005. Governance structures and decision-making roles in inflationtargeting central banks. IMF Working Paper #183.
Watts, G. 1993. The Bank of Canada: Origins and Early History. Ottawa: Carleton
University Press.
Wonnacott, P. 1965. The Canadian Dollar: 1948─1962. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
Yeager, L.B. 1976. International Monetary Relations: Theory, History and Policy.
Second Edition. New York: Harper & Row.

34

Appendix 1: Data for DSGE Model

Nominal Exchange Rate: Calculated as the monthly average of the daily CDN$-US$
noon spot rate as reported by the Bank for International Settlements.
Real Exchange Rate: Calculated as the nominal CDN$-US$ exchange rate deflated by
Canadian and U.S. CPI data.
Nominal 90-Day T-Bill Interest Rate: Prior to 1962, the Canadian T-Bill interest rate is
calculated as the average yield determined by auctions for 90-Day Treasury Bills. From
1962 onwards, the variable is simply the 90-Day T-Bill rate. All Canadian data are taken
from Statistics Canada. The US T-Bill rate is the 3-month market yield as reported by
the Bank for International Settlements.
CPI Inflation Rate: The year-over-year percentage change in the headline consumer
price index as measured by Statistics Canada and the U.S. Dept. of Labour. The indexes
are rebased to the year 1997.
Terms of Trade: The price of exports over the price of imports, taken from Statistics
Canada.
Industrial Production Index: The Canadian data consist of two series that are spliced
together. For months prior to 1971, data are taken from Statistics Canada. After 1971,
all data are obtained from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics. U.S. Data for all
periods are taken from the Bank for International Settlements. The indexes are rebased to
the year 1997.
Commodity Terms of Trade: The price of commodity exports over the price of
commodity imports, taken from Statistics Canada.
Unemployment Rate: Canadian data are obtained from hard copies of the Labour Survey
published by Statistics Canada. U.S. data are taken from hard copies of the Bureau of
Labour Statistics’ Household Data publication.

35

Appendix 2: Log-linearized DSGE Equilibrium System

yt = Et yt +1 − [τ + α (2 − α )(1 − τ )]( Rt − Etπ t +1 ) + ρ A dAt
+ α [τ + α (2 − α )(1 − τ )]ρ q Δqt + [α (2 − α )(1 − τ ) / τ ]( ρ y − 1) y *t ;

π d t = βEtπ d t +1 +

κ
( yt − y p t );
[τ + α (2 − α )(1 − τ )]

α (2 − α )(1 − τ ) *
y t;
τ
Rt = ρ R1 Rt −1 + ρ R 2 Rt − 2 + ψ 1π t + ψ 2 y t + ψ 3 Δet −1 + ε Rt ;
Δet = π t − (1 − α )Δqt − π * t ;
y pt = −

(A2.1)
(A2.2)
(A2.3)
(A2.4)
(A2.5)

π t = π d t − αΔqt ;

(A2.6)

Δqt = ρ q Δqt −1 + ε qt ;

(A2.7)

π * t = ρ π π * t −1 + ε πt ; ,

(A2.8)

dAt = ρ A dAt −1 + ε At ;

(A2.9)

y * t = ρ y y * t −1 + ε yt ;

(A2.10)

ΔYt = y t − y t −1 + dAt .

(A2.11)

36

Table 1:
Prior distributions of the structural parameters of the model

Parameters
ψ1
ψ2
ψ3
ρR1
ρR2
σR

Domain
IR+
IR+
IR+
[0,1)
(-1,1)
IR+

Density
Gamma
Gamma
Gamma
Beta
Normal
InvGamma

Mean
0.1
0.03
0.10
0.90
0.0
0.5

St Dev.
0.04
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.03
Inf.

β
α
τ
κ
ρA
ρq
ρy
ρπ
σA
σq
σy
σπ

[0,1)
[0,1)
[0,1)
IR+
[0,1)
[0,1)
[0,1)
[0,1)
IR+
IR+
IR+
IR+

Beta
Beta
Beta
Gamma
Beta
Beta
Beta
Beta
InvGamma
InvGamma
InvGamma
InvGamma

0.999
0.25
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.2
0.94
0.7
1.3
1.0
1.5
0.8

0.0005
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.05
Inf.
Inf.
Inf.
Inf.

37

Table 2:
Posterior distribution of the monetary policy rule parameters

Parameters

Definition

ψ1

Inflation coefficient

ψ2

Output coefficient

ψ3

Exchange rate coefficient

ρR1

First smoothing coefficient

ρR2

Second smoothing coefficient

σR

Standard deviation of policy
shocks in %

Entire Floating
Period
0.147
(0.0268)
0.049
(0.025)
0.134
(0.029)
0.874
(0.053)
-0.037
(0.028)
0.51
(0.05)

Pre-1957:
Period
0.060
(0.012)
0.015
(0.011)
0.084
(0.038)
0.925
(0.038)
-0.020
(0.028)
0.22
(0.03)

Post -1957:
Period
0.230
(0.043)
0.061
(0.033)
0.110
(0.032)
0.862
(0.063)
-0.037
(0.029)
0.62
(0.07)

Note: The standard deviations are underneath in parentheses.
Entire Floating Period covers 1952M1—1961M12. Pre-1957 period covers 1952M1—
1956M12, while Post-1957 period covers 1957M1—1961M12.

38

Table 3:
Posterior distribution of non-monetary policy rule parameters

Parameters

Entire
Floating
Period

Definition

β

Discount factor

α

Import share

τ

Intertemporal elasticity of
substitution
New Philips curve coefficient

κ
ρA
ρq
ρy
ρπ
σA
σq
σy
σπ

Autoregressive coefficient of
technology shocks
Autoregressive coefficient of terms
of trade shocks
Autoregressive coefficient of world
output shocks
Autoregressive coefficient of world
inflation shocks
Standard deviation of technology
shocks in %
Standard deviation of terms of trade
shocks in %
Standard deviation of world output
shocks in %
Standard deviation of world inflation
shocks in %

0.999
(0.001)
0.226
(0.041)
0.420
(0.048)
0.407
(0.043)
0.514
(0.063)
0.175
(0.052)
0.992
(0.007)
0.611
(0.040)
0.83
(0.10)
0.90
(0.06)
1.39
(0.41)
1.30
(0.09)

Pre-1957
Period

Post-1957
Period

0.9992
(0.001)
0.227
(0.043)
0.444
(0.048)
0.481
(0.047)
0.486
(0.052)
0.218
(0.070)
0.995
(0.004)
0.576
(0.042)
0.79
(0.10)
1.04
(0.10)
1.24
(0.42)
1.61
(0.15)

0.998
(0.001)
0.278
(0.047)
0.463
(0.049)
0.413
(0.044)
0.507
(0.062)
0.174
(0.052)
0.978
(0.022)
0.660
(0.044)
0.88
(0.12)
0.73
(0.07)
1.34
(0.45)
0.87
(0.08)

Note: The standard errors are underneath in parentheses.
Entire Floating Period covers 1952M1—1961M12. Pre-1957 period covers 1952M1—
1956M12, while Post-1957 period covers 1957M1—1961M12.

39

Table 4:
Volatilities (Standard errors in % of data and counterfactual series)

Variables

Data

Pre-1957 MP

Fixed NER

Output

2.25

1.35

3.36

Nominal Interest

1.07

0.28

3.18

Inflation

1.02

1.63

1.21

Dif (Nominal exchange rate)

0.69

1.39

0

Output

2.69

2.57

3.13

Nominal Interest

1.22

0.88

3.89

Inflation

1.77

2.09

1.83

Dif (Nominal exchange rate)

0.65

1. 54

0

A. Post-1957 perioda

B. Entire floating periodb

Note: In Pre-1957 MP column, Pre-1957 estimated monetary policy parameters and
monetary policy unsystematic shocks are used. In Fixed NER column, the parameter ψ3
is set equal to 5.
a

The simulations are based on the estimates of the pre-1957 period: 1957M1-1961M12.

b

The simulations are based on the estimates of the entire floating period: 1952M1-

1961M12.

40

Table 5:
Volatilities and Autocorrelations: Data and Estimated model

Variables

Volatilities
Data
Model

Autocorrelations
Data
Model

A. Pre-1957 period
Output
Nominal Interest
Inflation
Dif (Nom. exchange rate)

2.74
0.72
2.17
0.59

2.44
0.68
1.35
0.53

0.97
0.98
0.95
0.37

0.96
0.98
0.91
0.34

B. Post-1957 period
Output
Nominal Interest
Inflation
Dif (Nom. exchange rate)

2.25
1.07
1.02
0.69

2.31
0.93
0.97
0.77

0.91
0.90
0.84
0.28

0.89
0.89
0.85
0.43

C. Entire floating period
Output
Nominal Interest
Inflation
Dif (Nom. exchange rate)

2.69
1.22
1.77
0.65

2.80
1.14
1.36
0.62

0.94
0.96
0.93
0.33

0.94
0.95
0.91
0.31

Note: Volatilities are measured by standard errors in %. Simulated volatilities and
autocorrelations are based on the estimates of the pre-1957, post-1957, and entire floating
periods as displayed in Table 2 and 3.

41

Table 6:
Volatilities of the shocks in different periods (standard errors in %)

Shocks

Period:

Period:

Period:

Period:

1952M1-61M12

72M1-81M12

82M1-91M12

92M1-01M12

Technology

0.86

1.24

1.20

0.72

Monetary policy

0.46

1.11

0.65

0.51

Terms of trade

0.90

2.20

0.85

2.38

World output

1.29

0.73

0.78

0.70

World Inflation

1.11

2.32

1.66

2.85

42

Figure 1a: Exchange Rate
Monthly Average Noon Rates
U.S. Dollars Per Unit

1.1

1.05

1

0.95

0.9
1950

1951

1952

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

1961

1962

Figure 1b: Canadian Official Holdings of Gold and U.S. Dollars
Billions of U.S. dollars

3

2

1

0
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: Bank of Canada, Statistical Summary, Financial Supplement 1954,1958, Supplement 1960, 1963

43

Figure 2: Direct Investment in Canada
Quarterly, Million of CND.$

220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: The Dominion Bureau of Statistics

Figure 3: Real Gross Domestic Product (At 1997 Prices)
Quarterly, Year-Over-Year Growth Rate
Canada

US

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
1950

1951

1952

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and Statistics Canada

44

1961

1962

Figure 4: Consumer Price Index
Monthly (1997=100), Year-Over-Year Growth Rate
Canada

US

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and Statistics Canada

Figure 5a: 3-Month Treasury Bills Market Yields
Monthly
Canada

US

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: Statistics Canada and Bank for International Settlements

45

Figure 5b: Interest Rates
Monthly
Canada - Bank Rate
U.S. - Discount Rate

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: Statistics Canada and Bank for International Settlements

Figure 6: Money Supply (M1)
Monthly, Year-Over-Year Growth Rate
Canada (seasonally adjusted)
US (seasonally adjusted)

20
15
10
5
0
-5
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: UBC Department of Economics website and National Bureau of Economic Research website

46

Figure 7: Unemployment Rate
Monthly
Canada
US

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962
Source: Statscan hard copies of Labour Force Survey and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Figure 8: Measures of Canadian Commodity Prices
Quarterly (1953Q1=100)
Spliced Series
Wilkinson Series

180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960
Source: Wilkinson series from Wilkinson's database of commodity prices.
Spliced series from IFS database, and Wilkinson database.

47

Figure 9: Structural Shocks During Entire Floating Period
(1952M1 1961M12)
Technology

Nominal Interest

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0

0

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02
1952

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

-0.02
1952

1961

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

1961

1958

1959

1960

1961

World Output

Terms of Trade
0.02

0.05
0.04

0.01
0.03
0.02
0
0.01
0

-0.01

-0.01
-0.02

-0.02

-0.03
-0.03
1952

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

1961

1958

1959

1960

1961

-0.04
1952

World Inflation
0.03

0.02

0.01

0

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03
1952

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

48

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

Figure 10: Data and Counterfactual Series in Post-1957 period
(1957M1-1961M12)

Output

Nominal Interest

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

-0.06

-0.08

-0.08
1957

1958

1959

Actual data

1960

Pre-1957 MP

-0.1
1957

1961

1958

Fixed ER

Inflation
0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0

0

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

-0.03

-0.03

1958

1959
Actual data

1960
Pre-1957 MP

1961
Fixed ER

Dif(Nom. Exchange Rate)

0.04

-0.04
1957

1959
Actual data

1960
Pre-1957 MP

-0.04
1957

1961
Fixed ER

1958

1959
Acutal data

49

1960
Pre-1957 MP

1961

Figure 11: Data and Counterfactual Series in Entire Floating Period
(1952M1-1961M12)

Output

Nominal Interest

0.08

0.1

0.06

0.08
0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02
0
0
-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06
-0.08
1952

-0.06

1953

1954

1955

1956

Actual data

1957

1958

Pre-1957 MP

1959

1960

-0.08
1952

1961

1953

1954

Fixed ER

1955

1956

Actual data

Inflation

1957

1958

Pre-1957 MP

1959

1960

1961

Fixed ER

Dif(Nom. Exchange Rate)

0.1

0.05

0.08

0.04
0.03

0.06
0.02
0.04

0.01

0.02

0
-0.01

0

-0.02
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.06
1952

-0.04

1953

1954

1955

1956

Actual data

1957

1958

Pre-1957 MP

1959

1960

-0.05
1952

1961

Fixed ER

1953

1954

1955

1956

1957

Acutal data

50

1958

1959

Pre-1957 MP

1960

1961

