                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF LEGAL ORIGINS

                                          Rafael La Porta
                                    Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                          Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 13608
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13608


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We are grateful to Daniel Berkowitz, Olivier Blanchard, Simeon Djankov, Nicola Gennaioli, Roger
Gordon, Oliver Hart, Katharina Pistor, students in Ec 2470, four reviewers, and especially Louis Kaplow
for extremely helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Consequences of Legal Origins
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 13608
November 2007
JEL No. K00,N20,P51

                                              ABSTRACT

In the last decade, economists have produced a considerable body of research suggesting that the historical
origin of a country's laws is highly correlated with a broad range of its legal rules and regulations,
as well as with economic outcomes. We summarize this evidence and attempt a unified interpretation.
We also address several objections to the empirical claim that legal origins matter. Finally, we assess
the implications of this research for economic reform.


Rafael La Porta                                      Andrei Shleifer
Tuck School                                          Department of Economics
314 Woodbury                                         Harvard University
Hanover, NH 03755                                    Littauer Center M-9
and NBER                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu                         and NBER
                                                     ashleifer@harvard.edu
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Professor of Finance and Law
Chair, EDHEC-Paris School of Economics
Director, Corporate Goverannce Research Program
EDHEC Business School
393, Promenade des Anglais BP 3116
06202 Nice Cedex 3, France
and NBER
Florencio.lopezdesilanes@edhec.edu
I. Introduction

         About a decade ago, the three of us together with Robert Vishny published a pair

of articles dealing with legal protection of investors and its consequences (La Porta et al.

or LLSV, 1997, 1998). These articles generated a fair amount of follow-up research, and

a good deal of controversy. This paper is our attempt to summarize the main findings,

and more importantly to interpret them in a unified way.

         LLSV started from a proposition, standard in corporate law (e.g., Clark 1986) and

emphasized by Shleifer and Vishny (1997), that legal protection of outside investors

limits the extent of expropriation of such investors by corporate insiders, and thereby

promotes financial development 1 . From there, LLSV made two contributions. First,

they showed that legal rules governing investor protection can be measured and coded for

many countries using national commercial (primarily corporate and bankruptcy) laws.

LLSV coded such rules for both the protection of outside shareholders, and the protection

of outside senior creditors, for 49 countries. The coding showed that some countries

offer much stronger legal protection of outside investors’ interests than others.

         Second, LLSV documented empirically that legal rules protecting investors vary

systematically among legal traditions or origins, with the laws of common law countries

(originating in English law) being more protective of outside investors than the laws of

civil law (originating in Roman law) and particularly French civil law countries. LLSV

further argued that legal traditions were typically introduced into various countries

through conquest and colonization, and as such were largely exogenous. LLSV then used

1
  This argument followed naturally from the contractual view of the firm (Jensen and Meckling 1976,
Grossman and Hart 1988, Hart 1995), which sees the protection of the property rights of the financiers as
essential to assure the flow of capital to firms. Financial economists have often argued, in contrast, that
financial markets are sustained by “market forces” such as competition and reputation (Leland and Pyle
1977, Fama 1980). Comparative research emphasized on the role of banks (Allen and Gale 1999).


                                                      2
legal origins of commercial laws as an instrument for legal rules in a two stage procedure,

where the second stage explained financial development. The evidence showed that legal

investor protection is a strong predictor of financial development.

       Subsequent research showed that the influence of legal origins on laws and

regulations is not restricted to finance. In several studies conducted jointly with Simeon

Djankov and others, we found that such outcomes as government ownership of banks (La

Porta et al. 2002), the burden of entry regulations (Djankov et al. 2002), regulation of

labor markets (Botero et al. 2004), incidence of military conscription (Mulligan and

Shleifer 2005a,b), and government ownership of the media (Djankov et al. 2003c) vary

across legal families. In all these spheres, civil law is associated with a heavier hand of

government ownership and regulation than common law. Many of these indicators of

government ownership and regulation are associated with adverse impacts on markets,

such as greater corruption, larger unofficial economy, and higher unemployment.

       In still other studies, we have found that common law is associated with lower

formalism of judicial procedures (Djankov et al. 2003b) and greater judicial

independence (La Porta et al. 2004) than civil law. These indicators are in turn

associated with better contract enforcement and greater security of property rights.

       Assuming that this evidence is correct, it raises an enormous challenge of

interpretation. What is the meaning of legal origin? Why is its influence so pervasive?

How can the superior performance of common law in many areas be reconciled with the

high costs of litigation, and well-known judicial arbitrariness, in common law countries?

       In this paper, we adopt a broad conception of legal origin as a style of social

control of economic life (and maybe of other aspects of life as well). In strong form




                                             3
(later to be supplemented by a variety of caveats), we argue that common law stands for

the strategy of social control that seeks to support private market outcomes, whereas civil

law seeks to replace such outcomes with state-desired allocations. In words of one legal

scholar, civil law is “policy implementing”, while common law is “dispute resolving”

(Damaska 1986). In words of another, French civil law embraces “socially-conditioned

private contracting,” in contrast to common law’s support for “unconditioned private

contracting” (Pistor 2006). We develop an interpretation of the evidence, which we call

the Legal Origins Theory, based on these fundamental differences.

       Legal Origin Theory traces the different strategies of common and civil law to

different ideas about law and its purpose that England and France developed centuries

ago. These broad ideas and strategies were incorporated into specific legal rules, but also

into the organization of the legal system, as well as the human capital and beliefs of its

participants. When common and civil law were transplanted into much of the world

through conquest and colonization, the rules, but also human capital and legal ideologies,

were transplanted as well. Despite much local legal evolution, the fundamental strategies

and assumptions of each legal system survived, and have continued to exert substantial

influence on economic outcomes. As the leading comparative legal scholars Zweigert

and Kotz (1998) note, “the style of a legal system may be marked by an ideology, that is,

a religious or political conception of how economic or social life should be organized” (p.

72). In this paper, we show how these styles of different legal systems have developed,

survived over the years, and continued to have substantial economic consequences. In

our conception, legal origins are central to understanding the varieties of capitalism.




                                              4
       The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the principal legal

traditions. In Section 3, we document the strong and pervasive effects of legal origins on

diverse areas of law and regulation, which in turn influence a variety of economic

outcomes. In Section 4, we outline the Legal Origins Theory, and interpret the findings

from that perspective. In sections 5-7, we deal with three lines of criticism of our

research, all organized around the idea that legal origin is a proxy for something else.

The three alternatives we consider are culture, politics, and history. Our strong

conclusion is that, while all these factors influence laws, regulations, and economic

outcomes, it is almost certainly false that legal origin is merely a proxy for any of them.

       Section 8 briefly considers the implications of our work for economic reform, and

describes some of the reforms that had taken place. Many developing countries today

find themselves heavily over-regulated in crucial spheres of economic life, in part

because of their legal origin heritage. Legal Origin Theory, and the associated

measurement of legal and regulatory institutions, provides some guidance to reforms.

       Section 9 concludes the paper.

       We note that this paper is not a survey, and therefore only introduces particular

papers in so far as they enter the discussion of the meaning and the consequences of legal

origins. The last decade has witnessed an explosion of research on corporate governance

which uses the investor protection framework. This research has successfully replaced

the traditional Berle-Means conception of a public corporation with a much more realistic

for most of the world model of family-run firms, pyramidal and group structures, and

tremendous conflicts between outside investors and controlling shareholders. This

research, however, is not covered in our paper.




                                              5
II. Background on legal origins.

       In their remarkable 300-page survey of human history, “The Human Web,”

Robert and William McNeill (2003) show how the transmission of information across

space shapes human societies. Information is transmitted through trade, conquest,

colonization, missionary work, migration, and so on. The bits of information transmitted

through these channels include technology, language, religion, sports, but also law and

legal systems. Some of these bits of information are transplanted voluntarily, as when

people adopt technologies they need. This makes it difficult to study the consequences of

adoption because we do not know whether to attribute these consequences to what is

adopted, or to the conditions that invited the adoption. In other instances, the

transplantation of information is involuntary, as in the cases of forced religious

conversion, conquest, or colonization. These conditions, unfavorable as they are, make it

easier to identify the consequences of specific information being transplanted.

       Legal origins or traditions present a key example of such often involuntary

transmission of different bundles of information across human populations. Legal

scholars believe that some national legal systems are sufficiently similar in some critical

respects to others to permit classification of national legal systems into major families of

law (David and Brierley 1985, Reynolds and Flores 1989, Glendon et al. 1992, 1994,

Zweigert and Kotz 1998). “The following factors seem to us to be those which are

crucial for the style of a legal system or a legal family: (1) its historical background and

development, (2) its predominant and characteristic mode of thought in legal matters, (3)

especially distinctive institutions, (4) the kind of legal sources it acknowledges and the

way it handles them, and (5) its ideology” (Zweigert and Kotz 1998, p. 68).




                                              6
       All writers identify two main secular legal traditions: common law and civil law,

and several sub-traditions – French, German, socialist, and Scandinavian – within civil

law. Occasionally, countries adopt some laws from one legal tradition and other laws

from another, and researchers need to keep track of such hybrids, but generally a

particular tradition dominates in each country.

       The key feature of legal traditions is that they have been transplanted, typically

though not always through conquest or colonization, from relatively few mother countries

to most of the rest of the world (Watson 1974). Such transplantation covers specific

laws and codes, the more general styles or ideologies of the legal system, but also

individuals with mother-country training, human capital, and legal outlook.

       Of course, following the transplantation of some basic legal infrastructure, such as

the legal codes, legal principles and ideologies, and elements of the organization of the

judiciary, the national laws of various countries changed, evolved, and adapted to local

circumstances. Cultural, political, and economic conditions of every society came to be

reflected in their national laws, so that legal and regulatory systems of no two countries

are literally identical. This adaptation and individualization, however, was incomplete.

Enough of the basic transplanted elements have remained and persisted (David 1985) to

allow the classification into legal traditions. As a consequence, legal transplantation

represents the kind of involuntary information transmission that the McNeills have

emphasized, which enables us to study the consequences of legal origins.

       Before discussing the legal traditions of market economies, we briefly comment

on socialist law. The socialist legal tradition originates in the Soviet Union, and was

spread by the Soviet armies first to the former Soviet republics and later to Eastern




                                             7
Europe 2 . It was also imitated by some socialist states, such as Mongolia and China.

After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the countries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern

Europe reverted to their pre-Russian-revolution or pre-World War II legal systems, which

were French or German civil law. In our work based on data from the 1990’s, we have

often classified transition economies as having the socialist legal system. However,

today, academics and officials from these countries object to such classification, so, in the

present paper, we classify them according to the key influence on their new commercial

laws. A couple of countries, such as Cuba, still maintain the socialist legal system, and

await liberation and re-classification. These countries typically lack other data, so no

socialist legal origin countries appear in the analysis in the present paper.

         Figure I shows the distribution of legal origins of commercial laws throughout the

world. The common-law legal tradition includes the law of England and its former

colonies. The common law is formed by appellate judges who establish precedents by

solving specific legal disputes. Dispute resolution tends to be adversarial rather than

inquisitorial. Judicial independence from both the executive and legislature are central.

“English common law developed because landed aristocrats and merchants wanted a

system of law that would provide strong protections for property and contract rights, and

limit the crown’s ability to interfere in markets” (Mahoney 2001, p. 504). Common law

has spread to the British colonies, including the United States, Canada, Australia, India,

South Africa, and many other countries. Of the maximal sample of 150 countries used in

our studies, there are 42 common law countries.



2
 The socialist legal tradition illustrates the significance of ideologies for legal styles. “…the socialist
concept of law can be directly traced to the movement of legal positivism. The movement … sees law as
an expression of the will of the legislators , supreme interpreters of justice” (David and Brierley 1985, p.69)


                                                      8
       The civil law tradition is the oldest, the most influential, and the most widely

distributed around the world, especially after so many transition economies returned to it.

It originates in Roman law, uses statutes and comprehensive codes as a primary means of

ordering legal material, and relies heavily on legal scholars to ascertain and formulate

rules (Merryman 1969). Dispute resolution tends to be inquisitorial rather than

adversarial. Roman law was rediscovered in the Middle Ages in Italy, adopted by the

Catholic Church for its purposes, and from there formed the basis of secular laws in many

European countries.

       Although the origins of civil law are ancient, the French civil law tradition is

usually identified with the French Revolution and Napoleon’s codes, which were written

in the early 19th century. In contrast to common law, “French civil law developed as it

did because the revolutionary generation, and Napoleon after it, wished to use state

power to alter property rights and attempted to insure that judges did not interfere. Thus,

quite apart from the substance of legal rules, there is a sharp difference between the

ideologies underlying common and civil law, with the latter notably more comfortable

with the centralized and activist government” (Mahoney 2001, p. 505).

       Napoleon’s armies introduced his codes into Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and

parts of Germany. In the colonial era, France extended her legal influence to the Near

East and Northern and Sub-Saharan Africa, Indochina, Oceania, and French Caribbean

Islands. Napoleonic influence was also significant in Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, and

some Swiss cantons. When the Spanish and Portuguese empires in Latin America

dissolved in the 19th century, it was mainly the French civil law that the lawmakers of the

new nations looked to for inspiration. In the 19th century, the French civil code was also




                                             9
adopted, with many modifications, by the Russian Empire, and through Russia to the

neighboring regions it influenced and occupied. These countries adopted the socialist

law after the Russian Revolution, but typically reverted to the French civil law after the

fall of the Berlin Wall. There are 84 French legal origin countries in the sample.

       The German legal tradition also has its basis in Roman law, but the German

Commercial Code was written in 1897, after Bismarck’s unification of Germany. It

shares many procedural characteristics with the French system, but accommodates

greater judicial law-making. The German legal tradition influenced Austria, the former

Czechoslovakia, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Switzerland, Yugoslavia, Japan, Korea, and a

few countries of the former Soviet Union. Taiwan’s laws came from China, which relied

heavily on German laws during modernization. There are 19 German legal origin

countries in the sample.

       The Scandinavian family is usually viewed as part of the civil law tradition,

although its law is less derivative of Roman law than the French and German families

(Zweigert and Kotz 1998). Most writers describe the Scandinavian laws as distinct from

others, and we have kept them as a separate family (with 5 members) in our research.

       Before turning to the presentation of results, five points about this classification

are in order. First, although the majority of legal transplantation is the product of

conquest and colonization, there are important exceptions. Japan adopted the German

legal system voluntarily. Latin American former Spanish and Portuguese colonies ended

up with codifications heavily influenced by the French legal tradition after gaining

independence. Beyond the fact that Napoleon had invaded the Iberian Peninsula, the

reasons were partly the new military leaders’ admiration for Bonaparte, partly language,




                                             10
and partly Napoleonic influence on the Spanish and Portuguese codes. In this instance,

the exogeneity assumption from the viewpoint of studying economic outcomes is still

appropriate. The 19th century influence of the French civil law in Russia and Turkey was

largely voluntary, as both countries sought to modernize. But the French and German

civil law traditions in the rest of the countries in Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and

Central Asia are the result of the conquests by the Russian, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman,

and German empires. The return by these countries to their pre-Soviet legal traditions

during the transition from socialism is voluntary, but shaped largely by history.

       Second, because Scandinavian countries did not have any colonies, and

Germany’s colonial influence was short-lived and abruptly erased by World War I, there

are relatively few countries in these two traditions. As a consequence, while we

occasionally speak of the comparison between common and civil law, most of the

discussion compares common law to the French civil law. This is largely because each

tradition includes a large number of countries, but also because they represent the two

most distinct approaches to law and regulation.

       Third, although we often speak of common law and French civil law in terms of

pure types, in reality there has been a great deal of mutual influence and in some areas

convergence. There is a good deal of legislation in common law countries, and a good

deal of judicial interpretation in civil law countries. But the fact that the actual laws of

real countries are not pure types does not mean that there are no systematic differences.

       Fourth, some have noted the growing importance of legislation in common law

countries as proof that judicial law making no longer matters. This is incorrect, for a

number of reasons. Statutes in common law countries often follow and reflect judicial




                                              11
rulings, so jurisprudence remains the basis of statutory law. Even when legislation in

common law countries runs ahead of judicial law making, it often must coexist with, and

therefore reflects, pre-existing common law rules. Indeed, statutes in common law

countries are often highly imprecise, with an expectation that courts will spell out the

rules as they begin to be applied. Finally, and most crucially, because legal origins shape

fundamental approaches to social control of business, even legislation in common law

countries expresses the common law way of doing things. For all these reasons, the

universal growth of legislation in no way implies the irrelevance of legal origins.

        Fifth, with the re-classification of transition economies from socialist into the

French and German civil law families, one might worry that the differences among legal

origins described below are driven by the transition economies. They are not. None of

our substantive results change if we exclude the transition economies.

        With these points in mind, we can turn to the evidence.



III. Basic Facts.

The Evidence in Brief

        Figure II organizes some of our own and related research on the economic

consequences of legal origins. It shows the links from legal origins to particular legal

rules, and then to economic outcomes. Figure II immediately suggests several concerns

for empirical work. First, in our framework, legal origins influence many spheres of law-

making and regulation, which makes it dangerous to use them as instruments. Second,

we have drawn a rather clean picture pointing from particular legal rules to outcomes. In

reality, a variety of legal rules (e.g., those governing both investor protection and legal




                                             12
procedure) can influence the protection of outside investors and hence financial markets.

This, again, makes empirical work less clean.

       Before turning to the evidence, we make four comments about the data. First, all

the data used in this paper, and a good deal more, are available at

http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/shleifer/data.html. We do not discuss the

data in detail, but the descriptions are available in the original papers presenting the data.

       Second, the basic evidence we present takes the form of cross-country studies.

An important feature of these studies is that all countries receive the same weight. There

is no special treatment of mother countries, of rich countries, etc. This design may

obscure the differences, discussed below, within legal origins, such as the greater

dynamism of law in mother countries than in former colonies.

       Third, the sources of data on legal rules and institutions vary significantly across

studies. Some rules, such as many indicators of investor protection and of various

government regulations, come from national laws. Those tend to be “laws on the books.”

Other indicators are mixtures of national laws and actual experiences, and tend to

combine substantive and procedural rules. These variables are often constructed through

collaborative efforts with law firms around the world, and yield summary indicators of

legal rules and their enforcement. For example, the study of legal formalism (Djankov et

al. 2003b) reflects the lawyers’ characterization of procedural rules that would typically

apply to a specific legal dispute; the study of the efficiency of debt enforcement (Djankov

et al. 2006) incorporates estimates of time, cost, and resolution of a standardized

insolvency case. The data used in each study have their advantages and problems. An




                                              13
important fact, however, is the consistency of results across both data collection

procedures and spheres of activity that we document below.

       Fourth, over the years, various writers have criticized both the conceptual

foundations of LLSV variables such as shareholder rights indices (Coffee 1999) and the

particular values we have assigned to these variables, in part because of conceptual

ambiguity (Spamann 2005). We have corrected our mistakes, but have also moved on to

conceptually less ambiguous measures (Djankov et al. 2008). These corrections have

strengthened the original results. The findings we discuss below use the most recent data.

       To organize the discussion, we do not provide a full survey of the available

evidence, but rather a sampling with an emphasis on the breadth of the findings. The

available studies have followed a similar pattern, shown in Figure II. They first consider

the effect of legal origins on particular laws and regulations, and then the effects of these

laws and regulations on the economic outcomes that they might influence most directly.

       The available studies can be divided into three categories. First, several studies

following LLSV (1997, 1998) examine the effects of legal origins on investor protection,

and then the effect of investor protection on financial development. Some of these

studies look at stock markets.   The LLSV measure of anti-director rights has been

replaced by a measure of shareholder protection through securities laws in the offerings

of new issues (La Porta et al. 2006), and by another measure of shareholder protection

from self-dealing by corporate insiders through corporate law (Djankov et al. 2008). As

outcomes, these studies use such measures as the ratio of stock market capitalization to

GDP, the pace of public offering activity, the voting premium (see Dyck and Zingales

2004), dividend payouts (La Porta et al. 2000), Tobin’s Q (La Porta et al. 2002), and




                                             14
ownership dispersion (La Porta et al. 1999). Predictions for each of these variables

emerge from a standard agency model of corporate governance, in which investor

protection shapes external finance (e.g., Shleifer and Wolfenzon 2002) 3 .

        Other studies in this category look at creditor rights. The LLSV (1997, 1998)

measure from bankruptcy laws has been updated by Djankov et al. (2007). Djankov et

al. (2006) take a different approach to creditor protection by looking at the actual

efficiency of debt enforcement, as measured by creditor recovery rates in a hypothetical

case of an insolvent firm. The latter study addresses a common criticism that it is law

enforcement, rather than rules on the books, that matters for investor protection by

integrating legal rules and characteristics of enforcement in the efficiency measure. La

Porta et al. (2002) focus on state involvement in financial markets by looking at

government ownership of banks.           These studies typically consider the size of debt

markets as an outcome measure, although Djankov et al. (2007) also examine several

subjective assessments of the quality of private debt markets.

        In the second category, several papers consider government regulation, or even

ownership, of particular economic activities. Djankov et al. (2002) look at the number of

steps an entrepreneur must complete in order to begin operating a business legally, a

number that in 1999 ranged from 2 in Australia and Canada to 21 in the Dominican

Republic. They examine the impact of such entry regulation on corruption and the size of

the unofficial economy. Botero et al. (2004) construct indices of labor market regulation

and examine their effect on labor force participation rates and unemployment. Djankov

et al. (2003a) examine government ownership of the media, which remains extensive

3
 The theoretical prediction that investor protection leads to greater ownership dispersion is not
unambiguous, and the data on ownership around the world is less clean and satisfactory than that on other
variables. Nonetheless, much of the criticism of LLSV has focused on ownership dispersion.


                                                    15
around the world, particularly for television. Mulligan and Shleifer (2005a,b) look at one

of the ultimate forms of government intervention in private life, military conscription.

       The third category of papers investigates the effects of legal origins on the

characteristics of the judiciary (and other government institutions), and then the effect of

those on the security of property rights and contract enforcement. Djankov et al. (2003b)

look at the formalism of judicial procedures in various countries, and its effect on the

time it takes to evict a non-paying tenant or to collect a bounced check. This variable can

be interpreted more broadly as the efficiency of contract enforcement by courts, and in

fact turns out to be highly correlated with the efficiency of debt collection obtained in an

entirely different way by Djankov et al. (2006). La Porta et al. (2004) adopt a very

different strategy and collect information from national constitutions on judicial

independence (as measured by judicial tenure) and the acceptance of appellate court

rulings as a source of law. They then ask directly whether judicial independence

contributes to the quality of contract enforcement and the security of property rights.

       Tables I-III show a sampling of results from each category of studies. In each

Table, the top panel presents the regressions of legal or regulatory institutions on legal

origins, controlling only for per capita income. In the original papers, many more

controls and robustness checks are included, but here we present the stripped down

regressions. The bottom panel of each Table then presents some results of regressions of

outcomes on legal rules. We could of course combine the two panels in an instrumental

variables specification, but, as we indicated previously, we do not recommend such

specifications since legal origins influence a broad range of rules and regulations, and we

cannot guarantee that the relevant ones are not omitted in the first stage.




                                             16
         Begin with Table I.            Higher income per capita is associated with better

shareholder and creditor protection, more efficient debt collection, and lower government

ownership of banks (Panel A). Civil law is generally associated with lower shareholder

and creditor protection, less efficient debt enforcement, and higher government

ownership of banks. The estimated coefficients imply that, compared to common law,

French legal origin is associated with a reduction of 0.33 in the anti-self-dealing index

(which ranges between 0 and 1), of 0.33 in the index of prospectus disclosure (which

ranges between 0 and 1), of 0.84 in the creditor rights index (which ranges from 0 to 4),

of 13.6 points in the efficiency of debt collection (out of 100), and a rise of 33

percentage points in government ownership of banks. The effect of legal origins on legal

rules and financial institutions is statistically significant and economically large.

         Higher income per capita is generally associated with more developed financial

markets, as reflected in a higher stock-market-capitalization-to-GDP ratio, more firms per

capita, less ownership concentration, a lower control premium, a higher private-credit-to-

GDP ratio, and lower interest rate spreads. 4 Investor protection is associated with more

developed financial markets (Panel B). The estimated coefficients imply that a two-

standard deviation increase in the anti-self-dealing index is associated with an increase in

the stock-market-to-GDP ratio of 42 percentage points, an increase in listed firms per

capita of 38 percentage points, and a reduction in ownership concentration of 6

percentage points. A two-standard deviation improvement in prospectus disclosure is

associated with a reduction in the control premium of 0.15 (the mean premium is 0.11).

4
  Recent research has looked at additional outcome variables as well as measures of credit market
regulation. Esty and Megginson (2003) find that creditor protection shapes foreign bank lending, while
Ongena and Smith (2000) show it influences the number of banking relationships. Qian and Strahan
(2007) find that better creditor protection lowers interest rates that lenders charge. Barth et al. (2004)
introduce measures of banking regulation and show that they vary systematically by legal origin.


                                                      17
The effect of legal rules on debt markets is also large. A two-standard deviation increase

in creditor rights is associated with an increase of 15 percentage points in the private-

credit-to-GDP ratio.         A two-standard deviation increase in the efficiency of debt

collection is associated with an increase of 27 percentage points in the private-credit-to-

GDP ratio. A two-standard deviation increase in government ownership of banks is

associated with a 16 percentage point rise in the spread between lending and borrowing

rates (the median spread is 12). 5

         Table II presents the results on regulation. Higher income per capita is correlated

with lower entry regulation and government ownership of the media, but not with labor

regulation or conscription (Panel A). Both French and German civil origins have more

entry and labor regulation, higher state ownership of the media, and heavier reliance on

conscription 6 . The coefficients imply that, compared to common law, French legal origin

is associated with an increase of 0.69 in the (log) number of steps to open a new business

(which ranges from 0.69 to 3.0), a rise of 0.26 in the index of labor regulation (which

ranges from 0.15 to 0.83), a 0.21 rise in government ownership of the media (which

ranges from 0 to 1), and a 0.55 increase in conscription (which ranges from 0 to 1).

         According to the estimated coefficients in Panel B, a two-standard deviation

increase in the (log) number of steps to open a new business is associated with a 0.71

worsening of the corruption index and a 14 percentage point rise in employment in the

unofficial economy. A two-standard deviation increase in the regulation of labor implies
5
  Sapienza (2004) shows that government-owned banks in Italy lend to big enterprises rather than small
ones. Dinc (2005) finds that government-owned banks sharply increase lending in election years. Khwaja
and Mian (2005) present evidence that politically-connected firms in Pakistan get preferential treatment
from government-owned banks. They borrow 45 percent more and have 50 percent higher default rates.
6
  In a similar spirit, Ben-Bassat and Dahan (2007) show that constitutional commitments to “social rights”
(the right to social security, education, health, housing, and workers rights) are less prevalent in common
law countries than in the French civil law ones.


                                                    18
a 1.99 percentage point reduction in the male labor force participation rate, a 2.32

percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, and a 5.67 percentage point rise in

the unemployment rate of young males.

        Table III shows the results on judicial institutions. Higher income per capita is

associated with less legal formalism but not with longer judicial tenure or the acceptance

of case law (Panel A). Here again, legal origin has a pronounced effect on institutions.

Compared to common law countries, civil law countries generally have more legal

formalism, lower judicial tenure, and sharply lower constitutional acceptance of case

law 7 . The estimated coefficients imply that French legal origin is associated with an

increase of 1.49 in the index of legal formalism, a reduction of 0.24 in judicial tenure, and

of 0.67 in case law. These are large effects since legal formalism ranges from 0.73 to 6.0,

and both judicial tenure and case law range from 0 to 1.

       Judicial institutions matter for both the efficiency of contract enforcement and the

security of property rights (Panel B). The estimated coefficients imply that a two-

standard deviation increase in legal formalism is associated with a 65 percentage point

increase in the time to collect on a check and a reduction of 1.1 in the index of contract

enforcement (the latter ranges from 3.5 to 8.9). Moreover, a two-standard deviation

increase in judicial tenure is associated with a 2.9 point rise in the property rights index.

Finally, a two standard deviation increase in case law is associated with an improvement

of 1.3 points in the property rights index, which ranges from 1 to 5.


       7
           Berkowitz and Clay (2005, 2006, 2007) exploit the fact that ten US states were
initially settled by France, Spain, or Mexico to examine the effects of legal origin. They
find that states initially settled by civil law countries granted less independence to their
judiciaries as recently as 1970-90, had lower quality courts in 2001-03, and used different
procedures for setting judicial budgets as late as 1960-2000.


                                             19
Initial Criticisms

       So, what do we learn from these tables? The economic consequences of legal

origins are pervasive. Compared to French civil law, common law is associated with a)

better investor protection, which in turn is associated with improved financial

development, better access to finance, and higher ownership dispersion, b) lighter

government ownership and regulation, which are in turn associated with less corruption,

better functioning labor markets, and smaller unofficial economies, and c) less formalized

and more independent judicial systems, which are in turn associated with more secure

property rights and better contract enforcement.

       The most important aspect of these results from our viewpoint is how pervasive is

the influence of legal origins. As we discuss below, many objections have been raised

with respect to individual pieces of this evidence. We address later the most far-reaching

criticism, that legal origin is a proxy for something else, but deal here with more

parochial concerns. The key point to start with, however, is that objections rarely come

to grips with the breadth of the influence of legal origins on economic outcomes.

       We focus on objections to the law and finance evidence. The most immediate

objection is reverse causality: countries improve their laws protecting investors as their

financial markets develop, perhaps under political pressure from those investors. If

instrumental variable techniques were appropriate in this context, a two stage procedure,

in which in the first stage the rules are instrumented by legal origins, would address this

objection. LLSV (1997, 1998) pursue this strategy. But even if instrumental variable

techniques are inappropriate because legal origin influences finance through channels

other than rules protecting investors, legal origins are still exogenous, and to the extent




                                             20
that they shape legal rules protecting investors, these rules cannot be just responding to

market development. Moreover, this criticism in no way rejects the significance of legal

origins in shaping outcomes; it speaks only to the difficulty of identifying the channel.

       Recent evidence has gone beyond cross-section to look at changes in financial

development in response to changes in legal rules, thereby relieving the reverse causality

concerns. Greenstone, Oyer, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2006) examine the effects of the

1964 Securities Act Amendments, which increased the disclosure requirements for US

over-the-counter firms. They find that firms subject to the new disclosure requirements

had a statistically significant abnormal excess return of about 10% over the year and a

half that the law was debated and passed relative to a comparison group of unaffected

NYSE/AMEX firms. Bushee and Leuz (2005) obtain similar findings using a regulatory

change on US over-the-counter markets. Linciano (2003) examines the impact of the

Draghi reforms in Italy, which improved shareholder protection. The voting premium

steadily declined over the period that the Draghi committee was in operation, culminating

in a drop of 7 percent in the premium at the time of the passage of the law. Nenova

(2006) analyzes how the control premium is affected by changes in shareholder

protection in Brazil. She documents that the control value more than doubled in the

second half of 1997 in response to the introduction of Law 9457/1997, which weakened

minority shareholder protection. Moreover, control values dropped to pre-1997 levels

when in the beginning of 1999 some of the minority protection rules scrapped by the

previous legal change were reinstated.

       Turning to the evidence on credit markets, Djankov et al. (2007) show that private

credit rises after improvements in creditor rights and in information sharing in a sample




                                             21
of 129 countries. For a sample of 12 transition economies, Haselmann et al (2006) report

that lending volume responds positively to improvements in creditor rights. Visaria

(2006) estimates the impact of introducing specialized tribunals in India aimed at

accelerating banks' recovery of non-performing loans. She finds that the establishment of

tribunals reduces delinquency in loan repayment by between 3 and 10 percentage points.

Musacchio (2008) finds that the development of bond markets in Brazil is correlated with

changes in creditors’ rights. Gamboa and Schneider (2007), in an exhaustive study of

recent bankruptcy reform in Mexico, show that changes in legal rules lowered the time it

takes firms to go through bankruptcy proceedings and raised recovery rates 8 .

         A second concern about the law and finance evidence is omitted variables – the

very reason IV techniques are not suitable for identifying the channels of influence. How

do we know that legal origin influences financial development through legal rules, rather

than some other channel (or perhaps even other rules)? The most cogent version of this

critique holds that legal origin influences contract enforcement and the quality of the

judiciary, and it is through this channel that it effects financial development. Indeed, we

know from La Porta et al. (1999, 2004) and Djankov et al. (2003b), as illustrated in Table

III above, that common law is associated with better contract enforcement.

         This objection is significant since, in reality, enforcement and rules are not

entirely separable. A formalistic judiciary might be better able to enforce bright line

rules than broad legal standards; an independent judiciary might have a comparative

advantage at enforcing standards. One way to address this concern is to control for

contract enforcement as best we can. In the regressions above, we control for per capita

8
  There is also growing evidence on reforms of entry regulations. Yakovlev and Zhuravskaya (2007) for
the case of Russia and Kaplan, Piedra, and Seira (2007) for the case of Mexico find that reductions in entry
regulations increase new business startups.


                                                    22
income, which is a crude proxy of the quality of the judiciary. More recent studies, such

as Djankov et al. (2008) and La Porta et al. (2006), also control for the quality of contract

enforcement from Djankov et al. (2003b), with the result that both the actual legal rules

and the quality of contract enforcement matter. For the case of credit markets, Safavian

and Sharma (2007) show that creditor rights benefit debt markets if the country has a

good enough court system, but not if it does not. Djankov et al. (2006) combine the rules

and their actual enforcement into an integrated measure of debt enforcement efficiency.

This measure (see Table I above) is highly predictive of debt market development. The

available evidence suggests that both good rules and their enforcement matter, and that

the combination of the two is generally most effective.

       Another relevant distinction is between legal rules and their interpretation. One

view is that the actual legal rules, which might have come from legislation, from

appellate decisions, or from legislation codifying previous appellate decisions, are shaped

by legal origins and in turn shape finance. For example, the extensive approval and

disclosure procedures for self-dealing transactions discourage them in common law

countries, as compared to the French civil law countries (Djankov et al. 2008).

       Other writers emphasize the flexibility of judicial decision-making under common

law.   One version of this argument suggests that common law judges are able or willing

to enforce more flexible financial contracts, and that such flexibility promotes financial

development (Gennaioli 2007). Lerner and Schoar (2005) and Bergman and

Nikolaievsky (2007) present some evidence in support of this view. In the context of

labor markets, Ahlering and Deakin (2005) likewise argue that in civil law countries,

unlike in common law ones, freedom of contract is counterbalanced by the exercise of




                                             23
public power for the protection of workers in the French tradition, and the communitarian

conception of the enterprise in the German one. Pistor (2006) presents a legal and

historical account of the greater contractual flexibility in common law, the reason being

that contractual freedom is unencumbered by social conditionality 9 .

         A second version of the flexibility thesis stresses the ability of common law

courts to use broad standards rather than specific rules in rendering their decisions. This

ability enables judges to “catch” self-dealing or tunneling, and thereby discourages it.

Coffee (1999) has famously called this the smell-test of common law. Johnson et al

(2000) examine several legal cases concerning tunneling of assets by corporate insiders in

civil law countries, and find that the bright line rules of civil law allow corporate insiders

to structure legal transactions that expropriate outside investors. In contrast, the broader

standards of common law, such as fiduciary duty, discourage tunneling more effectively.

         At this point, there is evidence supporting both the “laws on the books” and the

“judicial flexibility” theories. As we argue in section IV, both interpretations are also

consistent with the fundamental differences between common and civil law.



Recent Findings on Resource Allocation

         Recent years have seen an explosion of research on the consequences of legal

rules and regulations, many of which are related to legal origins, for resource allocation.

We briefly review this evidence before turning to the interpretation.

         Perhaps the largest body of work concerns the effect of financial development on

resource allocation. Many of these papers use LLSV indicators of investor protection, as


9
  Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2005) dispute the flexibility hypothesis by pointing to the broader range of
legally acceptable forms of business organization in France than in the United States in the 19th century.


                                                     24
well as legal origins as instruments for financial development. The central paper here is

Rajan and Zingales (1998), who find that, in financially developed countries, sectors

which for technological reasons depend more on external finance, grow faster. In a

similar spirit, Wurgler (2000) finds that financially developed countries exhibit a higher

responsiveness of investment to growth opportunities 10 .

        Several studies use the data from Botero et al. (2004) to examine the effects of

labor regulation on resource allocation. Caballero et al. (2004) find that, in countries

with strong rule of law, higher job security is associated with slower adjustment to shocks

and lower productivity growth. Gaëlle and Scarpetta (2007) show that employment

regulations lead to substitution from permanent to temporary employment. Haltiwanger

et al. (2006) and Micco and Pages (2006) find that legal employment protections reduce

labor turnover. Cunat and Melitz (2006) find that countries with light labor market

regulations specialize in volatile industries. Lafontaine and Sivadasan (2007) study one

firm operating in 43 countries, and find that employment protections lead to labor

misallocation, delayed entry, and operation of fewer outlets.

        Entry regulations, another sphere influenced by legal origins, also affect resource

allocation. Fisman and Sarria-Allende (2004) find that entry regulations distort industry

structure and promote concentration. Klapper et al. (2006) and Djankov et al. (2007b)

show that such regulations stifle entry. Ciccone and Papaioannou (2006c) report that

countries with lower entry regulations see more entry in industries that experience

expanding global demand and technology shifts.



10
  Other papers in this area include Claessens and Laeven (2003), Braun (2003), Fisman and Love (2004),
Beck et al. (2005), Perotti and Volpin (2004), Ciccone and Papaioannou (2006a,b), De Serres et al. (2006),
and Bekaert et al. (2007).


                                                    25
       Two other papers use our variables to examine the effects of contract enforcement

on the structure of production. Nunn (2007) finds that countries with good contract

enforcement specialize in the production of goods for which relationship-specific

investments are more important. Antras, Desai, and Foley (2007) find that weak investor

protections limit the scale of multi-national firm activity, increase the reliance on FDI

flows, and alter the decision to deploy technology through FDI rather than licensing.

       Finally, a growing body of research shows that costly regulation can reduce the

benefits of international trade. Lopez-de-Cordova (2007) finds that exporting firms grow

4 percentage points faster after trade liberalization in countries with less burdensome

labor regulations. Using cross-country data, Freund and Bolaki (2007) show that trade

openness has a positive impact on per capita income only in countries with low regulation

of entry. Chang et al. (2005) present a similar finding for labor market regulation.

Helpman et al. (2007) find that the probability that two countries trade is smaller when

the cost of entry regulation is high in both countries.

       All this evidence suggests that through their effect on finance, labor markets, and

competition, legal origins indeed influence resource allocation. This raises the question

of whether one can take the next step and connect legal origins to aggregate economic

growth. This, however, has proved to be difficult, as we explain next.

       Mahoney (2001) shows that, in the recent period, common law countries have

grown faster than French legal origin countries. Mahoney is indeed correct: during

1960-2000, compared to the common law countries, GDP per capita in the French legal

origin countries has grown about 0.6 percentage point slower per year. On the other

hand, German legal origin countries grew faster than the common law countries.




                                             26
Depending on the specification, there are similar differences in the growth rates of GDP

per worker, capital stock per worker, and productivity.

       These results, however, are not particularly robust. The growth effects of legal

origins become weaker once we control for a measure of human capital, namely average

years of schooling in 1960 – a standard control in such regressions. Indeed, throughout

the 1960-2000 period, years of schooling are sharply higher in common law countries

than in French legal origin ones, even holding per capita income constant. Interestingly,

Rostowski and Stacescu (2006) argue that legal origins should enter the growth equation

precisely through education because England pursued more enlightened educational

policies in its colonies than did France. French colonial education was largely guided by

the idea of assimilation, with French textbooks, French teachers, and instruction in

French. The British, in contrast, adapted colonial education to local conditions, and

taught in vernacular. This is a very original theory, and we hope it is developed.

       The most obvious potential channel of influence of legal origins on growth is

financial development, since legal origins have such strong effects on finance. Using

legal origins as instruments, Beck et al. (2000a, b) find that private debt market

development is a statistically significant and quantitatively important predictor of growth.

Again, however, one needs to be careful, both because (as we argued above) the

exclusion restriction is unlikely to be satisfied and because the results are often sensitive

to the inclusion of other variables, such as alternative measures of human capital.

       In sum, there is by now a great deal of evidence that legal origins influence legal

rules and regulations, which in turn have substantial impact on important economic

outcomes – from financial development, to unemployment, to investment and entry, to




                                              27
the size of unofficial economy, to international trade. Much of this evidence suggests

that common law is associated with better economic outcomes than French civil law.

The evidence also shows that legal origins influence patterns of growth within industries,

but it is less clear that legal origins predict aggregate growth. The last finding resonates

with the obvious observation made by LLSV (1998) that countries like France and

Belgium achieved very living standards despite their legal origin. One possible

explanation of the aggregate growth evidence is that civil law countries have found

compensating mechanisms to overcome the baggage of their legal tradition in the long

run. Another possibility is that the last 40 years have been unrepresentative, and that in

the long run there are periods that advantage civil law regimes (such as state-led growth).

We do not know which of these, or some other explanation, is correct 11 .

        All this evidence leaves us with a major question: why do legal origins matter,

and why do they matter in such a pervasive way for both rules and economics outcomes?

What are the historical and structural differences among common and civil law countries

that have such pervasive consequences for both the specific legal and regulatory rules and

major economic outcomes? In the next section, we attempt to answer this question.



IV. Explaining the Facts

        The correlations documented in the previous section require an explanation.

LLSV (1997, 1998) do not advance such an explanation, although in a broader study of

government institutions, LLSV (1999) follow Hayek (1960) and suggest that common

law countries are more protective of private property than French legal origin ones. In


11
  We note, however, that the evidence on the relationship between institutions and aggregate growth more
generally, which seemed substantial a few years ago, has been crumbling (see Glaeser et al. 2004).


                                                   28
the ensuing years, many academics, ourselves included, used the historical narrative to

provide a theoretical foundation for the empirical evidence (see Glaeser and Shleifer

2002, Djankov et al. 2003c, and Mulligan and Shleifer 2005b). In this section, we begin

with the alternative historical explanations, and then try to revise, synthesize and advance

previous theoretical accounts into the Legal Origins Theory 12 .



Revolutionary Explanations

         The standard explanation of the differences between common law and French

civil law in particular, and to a lesser extent German law, focus on 17th-19th century

developments (Merryman 1969, Zweigert and Kotz 1998, Klerman and Mahoney 2007).

According to this theory, the English lawyers were on the same winning side as the

property owners in the Glorious Revolution, and in opposition to the Crown and to its

courts of royal prerogative. As a consequence, the English judges gained considerable

independence from the Crown, including lifetime appointments in the 1701 Act of

Settlement. A key corollary of such independence was the respect for private property in

English law, especially against possible encroachments by the sovereign. Indeed,

common law courts acquired the power to review administrative acts: the same principles

applied to the deprivation of property by public and private actors (Mahoney 2001, p.

513). Another corollary is respect for the freedom of contract, including the ability of

judges to interpret contracts without a reference to public interest (Pistor 2006). Still


12
   Legal Origins Theory is intimately related to the discussion of the varieties of capitalism, which
(typically in the context of the OECD economies) distinguishes between liberal and coordinated market
economies, the latter having firms that “depend more heavily on non-market relationships to coordinate
their endeavors with other actors to construct their core competencies” (Hall and Soskice 2001, p. 8). As
Pistor (2006) points out, all the liberal market economies in the OECD are common law countries, and all
the coordinated ones are civil law ones. The literature on the variety of capitalisms has long looked for an
objective measure of different types; perhaps it should have looked no further than legal origins.


                                                     29
another was the reassertion of the ability of appellate common law courts to make legal

rules, thereby becoming an independent source of legal change separate from Parliament.

Judicial independence and law making powers in turn made judging a highly attractive

and prestigious occupation.

       In contrast, the French judiciary was largely monarchist in the 18th century (many

judges bought offices from the king), and ended up on the wrong side of the French

Revolution. The revolutionaries reacted by seeking to deprive judges of independence

and law making powers, to turn them into automata in Napoleon’s felicitous phrase.

Following Montesquieu’s (1748) doctrine of separation of powers, the revolutionaries

proclaimed legislation as the sole valid source of law, and explicitly denied the

acceptability of judge-made law. “For the first time, it was admitted that the sovereign is

capable of defining law and of reforming it as a whole. True, this power is accorded to

him in order to expound the principles of natural law. But as Cambaceres, principal legal

adviser to Napoleon, once admitted, it was easy to change this purpose, and legislators,

outside of any consideration for “natural laws” were to use this power to transform the

basis of society” (David and Brierley 1985, p. 60).

       Hayek (1960) traces the differences between common and civil law to distinct

conceptions of freedom. He distinguishes two views of freedom directly traceable to the

predominance of an essentially empiricist view of the world in England and a rationalist

approach in France. “One finds the essence of freedom in spontaneity and the absence of

coercion, the other believes it to be realized only in the pursuit and attainment of an

absolute social purpose; one stands for organic, slow, self-conscious growth, the other for

doctrinaire deliberateness; one for trial and error procedure, the other for the enforced




                                             30
solely valid pattern (p. 56).” To Hayek, the differences in legal systems reflect these

profound differences in philosophies of freedom.

       To implement his strategy, Napoleon promulgated several codes of law and

procedure intended to control judicial decisions in all circumstances. Judges became

bureaucrats employed by the State; their positions were seen as largely administrative,

low-prestige occupations. The ordinary courts had no authority to review government

action, making them useless as guarantors of property against the state.

       The diminution of the judiciary was also accompanied by the growth of the

administrative, as Napoleon created a huge and invasive bureaucracy to implement the

state’s regulatory policies (Woloch 1994). Under Napoleon, “the command orders were

now unity of direction, hierarchically defined participation in public affairs, and above all

the leading role assigned to the executive bureaucracy, whose duty was to force the pace

and orient society through the application from above of increasingly comprehensive

administrative regulations and practices” (Woolf 1992, p. 95).

       Merryman (1969, p. 30) explains the logic of codification: “If the legislature

alone could make laws and the judiciary could only apply them (or, at a later time,

interpret and apply them), such legislation had to be complete, coherent, and clear. If a

judge were required to decide a case for which there was no legislative provision, he

would in effect make law and thus violate the principle of rigid separation of powers.

Hence it was necessary that the legislature draft a code without gaps. Similarly, if there

were conflicting provisions in the code, the judge would make law by choosing one

rather than another as more applicable to the situation. Hence there could be no

conflicting provisions. Finally, if a judge were allowed to decide what meaning to give




                                             31
to an ambiguous provision or an obscure statement, he would again be making law.

Hence the code had to be clear.”

       Yet, according to Merryman (1996), Napoleon’s experiment failed in France, as

the notion that legislation can foresee all future circumstances proved unworkable. Over

decades, new French courts were created, and they as well as older courts increasingly

became involved in the interpretation of codes, which amounted to the creation of new

legal rules. Even so, the law-making role of French courts was never explicitly

acknowledged, and never achieved the scope of their English counterparts.

       Perhaps more importantly for cross-country analysis, the developing countries

into which the French legal system was transplanted apparently adhered faithfully to the

Napoleonic vision. In those countries, judges stuck to the letter of the code, resolving

disputes based on formalities even when the law needed refinement. Enriques (2002)

shows that, even today, Italian magistrates let corporate insiders expropriate investors

with impunity, as long as formally correct corporate decision making procedures are

followed. In the transplant and to some extent even in the origin countries, legislation

remained, at least approximately, the sole source of law, judicial law-making stayed close

to non-existent, and judges retained their bureaucratic status. Merryman memorably

writes that “when the French exported their system, they did not include the information

that it really does not work that way, and failed to include the blueprint of how it actually

does work” (1996, p. 116). This analysis of the “French deviation” may explain the

considerable dynamism of the French law as compared to its transplant countries, where

legal development stagnated. The French emphasis on centralized bureaucratic control

may have been the most enduring influence of transplantation.




                                             32
       Although less has been written about German law, it is fair to say that it is a bit of

a hybrid (Dawson 1960, 1968, Merryman 1969, Zweigert and Kötz 1998). Like the

French courts, German courts had little independence. However, they had greater power

to review administrative acts, and jurisprudence was explicitly recognized as a source of

law, accommodating greater legal change.

       The historical analysis has three key implications for the economic consequences

of legal origins. First, the built-in judicial independence of common law, particularly in

the cases of administrative acts affecting individuals, suggests that common law is likely

to be more respectful of private property and contract than civil law.

       Second, common law’s emphasis on judicial resolution of private disputes, as

opposed to legislation, as a solution to social problems, suggests that we are likely to see

greater emphasis on private contracts and orderings, and less emphasis on government

regulation, in common law countries. To the extent that there is regulation, it aims to

facilitate private contracting rather than to direct particular outcomes. Pistor (2006)

describes French legal origin as embracing socially-conditioned private contracting, in

contrast to common law’s support for unconditioned private contracting. Damaska

(1986) calls civil law “policy-implementing,” and common law “dispute resolving.”

       Third, the greater respect for jurisprudence as a source of law in the common law

countries, especially as compared to the French civil law countries, suggests that common

law will be more adaptable to the changing circumstances, a point emphasized by Hayek

(1960) and more recently Levine (2005). These adaptability benefits of common law

have also been noted by scholars in law and economics (Posner 1973, Rubin 1977, Priest

1977, Ponzetto and Fernandez 2008), who have made the stronger claim that through




                                             33
sequential decisions by appellate courts, common law evolves not only for the better, but

actually toward efficient legal rules. The extreme hypothesis of common law’s efficiency

is difficult to sustain either theoretically or empirically, but recent research does suggest

that the ability of judges to react to changing circumstances – the adaptability of common

law – tends to improve the law’s quality over time. For example, Gennaioli and Shleifer

(2007) argue in the spirit of Cardozo (1921) and Stone (1985) that the central strategy of

judicial law-making is distinguishing cases from precedents, which has an unintended

benefit that the law responds to a changing environment. The quality of law improves

on average even when judges pursue their policy preferences; law making does not need

to be benevolent.

       The theoretical research on the adaptability of common law has received some

empirical support in the work of Beck et al. (2003), who show that the acceptability of

case law variable from La Porta et al. (2004) captures many of the benefits of common

law for financial and other outcomes. On the other hand, a recent study of the evolution

of legal doctrine governing construction disputes in the US over the period of 1970-2005

finds little evidence either that legal rules converge over time, or that they move toward

efficient solutions (Niblett, Posner, and Shleifer 2007).



Medieval Explanations

       The idea that the differences between common and civil law manifest themselves

for the first time during the Enlightenment seems a bit strange to anyone who has heard

of Magna Carta. Some of the differences were surely sharpened, or even created, by the

English and the French Revolutions. For example, judges looked to past judicial




                                              34
decisions for centuries in both England and France prior to the revolutions (Gorla and

Moccia 1981). However, the explicit reliance on precedent as a source of law (and the

term precedent itself) is only a 17th and 18th century development in England (Berman

2003). Likewise, the denial of the legal status of precedent in France is a Napoleonic

rather than an earlier development.

       But in other respects, important differences predate the revolutions. The English

judges fought the royal prerogative, used juries to try criminal cases, and pressed the

argument that the King (James) was not above the law early in the 17th century. They

looked down on the inquisitorial system that flourished on the Catholic continent. In

light of such history, it is hard to sustain the argument that the differences between

common and civil law only emerged through revolutions.

       Several distinguished legal historians, including Dawson (1960) and Berman

(1983), trace the divergence between French and English law to a much earlier period,

namely the 12th and 13th centuries. According to this view, the French Crown, which

barely had full control over the Ile de France let alone other parts of France, adopted the

bureaucratic inquisitorial system of the Roman Church as a way to unify and perhaps

control the country. The system persisted in this form through the centuries, although

judicial independence at times increased as judges bought their offices from the Crown.

Napoleonic bureaucratization and centralization of the judiciary is seen as a culmination

of a centuries-old tug of war between the center and the regions.

       England, in contrast, developed jury trials as far back as the 12th century, and

enshrined the idea that the Crown cannot take the life or property of the nobles without

due process in the Magna Carta in 1215. The Magna Carta stated: “No freeman shall be




                                             35
taken or imprisoned or disseised or outlawed or exiled or in any way ruined, nor will we

go or send against him, except by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the

land.” The Magna Carta established the foundations of the English legal order. As in

France, such independence was continuously challenged by the Crown, and the courts of

royal prerogative, subordinate to the Crown, grew in importance in the 16th century,

during the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Yet, as we indicated earlier, even during

Elizabeth’s reign, and much more so during those of James I and Charles I, Parliament

and courts repeatedly reaffirmed the rights of individuals against royal demands. Chief

Judge Edward Coke’s early 17th century insistence that the king is not above the law is

neither a continental nor a post-revolutionary phenomenon. The Glorious Revolution

eliminated the courts of royal prerogative, and eventually enshrined the principles of

judicial independence in several acts of Parliament.

       Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) present a theoretical model intended to capture this

comparative 12th and 13th century narrative, but with an economic twist. They argue that

England was a relatively peaceful country during this period, in which decentralized

dispute resolution on the testimony of independent knights (juries) was efficient. France

was a less peaceful country, in which high nobles had the power to subvert decentralized

justice, and hence a much more centralized system, organized, maintained, and protected

by the sovereign, was required to administer the law. Roman law provided the backbone

of such a system. This view sees the developments of 17th and 18th centuries as

reinforcing the structures that evolved over the previous centuries.

       Regardless of whether the revolutionary or the medieval story is correct, they

have very similar empirical predictions. In the medieval narrative, as in the revolutionary




                                            36
one, common law exhibits greater judicial independence than civil law, as well as greater

sympathy of the judiciary toward private property and contract, especially against

infringements by the executive. In both narratives, judicial law making and adaptation

play a greater role in common than in civil law, although this particular difference might

have been greatly expanded in the Age of Revolutions. The historical accounts may

differ in detail, but they lead to the same place as to the fundamental features of law.

These features, then, carry through the process of transplantation, and appear in the

differences among legal families.



Legal Origins Theory

       Legal Origins Theory has three basic ingredients. First, regardless or whether the

medieval or the revolutionary narrative is the best one, by the 18th or 19th centuries

England and Continental Europe, particularly France, have developed very different

styles of social control of business, and institutions supporting these styles. Second,

these styles of social control, as well as legal institutions supporting them, were

transplanted by the origin countries to most of the world, rather than written from scratch.

Third, although a great deal of legal and regulatory change has occurred, these styles

have proved persistent in addressing social problems.

       Djankov et al. (2003c) propose a particular way of thinking about the alternative

legal styles. All legal systems seek to simultaneously address twin problems: the

problem of disorder or market failure, and the problem of dictatorship or state abuse.

There is an inherent tradeoff in addressing these twin problems: as the state becomes

more assertive in dealing with disorder, it may also become more abusive. We can think




                                             37
of the French civil law family as a system of social control of economic life that is

relatively more concerned with disorder, and relatively less with dictatorship, in finding

solutions to social and economic problems. In contrast, the common law family is

relatively more concerned with dictatorship, and less with disorder. These are the basic

attitudes or styles of the legal and regulatory systems, which influence the “tools” they

use to deal with social concerns. Of course, common law does not mean anarchy, as the

government has always maintained a heavy hand of social control; nor does civil law

mean dictatorship. Indeed, both systems seek a balance between private disorder and

public abuse of power. But they seek it in different ways: common law by shoring up

markets, civil law by restricting them or even replacing them with state commands.

       Legal Origins Theory raises the obvious question of how the influence of legal

origins has persisted over the decades or even centuries. Why so much hysterisis? What

is it that the British brought on the boat that was so different from what the French or the

Spaniards brought, and that had such persistent consequences? They key point to realize

is that transplantation involves not just specific legal rules (many of which actually

change later), but also legal institutions (or which judicial independence might be the

most important), human capital of the participants in the legal system, and crucially the

strategy of the law for dealing with new problems. Successive generations of judges,

lawyers, and politicians all learn the same broad ideas of how the law and the state should

work. The legal system supplies the fundamental tools for addressing social concerns,

and it is that system, as defined by Zweigert and Kotz, with its codes, distinctive

institutions, modes of thought and even ideologies, that is very slow to change.




                                             38
       The fact that legal system is slow to change does not mean that specific legal rules

and regulations never change. As we discuss below, governments in both common and

civil law countries entered many new spheres of social control in the 20th century, but

typically in ways consistent with their legal traditions. In some more stable areas of law,

such as legal procedure, there is sometimes a great deal of rigidity even in the specific

rules. Balas et al. (2007) compute the index of the formalism of legal procedure,

considered in Table II, for 20 common law and 20 civil law countries over the period

1950-2000. Consistent with Djankov et al. (2003b), they find that formalism is higher in

common than in civil law countries in 2000, but also in 1950. Perhaps more surprisingly,

formalism is extraordinarily stable. Among common law countries, the average of the

ratio of 2000 to 1950 procedural formalism is .90; among civil law countries the average

of this ratio is 1.10. The data reflects significant persistence of the differences among

legal origins, with no evidence of convergence.

       The reader might wonder at this point whether Legal Origin Theory simply

identifies legal families with different “ideologies” or “cultures.” To the extent that

ideologies or cultures refer to the beliefs about how the law should deal with social

problems, Legal Origin Theory clearly accepts the view that ideologies and cultures are

crucial for the persistent influence of legal families. But the central point is that the

reason for persistence is that the beliefs and ideologies become incorporated in legal

rules, institutions, and education, and as such are transmitted from one generation to the

next. It is this incorporation of beliefs and ideologies into the legal and political

infrastructure that enables legal origins to have such persistent consequences for rules,

regulations, and economic outcomes.




                                              39
       The account of legal origins has implications for how the government responds to

new needs both across activities and over time. Essentially, the toolkit of civil law

features more prominently such policies as nationalization and direct state control; the

toolkit of common law features more litigation and market-supporting regulation.

Mulligan and Shleifer (2005b) argue that, by specializing in such “policy-implementing”

solutions, the civil law system tends to expand the scope of government control to new

activities when a need arises. Perhaps the best known historical example of this is the

vast expansion of military conscription in France under Napoleon, made possible by the

already existing presence of government bureaucracy that could administer the draft in

every French village (Woloch 1994). Because the state’s presence on the ground is less

pervasive under the common law, it tends not to rely as extensively on administrative

solutions, and more on “market-supporting” or “dispute-resolving” ones.

       Likewise, one can argue that, when the market system gets into trouble or into a

crisis, the civil law approach is to repress it or to replace it with state mandates, while the

common law approach is to shore it up. One place to see this might be the regulatory

response to the Great Depression and financial crises of the 20th century. According to

Morck and Steier (2005), “the responses of the Dutch, Italian, Japanese, and Swedish

governments to the financial crisis of the 1920s and 1930s were to substitute various

mechanisms of state-controlled capital allocation for their stock markets (p. 39).” “A

similar succession of financial manias, panics, and crises in Britain, Canada, and the

United States ultimately strengthened shareholder rights (p. 39).” The United States

responded to the Great Depression by introducing securities regulation and deposit

insurance. These strategies intended to rehabilitate and support markets, not to replace




                                              40
them. Even Roosevelt’s most radical aspirations fell short of nationalization. This

contrast between the replacement of markets by state solutions in civil law countries, and

the rehabilitation of markets in common law countries, appears quite pervasive.

       One form of government reaction to new circumstances is the expansion of public

involvement into new spheres. Economic historians have sometimes argued that because

legal origins have differed for centuries, one should observe equally sharp differences in

rules and regulations in the 19th century as well. This, of course, does not follow. To the

extent that public intervention in markets changes over time and responds to social needs

or political imperatives, laws and regulations will change as well, but in ways that are

consistent with legal traditions. Both labor laws and securities laws are creatures of the

20th century; they were introduced as a response to perceived social needs. Yet, as the

evidence in section III shows, these laws took different forms in countries from different

legal traditions, consistent with broad strategies of how the state intervenes.

       Ahlering and Deakin (2005) elaborate this point in the context of labor laws.

They argue that the current differences between the labor laws of Britain and Continental

Europe can be traced to the differences in the ways common and civil law systems saw

the role of the enterprise as far back as the Industrial Revolution. Common law saw the

enterprise as an unencumbered property or the employer, with the workers relegated to

contractual claims on the surplus from production. In contrast, civil law saw property

and responsibility as two sides of the same coin. Thus, the support provided by the legal

system to the freedom of contract and property rights was counterbalanced in the French

tradition by the exercise of public power for the protection of workers, and in the




                                             41
Germanic tradition by the communitarian conception of the enterprise. Ahlering and

Deakin suggest that these differences in “legal cultures” persist even today.

         Crucially, the Legal Origins Theory does not say that common law always works

better for the economy. As Glaeser and Shleifer (2002, 2003) show, regulation and state

control may well be efficient responses to disorder, where common-law solutions fail to

sustain markets. 13 Indeed, all countries efficiently resort to the quintessentially civil law

solution of planning in time of war, and add good dollops of state intervention and

control in response to major threats to order, such as terrorism. Glaeser and Shleifer

(2003) interpret the early 20th century rise of the regulatory state in the US as an efficient

response to the subversion of the justice system by large corporations.

         Legal Origin Theory also does not imply that the outcomes we observe are always

or even typically efficient within a given legal family. There are several reasons for

inefficiency, quite aside from interest group politics. First, at the most basic level, the

tools used by a legal system may lead to outcomes that are worse than the initial problem.

Excessive regulation of entry in civil law countries is a good example. Second, courts or

legislators in a country might bring into one domain a set of tools that has been used in

another, based on either philosophical outlook or a desire for consistency, with adverse

results. For example, the strategy of extensive interlocutory appeals that is standard in a

civil law system can slow down a bankruptcy proceeding, where time is of the essence,

and lead to a large loss of value (Djankov et al. 2006). Third, additional inefficiencies

may arise from transplantation. A regulatory approach that works well in France may

become little but a source of corruption and delay in a poor West African country. As

13
   Crucially from the perspective of the developing countries, Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) show that when
all mechanisms of state action can be subverted by private interests, the best policy might be to do nothing
and leave the markets alone, even in the presence of substantial market failure.


                                                     42
we show in section VIII, an understanding of regulatory inefficiencies afforded by the

Legal Origins Theory can form the basis of reform.

       To reiterate, no country exhibits a system of social control that is an ideal type; all

countries mix the two approaches. Common law countries are quite capable of civil law

solutions, and vice versa. Nonetheless, the empirical prediction of the Legal Origin

Theory is that the differences between legal origins are deep enough that we observe

them expressed in the different strategies of social control of economic life even after

centuries of legal and regulatory evolution. Perhaps because the legal system is such a

difficult-to-change element of social order, supported by legal institutions, human capital

and expectations, legal origins survive both time and transplantation. This, we submit, is

what gives them explanatory power.



Interpretation of the Evidence

       In interpreting the evidence in light of the Legal Origins Theory, it is easiest to

proceed in reverse: from judicial independence to government regulation to finance. The

evidence on judicial independence directly confirms the predictions. As we saw in Table

III, compared to French civil law, common law countries have less formalized contract

enforcement, longer constitutional tenure of Supreme Court judges (a direct indicator of

independence), and greater recognition of case law as a source of law, which Beck et al.

(2003) use as an indicator of adaptability. Also consistent with the Legal Origins Theory,

these characteristics of legal systems predict both the efficiency of contract enforcement

– measured objectively and subjectively – and the security of property rights.




                                             43
       The evidence on government regulation is consistent with the Legal Origins

Theory as well. The historical evidence suggests that civil law countries are more likely

to address social problems through government ownership and mandates, whereas

common law countries are more likely to do so through private contract and litigation.

When common law countries regulate, we expect their regulation to support private

contracting rather than dictate outcomes. We see those differences across a broad range

of activities – from entry and labor regulation to recruitment of armies. We also see that

civil law countries exhibit heavier government ownership of both the media and banks.

       The theory is also consistent with the evidence on finance. The better protection

of both shareholders and creditors in common law countries than especially in the French

civil law ones is consistent with the principal historical narrative of the greater security of

private property and better contract enforcement under common law. Moreover, as noted

by Beck et al (2003), financial markets may be an area where the adaptability of judge-

made rules, as exemplified by the American Delaware courts, is especially beneficial.

       Roe (2006) points out that many of the legal rules protecting investors in common

law countries are statutory rather than judge-made, so in many crucial respects regulation

rather than judge-made law is responsible for investor protection. Securities laws in

general and disclosure rules in particular, which La Porta et al. (2006) show to provide

some of the most effective investor protections, are entirely statutory. Jackson and Roe

(2007) further argue that the budgets and staffing levels of securities regulators, which

are higher in common law countries, predict financial development. Is this evidence

consistent with Legal Origins Theory?




                                              44
       The answer, we believe, is yes. Common law countries succeed in finance

because their regulatory strategies seek to sustain markets rather than replace them.

Returning to the examples of securities regulation and of the often-statutory regulation of

self-dealing transactions, the statutory requirements of disclosure originate in the

common law of fiduciary relationships. Market forces on their own are not strong

enough, and contract claims not cheap enough to pursue, to protect investors from being

cheated. A regulatory framework that offers and enforces such protection, and makes it

easier for investors to seek legal remedies to rectify the wrongs even when doing so relies

on public action, allows more extensive financial contracting. The form of statutory

protection of investors in common law countries, as compared to civil law countries, is

consistent with Legal Origins Theory. Finance falls into line with other evidence.



V. Legal Origins and Culture.

       In this section and the next two, we address the central criticism of research on

legal origins: that they are merely proxy for other factors influencing legal rules and

outcomes. The three factors we consider are culture, history, and politics. We stress

from the outset that it is not our position, nor our objective in these sections, to show that

culture, history, or politics, are unimportant for legal and regulatory rules. All of them

are clearly important, and there is a great deal of evidence confirming their roles (see,

e.g., Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2004, 2006 on the role of culture). Our point is

rather to establish, as clearly as possible, a much more modest yet central to the Legal

Origins Theory proposition that legal origins are not proxies for something else.




                                              45
        We begin with culture, which has been considered as a potential explanation of

the evidence on legal origins. Stulz and Williamson (2003) suggest that, in light of the

hostility of some of the religious traditions to lending on interest, religion may be a more

fundamental determinant of legal rules governing creditor protection than legal tradition.

Licht et al. (2005) present a more sweeping case, using sociological measures of cultural

attitudes to predict legal rules. So are legal origins merely proxies for cultural variables?

        Table IV shows the facts. First, religion is not nearly as important a determinant

of creditor rights as legal origin (see Djankov et al. 2007). Second, most indices of

cultural attitudes do not influence creditor rights holding legal origin constant. There is

some evidence that a nation’s masculinity (defined as “the degree to which the society

reinforces, or does not reinforce, the traditional masculine work role model of

achievement, control, and power”) is not conducive to creditor protection, while belief in

the independence of children is, but neither variable makes much of a dent in the effect of

legal origin on creditor rights.

        Cultural variables, then, do not make much of a dent in the explanatory power of

legal origins. We note, however, that we have used the sociological notions of what

culture is, focusing on religion and broad social attitudes. One can alternatively include

in culture something like “legal culture,” which would make culture indistinguishable

from legal origins.   This theory of culture, of course, we do not reject.



VI. Legal Origins and Politics.

        A broader challenge to the explanatory power of legal origins has been posed by

political theories of corporate finance. There are now many papers in this literature,




                                             46
including Hellwig (2000), Rajan and Zingales (2003), Pagano and Volpin (2005, 2006),

Perotti and von Thadden (2006), and Roe (2000, 2006), and even a recent survey by

Haber and Perotti (2007). Although the papers differ in detail, they have a common

theme, so we take the liberty of providing an integrated account. Also, while some of

the papers cover developing countries, virtually all of them deal with Western Europe, or

the Wealthy West, a point we return to below.

       According to the political theories, sometime in the middle of the 20th century,

Continental European countries formed alliances between families that controlled firms

and (typically organized) labor. In many cases, these alliances were a response to crises

from hyperinflation, depression, or defeat in war. These political alliances sought to win

elections in order to secure the economic rents of the insiders, and to keep them from the

“outsiders,” such as unorganized labor, minority shareholders, corporate challengers, or

potential entrants. When these alliances won elections, they wrote legal rules to benefit

themselves. The families secured poor protection of outside shareholders, so they could

hold on to the private benefits of control. Labor got social security and worker protection

laws, which maintained employment and wages of the insiders. Both the families and

labor secured the laws protecting them against product market competition, such as

regulation of entry. The legal rules observed in the data, then, are outcomes of this

democratic process, and not of any “permanent” conditions, such as legal origins.

       The political story is part of a broader narrative of Continental European history

in the 20th century, in which the response to crisis is variously characterized by the rise of

proportional representation (Alesina and Glaeser 2004, Persson and Tabellini 2003),

socialist politics (Alesina and Glaeser 2004), and social democracy (Roe 2000). The




                                             47
United States was spared these political developments, and therefore did not get the laws

adopted on the Continent. Some implications of these theories are broadly consistent

with the evidence: countries that have strong shareholder protection indeed have weak

protection of labor and low regulation of entry. The suggestion of this research is that

legal origin enters the various regressions summarized in Section III spuriously, with

French (and German) legal origins serving as proxies for – depending on the exact paper

– social democracy, leftist politics, or proportional representation. If politics were

appropriately controlled for in the regressions, legal origin would not matter.

         The political story is plausible, since we see social democracies in Continental

Europe but not in the United States. For this reason, we consider it in some detail. We

do so in three steps. First, we briefly look at the logic of the story. Second, we show

what happens when some of the political variables proposed in this literature are actually

added to the regression. Third, we test an implication of the available political models,

namely that the formation of laws is a consequence of democratic politics 14 . This

prediction implies, most immediately, that the relationship between legal origins and laws

should not hold outside democracies.

         With respect to the logic of the story, it is hard to understand why organized labor

accepts rules that facilitate the diversion of corporate wealth, or tunneling – something

we see on a fairly large scale in, say, Italy or Belgium. We can see the argument for the

Swedish system, in which the leading families stay in control, but are kept on a tight

leash through government regulations, and certainly not allowed to expropriate investors.

Sweden indeed has a valuable stock market and low private benefits of control. It is

14
  Haber and Perotti (2007, p. 4) write: “Recent explanations suggest that a democratic majority in
countries hit by a major redistribution of wealth may shift in favor of low minority investor protection and
less corporate restructuring and competition to protect established labor rents.”


                                                     48
harder to accept the notion that organized labor endorses tunneling of corporate wealth,

since presumably such wealth could be taxed or shared with the workers.

        But what do the data say? Table V presents regressions of the legal and

institutional rules on three variables considered by the political theories. The first one is

proportional representation, the form of democracy seen as an adaptation to political

demands of labor in the early 20th century (Alesina and Glaeser 2004, Persson and

Tabellini 2003). We obviously run these regressions for democracies only. The second

variable, collected by Botero et al. (2004) for 85 countries, is the share of years between

1928-1995 when the chief executive and the largest party in the legislature were leftist or

centrist. The third variable is union density, defined as the percentage of the total work

force affiliated to labor unions in 1997. The regressions in Table V cover the whole

sample and are not confined to Western Europe or the OECD.

        For all three variables, the results in Table V are straightforward. Political

variables explain the variation in legal rules only occasionally. In contrast, legal origins

continue to explain the variation even with political variables in the regression, and the

difference between common law and French civil law remains highly statistically

significant. This is true for all three political variables aiming to get at the political

explanation of legal rules. While each political variable is surely measured with error,

and our specifications surely do not capture the full subtlety of the political theories,

political variables are rarely significant. In contrast, legal origins are consistently

significant, even with political variables in the regression.

        We next ask whether legal origins only have an effect in democracies, which

would be the case if they were proxies for the political sentiment of the majority. In this




                                               49
scenario, legal origins would not predict legal rules in autocracies. In contrast, under

Legal Origins Theory, they should predict legal rules in autocracies as well. In Table VI,

we focus on autocracies (countries with a positive autocracy score from Alvarez et al.

2000). For nearly all our variables, the differences between common law and French

legal origin remain significant among autocracies. This result holds for other measures of

non-democratic government as well. We see this evidence as a direct rejection of the

hypothesis that legal origins are proxies for the political sentiment of the democratic

majority. Political theories can perhaps be adjusted to incorporate autocracies, but the

data suggest that legal origins are quite distinct from political sentiment.

       None of this is to say that politics is unimportant for either legal rules or

economic outcomes. Indeed, political change may provide the impetus for countries to

revise their laws and regulations. But the thrust of Legal Origins Theory is that, even in

response to political demands, countries will design reforms consistently with their legal

traditions. Legal origins are not proxies for leftist politics.



VII. Legal Origins and History.

       Perhaps the most difficult challenge to the hypothesis that legal origins cause

outcomes has been posed by historical arguments. Because virtually all of these

arguments focus on finance, we likewise focus on finance in this section, but bearing in

mind that an alternative theory must address all the evidence. At the broadest level,

historical arguments suggest that the positive correlation between common law and

finance is a 20th century phenomenon. According to the critics, if one looks at historical

data, particularly from the early 20th century, the correlation does not exist. Because




                                              50
legal traditions predate the 20th century, they cannot, say the critics, account for the

differences in financial development.

       It is useful to break down the historical argument into three component parts, and

to address them sequentially. This also allows us to consider several influential papers.

       First, Rajan and Zingales (2003) present evidence showing that in 1913, French

civil law countries had more developed financial markets than common law countries. In

their sample, as of 1913, the five common law countries had the average stock market to

GDP ratio of 53%, compared to 66% for the ten French civil law countries.

       Second, several writers maintain that shareholder protection in Britain at the

beginning of the 20th century was minimal. The evidence that Britain was financially

developed at the time, including having some ownership dispersion, must therefore be

accounted for not by law, but by alternative mechanisms, such as trust and financial

intermediaries (Cheffins 2001, Franks et al. 2005).

       Third, the historical critique holds that the correlation between common law and

financial development emerges over the 20th century, a finding it sees as inconsistent with

LLSV. In contrast to the superiority of financial development in the French legal origin

countries, as compared to the common law countries, circa 1913, Rajan and Zingales find

that the respective average stock market for common law and French civil law countries

were 130% and 74% by 1999. They call this the Great Reversal (see Figure III).

       Critics propose two explanations of how common law countries came to excel in

finance. The first is the political argument, namely that common law countries happened

to have more favorable democratic politics, which we have already discussed. In

addition, according to Roe (2006), civil law countries suffered greater destruction during




                                              51
World War II, which radicalized their politics and in this way led to pro-labor and anti-

capital laws and regulations.

        It is easiest to take up the three pieces of the historical critique in turn.



Stock Markets at the Start of the 20th Century

        Rajan and Zingales (2003) present data on stock market development for 6

common law and 18 civil law countries (10 of them French civil law) starting in 1913.

To do so, they find a separate data source for each country that reports aggregate stock

market capitalization. Their findings of a higher ratio of stock market value to GDP in

civil than in common law countries (the variable used by LLSV 1997, 1998), reproduced

in Table VII and illustrated in Figure III, is the starting point of most historical critiques

of LLSV, as well as of political accounts of finance in the 20th century.

        We have looked at some of the Rajan and Zingales’s data using their own sources.

Here we focus on stock market capitalization as a measure of financial development.

Conceptually, the measure of a country’s stock market capitalization relevant for testing

the influence of legal origins is the capitalization of equities listed on that country’s stock

exchange(s) whose shareholders are subject to protection of that country’s laws.

Impressively, Rajan and Zingales undertook to find such numbers, but doing so for the

early 20th century is especially difficult for two reasons. First, many – perhaps even most

-- securities that traded on stock exchanges were bonds rather than stocks, and most of

those were government bonds. Second, many of the companies listed on the exchanges

of developing countries were incorporated (and therefore subject to shareholder

protection rules), and even had their primary listings, in Europe or the U.S. (see Wilkins




                                               52
and Schroter 1998). For a developing country, both of these factors may lead to an

overestimate of market value of equities subject to national shareholder protection laws.

       Take a few examples. In 1913, the most financially developed country in the

Rajan and Zingales sample is Cuba. Cuba at that time is a French legal origin country,

but also an American colony, with a reported stock market capitalization to GDP ratio of

219%. We have looked at this observation, and discovered that if one excludes bonds

and only looks at stocks, the actual ratio falls to 33%. Moreover, by far the largest

company with its stock listed in Cuba is Havana Electric, a company incorporated in New

Jersey, subject to New Jersey laws, and with a primary listing in New York. We suspect

that concerns of Havana Electric shareholders would have been addressed by either New

Jersey courts or the US marines. Many other companies listed in Cuba appear to be like

Havana Electric; indeed – and perhaps not surprisingly – there does not seem to be much

of an indigenously Cuban stock market valuation at all. Given the small size of their

sample, the elimination of bonds from the Cuban data point by itself reduces the Rajan

and Zingales 1913 average French civil law stock market to capitalization ratio from 66%

to 47%, below their common law estimated average.

       The second most financially developed country in the 1913 Rajan and Zingales

sample is also a French civil law country, namely Egypt, with a stock market to GDP

ratio of 109%. It appears from Tignor (1984) that this ratio, as for Cuba, includes debt.

Moreover, virtually all of the largest companies listed in Egypt were incorporated in

England or in France, and many were listed there as well. (Egypt in 1913 was under

British protection.) We estimate that a correct observation for Egypt (specifically, a




                                            53
stock market to GDP ratio of at most 40%) would further reduce the Rajan-Zingales

French civil law average in 1913 by 6 percentage points.

       Some corrections appear to be in order for the rich countries as well. For France,

Rajan and Zingales estimate a ratio of 78%. A more recent estimate by Bozio (2002)

puts this number at 54%. Sylla (2006) criticizes Rajan and Zingales for presenting too

low a number of 39% for the United States, and proposes the alternative 95% from

Goldsmith (1985). Both of these corrections favor the common law countries. The

various corrections together, especially the one for Cuba, put the common law average

stock market to GDP ratio comfortably ahead of the French civil law one in 1913.

       To be sure, we have selected Cuba and Egypt non-randomly as two obviously

bizarre observations. A more systematic treatment of the data would reveal over-

estimates in common law, and not just civil law, countries. Some such errors are

inevitable, and we have ourselves made many even with more recent data. What is

beyond doubt, however, is that the strong conclusions reached by Rajan and Zingales on

comparative financial development cannot be drawn from their sample.

       Perhaps a better way to get at this issue is to compare the two mother countries:

England and France. Rajan and Zingales recognize that England was more financially

developed than France at the start of the century, but the comparison can be expanded

because Bozio (2002) reports new numbers for France, and adequate data are available

for Britain from Michie (1999). Michie’s numbers of the value of the stock market

include corporate bonds, so we correct them using data from Goldsmith (1985).

       In Figure IV, we present Bozio’s numbers for France and adjusted numbers for

domestic stocks in Britain. The results show that Britain always had a higher stock




                                           54
market capitalization to GDP ratio than France, often by a wide margin. This is true in

1913, but also before and after.

        We can also look at Goldsmith’s (1985) data on the ratio of stock market to GDP,

reproduced in Table VIII. 15 The first point that emerges from the table is that, consistent

with Kindleberger’s (1984) assessment of Paris as a financial backwater, Britain is ahead

of France as far back as the middle of the 19th century, and perhaps even earlier. So,

interestingly, is the United States. Goldsmith’s sample allows also for a more general

comparison of common and civil law countries in 1913. If we pull in the US observation

from 1912, Goldsmith only has 4 common law countries, and 7 civil law ones. Even so,

with India pulling the common law average sharply down and no poor civil law countries

in the sample, the common law average in 1913 is 88%, the French legal origin average

based only on France and Belgium is 77%, and the overall civil law average is 69%.

Goldsmith’s data have many problems of their own, and we have not examined them

closely. But they independently confirm the point that the relative financial

underdevelopment of common law countries at the start of the 20th century is a myth.

        We conclude that common law countries appear to be more financially developed

than civil law ones at the start of the 20th century, and in particular Britain is ahead of

France. Over the course of the 20th century, the differences widen, a divergence that

needs to be explained. But the puzzle is divergence, not reversal.



Britain at the Start of the 20th Century


15
   Goldsmith’s (1985) data for corporate stock includes unlisted firms. In practice, information on
corporate shares “… is generally limited to securities listed on exchanges, so that comprehensive figures
must be derived, if at all, by a blowup, often on a precarious basis” (page 337).



                                                   55
       A small but lively historical literature argues that Britain had a well developed

stock market at the beginning of the 20th century, with beginnings of ownership

dispersion, but that this had nothing to do with the law (Cheffins 2001, Franks et al.

2005). Looking both at the LLSV indices of shareholder protection and at legal rulings,

this research sees the rights of minority shareholders in the UK as only weakly protected.

With the law playing a minor role, the researchers credit financial development in

England to other mechanisms, such as the bonding role of intermediaries and trust.

       The position that British shareholders were utterly unprotected has proved

controversial. Several authors, for example, argue that Britain led the world in securities

regulation in general, and corporate disclosure in particular (Coffee 2001, Gower 1954,

Sylla and Smith 1995). Britain passed the Directors Liability Act in 1890, and

Companies Act in 1900, with the effects of both mandating significant disclosure in the

prospectus, and of holding directors accountable for inaccuracies. Subsequent

legislation in the early 20th century, according to Coffee (2001), mandated on-going

financial disclosure, and addressed some abuses in the new issues market. Britain also

had perhaps the best commercial courts in the world, with most professional and least

corrupt judges, with centuries of precedents and experience in dealing with fraud.

       This small literature is at a standstill, with some writers arguing the British

shareholder protection glass was half empty, and others countering that it was half full.

What makes this debate utterly frustrating is that it is not comparative, so except with a

few remarks on Britain versus the US (Coffee 2001), we know very little of how the

British shareholders were protected compared to the French and German ones. To the

extent that the literature has a bottom line, it is that shareholder rights have improved




                                             56
enormously in Britain over the course of the 20th century, parallel to the growth of its

markets. Explaining this parallel growth is a challenge to the Legal Origins Theory.



World War II Destruction

       Roe (2006) claims that poor economic performance, particularly associated with

the destruction of capital stocks in World War II, radicalized continental European

politics, leading to legal rules that were hostile to financial markets and favorable to

labor. To test this theory, Roe regresses modern ownership concentration on GDP

growth between 1913 and 1945 in a sample of 27 countries, and finds that countries with

worse economic growth have higher ownership concentration. Roe’s results fall apart,

however, if we use a broader sample of countries, if we use alternative measures of

financial development (e.g. stock market capitalization, block premium, or private

credit), or if we look at other predictions of his theory. Begin with ownership. Since

there is no generally accepted scientific reason to selectively throw out data, we use the

full available sample to run the Roe regression. When we do so, the correlation reported

by Roe disappears, as illustrated in Figure V. This is not surprising: many developing

countries stayed out of World War II, yet remained financially underdeveloped.

Continue with Roe’s other prediction that World War II devastation leads to pro-labor

laws. This also is not true in a broader sample, as illustrated in Figure VI. The data are

inconsistent with the theory that World War II destruction explains LLSV evidence.



Explaining Divergence




                                             57
       Although we do not see any evidence for the reversal of rankings between

common and civil law countries in financial development over the course of the 20th

century, the historical research yields two important findings that require an explanation.

First, as shown by Rajan and Zingales (2003) and in Figure III, common law countries

appear to have moved sharply ahead of civil law ones in financial development over the

course of the 20th century. Second, investor protection improved sharply in the common

law countries over the same time period (Coffee 1999, Cheffins 2001, Franks et al. 2005).

We suggest that Legal Origins Theory naturally accounts for these findings.

       The 20th century represented a period of explosive growth of the world economy,

including of countries that were the wealthiest at the beginning of that century. That

growth relied to a significant extent on outside capital. That growth was also far from

smooth: it was punctuated by World Wars, the Great Depression, and significant

economic and financial crises. The countries that grew successfully found their own

ways to deliver capital to firms and to survive the crises. For some countries, such

success involved massive state involvement in finance and development. For other

countries, such success to a much greater extent relied on shoring up markets.

       Here is where legal origins come in. As Morck and Steier (2005) make clear,

civil law countries in the middle of the century relied heavily on state supply of finance,

bank nationalization, and state investment companies to promote economic growth and

resolve crises. These were the standard civil law solutions to addressing social problems,

going back at least to Napoleon. Common law countries, particularly the US and the UK,

in contrast, relied more heavily on market-supporting regulations, such as securities laws,

deposit insurance, and court-led improvements in the corporate law. These differences




                                             58
were not absolute, with nationalizations in common law countries and many market-

supporting reforms in civil law ones, but they were pronounced nonetheless. We saw

this, for example, in the La Porta et al. (2002) data on government ownership of banks.

       In these very different ways, both some of the civil law countries and some of the

common law ones successfully solved their problems. In the second half of the century,

however, the world became a good deal more peaceful and orderly. In such a world, the

market-supporting solutions of the common law system, whether in the form of judicial

decisions or regulations, worked better than the policy-implementing solutions of the

civil law system. As a consequence of their 20th century legal and regulatory evolution,

common law countries ended up with sharply better investor protections. Their financial

markets ran away from the civil law ones, as we see in the data. Looking back over the

course of the 20th century, we see the basic differences in the legal traditions and

regulatory strategies playing out in how both the laws and the markets evolve.



VIII. A Blueprint for Policy Reform.

       Legal Origins Theory points to three important ways in which prevailing legal and

regulatory rules might be inefficient. First, to the extent that a country has a particular

legal or regulatory style shaped by its legal tradition, it might apply the tools

characteristic of that style to areas of regulation where they are inappropriate. A good

example of this that we already mentioned is the reliance on frequent interlocutory

appeals in civil law bankruptcy procedures. Such appeals are central to the civil

procedure of civil law countries, yet result in massive destruction of value in bankruptcy

(Djankov et al. 2006, Gamboa and Schneider 2007). Second, a country that introduces




                                              59
legal and regulatory rules in a situation of extreme disorder may fail to dismantle them

when the situation returns to normal. Heavy government ownership of banks, which

might have a purpose at the time of extreme financial underdevelopment, becomes a

burden under normal circumstances (La Porta et al. 2002). Third, transplantation of legal

and regulatory rules might itself become an important source of inefficiency, as rules

suitable for developed economies become a source of massive delay and corruption in the

developing countries that copy them (Pistor et al. 2003a,b, Spamann 2006).

       The inefficiency of the prevailing legal and regulatory rules points to a blueprint

for reforms. Such reforms would focus on the design of what Djankov et al. (2003c)

called “appropriate institutions,” those that seek to achieve the optimal tradeoff between

dictatorship and disorder in ways compatible with each country’s level of economic

development and legal tradition. In some instances, the direction of such reforms is

simply less government intervention. Neither underdevelopment nor the legal tradition

justifies heavy regulation of entry, so the reduction in those barriers is uncontroversial

from the efficiency perspective. Likewise, aspects of the formalism of bankruptcy

procedures, which probably are the heritage of civil law, appear detrimental to efficiency

at all levels of economic development, and could be reduced without impinging the

foundations of legal order. In other instances, the best solutions might differ across legal

systems. For example, while common law countries depend on investor protection to

support their debt markets, many civil law countries have successfully relied on

information sharing institutions, such as credit bureaus, for the same purpose (Djankov et

al. 2007). Finally, in situations of extreme disorder, such as participation or recovery

from war, even more aggressive government interventions might be appropriate.




                                             60
       The crucial requirement of reform is the availability of objective data on legal and

regulatory rules, preferably in a comparative form so that the consequences of particular

rules can be evaluated. Perhaps the most useful contribution of our research has been to

establish the possibility of collecting such data in a broad range of areas. More recently,

the data collection project has made substantial strides through a World Bank Doing

Business initiative, which assembles and updates much of the information on laws and

regulations discussed in this paper, as well as some additional indicators. Even the

publication of this report has proved controversial, with the French government accusing

its authors of an Anglo-Saxon bias. Nonetheless, the report has proved popular, and has

encouraged regulatory reforms in dozens of countries.

       The pace of legal and regulatory reform stimulated by the evidence is quickening.

Perhaps the greatest progress has been made in the reductions of entry regulations.

According to the 2006 Doing Business report, in 2005 and 2006 fifty five countries

undertook reforms that lowered administrative costs of starting a business and obtaining a

license. In Russia, an aggressive reformer in this area, the effects on encouraging the

entry of new firms have been significant (Yakovlev and Zhuravskaya 2007).

       The picture is more mixed for labor markets. OECD (2006) reports that labor

markets were liberalized in OECD countries in the last 15 years, although most reforms

pertained to temporary rather than permanent employment. In contrast, Heckman and

Pages (2004) see no tendency for liberalization in Latin America during the 1990s.

       With respect to investor protection, Pagano and Volpin (2005) report gains in

shareholder rights in OECD countries during the 1990s. Enriques and Volpin (2007)

describe a tendency toward improving shareholder rights in the EU. At the same time,




                                            61
they note that “far too little has been done to resolve the problem of related-party

transactions, which is the most common form of self-dealing in Europe.” We are aware

of no systematic evidence for emerging markets, although there are examples of

improvement, such as the Mexican bankruptcy reform (Gamboa and Schneider 2007).

       The use of our indicators of laws and regulations, with their clear correlations

with legal origins, for policy analysis has stimulated two objections. Some accuse us of

claiming that legal origin is destiny, so any reform of investor protection or of other

regulations short of wholesale replacement of the legal system is futile. This is not what

Legal Origin Theory says. The theory indeed holds that some aspects of the legal

tradition are so hard-wired that changing them would be extremely costly, and that

reforms must be sensitive to legal traditions. Nonetheless, many legal and regulatory

rules, such as entry regulations, disclosure requirements, or some procedural rules in

litigation, can be reformed without disturbing the fundamentals of the legal tradition.

       Some critics also argue that the legal rules we measure are not the right ones.

Even if these rules capture the broad stance of the law toward investor or worker

protection, the most relevant legal rules, doctrines, or even patterns of judicial behavior

responsible for the observed outcomes might be different from what we measure.

Focusing the reforms formalistically on our sub-indices will then be futile. For example,

if judges are reluctant to take on corporate self-dealing cases, and find technical or

procedural excuses to throw them out, changing the rules of approval of self-dealing

transactions might be futile. As Berkowitz et al. (2003) and Mauro et al. (2006) find,

reforms are more likely to succeed when people they affect choose to accept them.




                                             62
       We definitely agree with this point, and believe that legal or regulatory reform in

any country must be sensitive to the actual legal or regulatory bottlenecks.

Understanding what actually happens on the ground is essential. So if judges throw out

self-dealing cases, one might want to find out why they do so, and focus on how to get

them to stop. If labor courts rule for employees regardless of what the law says, labor

market reformers should take note. Having said this, in many circumstances the actual

laws on the books that we measure are indeed the reason for inefficient outcomes. The

heavy regulations of entry are one such example, procedural formalism is another. And

even when the legal rules we measure are not the entire problem, and thoughtless

formalistic reforms are likely to fail, the rules can point the reformer closer to where the

problem actually lies. In either case, the measured rules provide highly relevant data.

       Although the evidence on reforms is just beginning to come in, and much of it is

unfortunately confined to the developed world, many countries seem to be moving

toward market-friendlier government interventions. If the world remains peaceful and

orderly, the attraction of such reforms will only grow.



IX. Conclusion.

       Since their publication about a decade ago, the two LLSV articles have taken

some bumps. We now use different measures of shareholder protection, and are skeptical

about the use of instrumental variables. Our interpretation of the meaning of legal origins

has evolved considerably over time. But the bumps notwithstanding, the basic

contribution appears to us to still be standing, perhaps even taller than a decade ago.

And that is the idea that legal origins – broadly interpreted as highly persistent systems of




                                             63
social control of economic life -- have significant consequences for the legal and

regulatory framework of the society, as well as for economic outcomes. The range of

empirically documented legal, economic, and social spheres where legal origins have

consequences has expanded over the past decade.

       At the end of our overview, we believe that four propositions are correct, at least

given the current state of our knowledge. First, legal rules and regulations differ

systematically across countries, and these differences can be measured and quantified.

Second, these differences in legal rules and regulations are accounted for to a significant

extent by legal origins. Third, the basic historical divergence in the styles of legal

traditions – the policy-implementing focus of civil law versus the market-supporting

focus of common law – explains well why legal rules differ. Fourth, the measured

differences in legal rules matter for economic and social outcomes.

       The fact that the outlines of a coherent theory have emerged over the last decade

does not mean that all, or most, of the empirical issues have been settled, or, for that

matter, that the theory will survive further scrutiny. From our perspective, the crucial

open questions deal with the evolution of legal systems: How do they deal with crises?

How do they enter new spheres of regulation? How do they approach reforms? We

have offered many illustrations from the historical record, but a comprehensive account

of legal and regulatory evolution under common and civil law does not exist.

        Such an account might clarify an issue that has generated tremendous heat, and

not much light, throughout this research, namely the circumstances under which each

legal tradition “works better.” Legal Origins Theory does not point to the overall

superiority of common law; to the contrary, it points to the superiority of civil law and




                                             64
regulatory solutions when the problem of disorder is sufficiently (but not too) severe. On

the other hand, our attempt to find evidence for the commonly made defense of civil law

that it provides greater fairness or better access to justice have failed; the data suggest the

opposite (Djankov et al. 2003b).

       A deeper understanding of the dynamics of legal traditions may also inform the

crucial question of whether the differences between common and civil law will persist

into the future. Since we have shown legal origins to be closely related to the types of

capitalism, this question can be rephrased as follows: what kind of capitalism is likely to

prevail in the long run? Will it be the more market-focused Anglo-Saxon capitalism, or

the more state-centered capitalism of Continental Europe and perhaps Asia?

       There are many arguments for convergence. Globalization leads to a much faster

exchange of ideas, including ideas about laws and regulations, and therefore encourages

the transfer of legal knowledge. Globalization also encourages competition among

countries for foreign direct investment, for capital, and for business in general, which

must as well put some pressure toward the adoption of good legal rules and regulations.

       The convergence is working both by civil law countries increasingly accepting

common law solutions, and vice versa. In one area where heavy regulation appears

patently absurd – the entry of new firms – countries are rapidly tearing down the barriers.

In Europe at least, there are some reductions in labor regulations, as well as gains in

shareholder rights. At the same time, common law countries are increasingly resorting to

legislation to address social problems, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act being the most recent

example of such financial regulation in the U.S. Mediating against convergence is the

fact that civil law countries continue to resort to “policy-implementing” solutions to




                                              65
newly arising problems. The bias toward using state mandates to solve social problems,

such as the 35 hour workweek in France, is huge.

       All this, of course, leaves open the question of what legal rules and regulations the

countries are likely to move toward, even if they do not converge. So, in conclusion, let

us again rely on theory to make a prediction. The world economy in the last quarter

century has been surprisingly calm, and has moved sharply toward capitalism and

markets. In that environment, our framework suggests, the common law approach to

social control of economic life performs better than the civil law approach. When

markets do or can work well, it is better to support than to replace them. As long as the

world economy remains free of war, major financial crises, or order extraordinary

disturbances, the competitive pressures for market-supporting regulation will remain

strong, and we are likely to see continued liberalization. Of course, underlying this

prediction is a hopeful assumption that nothing like World War II or the Great

Depression will repeat itself. If it does, countries are likely to embrace civil law

solutions, just as they did back then.




                                             66
                                      References


Ahlering, Beth, and Simon Deakin. 2005. “Labour regulations, corporate governance, and
    legal origin: A case of institutional complementarity?”
    http://ssrn.com/abstract=898184/

Alesina, Alberto, and Edward Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A
    World of Difference. Oxford UK: Oxford University Press.

Allen, Franklin and Gale, Douglas. 1999. Comparing Financial Systems. Cambridge,
    MA: MIT Press.

Alvarez, Michael, Jose Cheibub, Fernando Limongi, and Adam Przeworski. 2000.
    “ACLP Political and Economic Database Codebook.” Democracy and Development:
    Political Institutions and Material Well-Being in the World, 1950-1990. Cambridge,
    UK: Cambridge University Press.

Antras, Pol, Mihir Desai, and Fritz Foley. 2007. “Multinational firms, FDI flows and
    imperfect capital markets.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 12855.

Balas, Aron, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007.
    “The divergence of legal procedures.” Harvard University Mimeo.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio Jr, and Ross Levine. 2004. “Bank regulation and
    supervision: what works best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13(2): 205-48.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2003. “Law and finance: why
    does legal origin matter?” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(4): 653-676.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine. 2005. “Law and firms' access to
    finance.” American Law and Economics Review, 7(1): 211-52.

Beck, Thorsten, Levine, Ross, and Norman Loayza. 2000a. "Financial intermediation and
    growth: causality and causes." Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(1): 31-77.

Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. 2000b. “Finance and the sources of
    growth.” Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2): 261-300.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, Christian Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel. 2007. “Global
    growth opportunities and market integration." Journal of Finance, 62(3):1081-1138.

Ben-Bassat, Avi and Momi Dahan. 2007. “Social rights in the constitution and in
    practice,” Forthcoming in Journal of Comparative Economics.




                                           67
Bergman, Nittai, and Daniel Nicolaievsky. 2007. "Investor protection and the Coasian
    view." Journal of Financial Economics, 84(3): 738-771.

Berkowitz, Daniel, and Karen Clay. 2005. “American civil law origins: implications for
    state constitutions.” American Law and Economics Review, 7(1): 62-84.

Berkowitz, Daniel, and Karen Clay. 2006. “The effect of judicial independence on courts:
    evidence from the American states.” Journal of Legal Studies, 35(2): 399-440.

Berkowitz, Daniel, and Karen Clay. 2007. “Legal origins and the evolution of
    institutions: evidence from American state courts.” Mimeo.

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. 2003. “Economic
    development, legality, and the transplant effect.” European Economic Review, 47(1):
    165-95.

Berman, Harold. 1983. Law and Revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Berman, Harold. 2003. Law and Revolution II: The impact of the Protestant
    reformations on the Western legal tradition. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of
    Harvard University Press.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
    Shleifer. 2004. “The regulation of labor.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4):
    1339-82.

Bozio, Antoine. 2002. "La capitalization boursière en France au XXe siècle.” Ecole
    Normale Supérieure, ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique.

Braun, Matias. 2003. "Financial contractibility and assets’ hardness." Mimeo.

Bushee, Brian, and Christian Leuz. 2005. “Economic consequences of SEC disclosure
    regulation: evidence from the OTC bulletin board.” Journal of Accounting and
    Economics, 39(2): 233-64.

Caballero, Ricardo, Kevin Cowan, Eduardo Engel, and Alejandro Micco. 2004.
    “Effective labor regulation and macroeconomic flexibility.” Mimeo, MIT.

Cardozo, Benjamin. 1921. The Nature of the Judicial Process. New Haven, CT: Yale
    University Press.

Chang, Roberto, Linda Kaltani, and Norman Loayza. 2005. “Openness can be good for
   growth: the role of policy complementarities.” World Bank Policy Research Paper
   No. 3763.




                                           68
Cheffins, Brian. 2001. “Does law matter? The separation of ownership and control in the
    United Kingdom.” Journal of Legal Studies, 30(2): 459-84.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2006a. “Adjustment to target capital, finance
    and growth.” CEPR Discussion Paper.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2006b. "Financial development and inter-
    sectoral investment: New estimates and evidence." Mimeo. European Central Bank.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2006c. “Red tape and delayed entry.”
    C.E.P.R. Discussion Paper.

Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven. 2003. “Financial development, property rights, and
    growth.” Journal of Finance, 58(6): 2401-36.

Clark, Robert. 1986. Corporate Law. New York: Aspen Publishers.

Coffee, John. 1999. “The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in
    corporate governance and its implications.” Northwestern University Law Review,
    93: 641–708.

Coffee, John. 2001. “The rise of dispersed ownership: The roles of law and the state in
    the separation of ownership and control.” Yale Law Journal, 111(1): 1-82.

Cunat, Alejandro, and Marc Melitz. 2006. “Volatility, labor market flexibility, and the
   patterns of comparative advantage,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Damaska, Mirjan. 1986. The Faces of Justice and State Authority. New Haven, CT: Yale
   University Press.

David, Paul. 1985. “Clio and the economics of Qwerty.” American Economic Review,
    75(2): 332-337.

David, Rene, and John Brierley. 1985. Major Legal Systems in the World Today.
    London, UK: Stevens and Sons.

Dawson, John. 1960. A History of Lay Judges. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
   Press.

Dawson, John. 1968. The Oracles of the Law. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
   Press.

de Serres, Alain, Shuji Kobayakawa, Torsten Mikkel Sløk, and Laura Vartia. 2006.
    "Regulation of financial systems and economic growth." OECD Working Paper No.
    506.




                                            69
Dinc, Serdar. 2005. “Politicians and banks: political influences on government-owned
    banks in emerging markets.” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(2): 453-79.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
    2002. “The regulation of entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 1-37.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003a. “Who
    owns the media?” Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 341-81.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
    2003b. “Courts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 453-517.

Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and
    Andrei Shleifer. 2003c. “The new comparative economics.” Journal of Comparative
    Economics, 31(1): 595-619.

Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2006. “Debt
    enforcement around the world.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No 12807.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. "Private credit in 129
    countries." Journal of Financial Economics, 84(2): 299-329.

Djankov, Simoen, Timothy Ganser, Caraeel McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei
    Shleifer, 2007b. “The effects of corporate taxation on investment and
    entrepreneurship.” Harvard University mimeo.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
    2008. “The law and economics of self-dealing.” Forthcoming in Journal of
    Financial Economics.

Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales. 2004. “Private benefits of control: an international
   comparison.” Journal of Finance, 59(2): 537-600.

Enriques, Luca. 2002. "Do corporate law judges matter? Some evidence from Milan."
    European Business Organization Law Review, 3(4): 756-821.

Enriques, Luca, and Paolo Volpin. 2007. “Corporate governance reforms in continental
    Europe.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1): 117-40.

Esty, Benjamin, and William Megginson. 2003. “Creditor rights, enforcement, and debt
    ownership structure: evidence from the global syndicated loan market.” Journal of
    Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38(1): 37-59.

Fama, Eugene. 1980. “Agency problems and the theory of the firm.” Journal of Political
   Economy, 88(2): 288-307.




                                           70
Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love. 2004. “Financial development and intersectoral
    allocation: a new approach.” Journal of Finance, 59(6): 2785-2807.

Fisman, Raymond, and Virginia Sarria-Allende. 2004. “Regulation of entry and the
    distortion of industrial organization.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No
    10929.

Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. 2005. "Ownership: evolution and
    regulation." ECGI - Finance Working Paper No. 09/2003.

Freund, Caroline, and Bineswaree Bolaky. 2007. “When does trade promote growth?”
    Mimeo, World Bank.

Gaëlle, Pierre and Stefano Scarpetta. 2007. “Do firms make greater use of training and
    temporary employment when labor adjustment costs are high?” Mimeo, World
    Bank.

Gamboa, Mario and Frank Schneider. 2007. “Bankruptcy as a legal process.” Mimeo,
   Harvard University.

Gennaioli, Nicola. 2007. “Optimal contracts with enforcement risk.” Mimeo, Stockholm
   University.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. "The evolution of common law.” Journal
   of Political Economy 115(1): 43-68.

Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
    2004. “Do institutions cause growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3): 271-303.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “Legal origins.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 117(4): 1193-1229.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The rise of the regulatory state.” Journal of
    Economic Literature, 41(2): 401-25.

Glendon, Mary Ann, Michael Gordon, and Christopher Osakwe. 1992. Comparative
    Legal Traditions in a Nutshell. St. Paul: West Publishing Company.

Glendon, Mary Ann, Michael Gordon, Christopher Osakwe. 1994. Comparative legal
    traditions : text, materials, and cases on the civil and common law traditions, with
    special reference to French, German, English, and European law. St. Paul, Minn.:
    West Pub.

Goldsmith, Raymond. 1985. Comparative National Balance Sheets: A Study of Twenty
    Countries, 1688-1978. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.




                                           71
Gower, Laurence. 1954. The Principles of Modern Company Law. London: Stevens.

Gorla, G., and L. Moccia. 1981. “A 'revisiting' of the comparison between 'Continental
    law' and 'English Law' (XVI-XIX Century).” Journal of Legal History, 2:143-156.

Greenstone, Michael, Paul Oyer, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2006. “Mandated
    disclosure, stock returns, and the 1964 Securities Acts amendments.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 121(2): 399-460.

Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart. 1988. “One share-one vote and the market for
    corporate control.” Journal of Financial Economics, 20(1/2): 175-202.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2004. “The role of social capital in
    financial development.” American Economic Review, 94(3): 526-56.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2006. “Does culture affect economic
    outcomes?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23-48.

Haber, Stephen, and Enrico Perotti. 2007. “The political economy of finance.” Mimeo.

Hall, Peter, and David Soskice. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism. Oxford, UK: Oxford
     University Press.

Haltiwanger, John, Stefano Scarpetta, and Helena Schweiger. 2006. “Assessing job flows
    across countries: the role of industry, firm size, and regulations.” The World Bank,
    Policy Research Working Paper Series.

Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. London, UK: Oxford.

Haselmann, Rainer, Katharina Pistor, and Vikrant Vig. 2006. "How law affects lending."
    Columbia Law and Economics Working Paper No. 285.

Hayek, Friedrich. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. South Bend, IN: Gateway Editions
   Ltd.

Heckman, James, and Carmen Pages. 2004. “Law and employment: introduction.” In
   Law and employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, James
   Heckman and Carmen Pages, eds., 1-107. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hellwig, Martin. 2000. “On the economics and politics of corporate finance and
    corporate control.” In Corporate Finance, Xavier Vives, ed., 95-134. Cambridge,
    UK: Cambridge University Press.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein. 2007. “Estimating trade flows:
    trading partners and trading volumes.” NBER Working Paper No. 12927.




                                            72
Jackson, Howell, and Mark Roe. 2007. “Public enforcement of securities laws:
    preliminary evidence.” Harvard Law School Mimeo.

Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the firm: managerial behavior,
    agency costs, and ownership structure.” Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4): 305-
    60.

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000.
    “Tunneling.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 90(2): 22-27.

Kaplan, David, Eduardo Piedra, and Enrique Seira. 2007. "Entry regulation and business
    start-ups: evidence from Mexico." SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=978863

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Atif Mian. 2005. “Do lenders favor politically connected firms?
   Rent provision in an emerging financial market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   120(4): 1371-1411.

Kindleberger, Charles. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London; Boston:
    Allen & Unwin.

Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. 2006. “Entry regulation as a barrier to
    entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Economics, 82(3): 591-629.

Klerman, Daniel, and Paul Mahoney. 2007. "Legal origin?" Journal of Comparative
    Economics, 35(2): 278-293.

Lafontaine, Francine, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. 2007. "The microeconomic implications
    of input market regulations: cross-country evidence from within the firm." Ross
    School of Business Paper No. 1069.

Lamoreaux, Naomi, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2005. “Legal regime and contractual
   flexibility: a comparison between businesses’ organizational choices in France and
   the United States during the era of industrialization.” American Law and Economics
   Review, 7(1): 28-61.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997.
    “Legal determinants of external finance.” Journal of Finance, 52(3): 1131-50.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998.
    “Law and finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6): 1113-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999.
    “The quality of government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15(1):
    222-79.




                                          73
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2000.
    “Agency problems and dividend policies around the world.” Journal of Finance,
    55(1): 1-33.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2002.
    “Investor protection and corporate valuation.” Journal of Finance, 57(3): 1147-70.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 1999. “Corporate
    ownership around the world.” Journal of Finance, 54(2): 71-517.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “Government
    ownership of banks.” Journal of Finance, 57(1): 265-301.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2006. “What works in
    securities laws?” Journal of Finance, 61(1): 1-32.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Christian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei
    Shleifer. 2004. “Judicial checks and balances.” Journal of Political Economy,
    112(2): 445-70.

Leland, Hayne, and David Pyle. 1977. “Informational asymmetries, financial structure,
   and financial intermediation.” Journal of Finance, 32: 371-387.

Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar. 2005. “Does legal enforcement affect financial
    transactions? The contractual channel in private equity.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 120(1): 223-46.

Levine, Ross. 2005. “Law, endowments and property rights.” Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 19(3): 61-88.

Licht, Amir, Chanan Goldschmidt, and Shalom Schwartz. 2005. “Culture, law, and
    corporate governance.” International Review of Law and Economics, 25(2): 229-55.

Linciano, Nadia. 2003. "Non-voting shares and the value of control: the impact of
    corporate regulation in Italy." Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=410191

Lopez-de-Cordova, Ernesto. 2007. “Labor regulation and the allocative efficiency of
    international trade.” Mimeo, World Bank.

Mahoney, Paul. 2001. “The common law and economic growth: Hayek might be right.”
   Journal of Legal Studies, 30(2): 503-25.

Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman, Yishay Yafeh. 2006. Emerging Markets and Financial
   Globalization: Sovereign Bond Spreads in 1870-1913 and Today. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.




                                           74
McNeill, Robert, and William McNeill. 2003. The Human Web: a Bird’s-Eye View of
   World History. New York: W.W. Norton.

Merryman, John Henry. 1969. The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal
    Systems of Western Europe and Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
    Press.

Merryman, John Henry. 1996. “The French deviation.” The American Journal of
    Comparative Law, 44(1): 109-19.

Micco, Alejandro, and Carmen Pages. 2006. "The economic effects of employment
    protection: evidence from international industry-level data." IZA Discussion Paper
    No. 2433.

Michie, Ronald. 1999. The London Stock Exchange: A History. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.

Montesquieu, Charles M. de Secondat. 1984 [1748]. The Spirit of Laws, Special Edition.
   The Legal Classics Library, Birmingham, AL: Lucas Printing Company.

Morck, Randall, and Lloyd Steier. 2005. “The global history of corporate governance: an
   introduction.” A History of Corporate Governance, Randall Morck ed. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press.

Mulligan, Casey, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005a. “Conscription as regulation.” American
    Law and Economics Review, 7(1): 85-111.

Mulligan, Casey, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005b. “The extent of the market and the supply of
    regulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4): 1445-73.

Musacchio, Aldo. 2008. "Can civil law countries get good institutions? Creditor rights
   and bond markets in Brazil." Forthcoming in Journal of Economic History.

Nenova, Tatiana. 2006. “Control values and changes in corporate law in Brazil”, Latin
   American Business Review, 6(3): 1-37.

Niblett, Anthony, Richard Posner, and Andrei Shleifer. “The evolution of a legal
    doctrine.” Harvard University Mimeo.

Nunn, Nathan. 2007. ''Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts and the pattern of
   trade.'' Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2): 569-600.

Ongena, Steven, and David Smith. 2000. “What determines the number of bank
   relationships? Cross-country evidence.” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 9(1):
   26-56.




                                           75
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2006. OECD employment
    outlook: Boosting jobs and incomes: 2006. Paris and Washington, D.C.:
    Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin. 2005. “The political economy of corporate
    governance.” American Economic Review, 95(4): 1005-30.

Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin. 2006. "Shareholder protection, stock market
    development, and politics." Journal of the European Economic Association, 4: 315-
    341

Perotti, Enrico, and Paolo Volpin, 2004. "Lobbying on entry." CEPR Discussion Paper
    No. 4519.

Perotti, Enrico, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden. 2006. “The political economy of
    corporate control and labor rents.” Journal of Political Economy, 114(1): 145-74.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2003. The Economic Effects of Constitutions.
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Pistor, Katharina. 2006. "Legal ground rules in coordinated and liberal market
     economies,“ In Corporate Governance in Context: Corporations, States, and
     Markets in Europe, Janan, and the US, edited by K.J. Hopt et al, Oxford, UK:
     Oxford University Press.

Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark West. 2003a. "The
     evolution of corporate law: a cross-country comparison". University of Pennsylvania
     Journal of International Economic Law, 23(4): 791-871.

Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark West. 2003b.
     "Evolution of corporate law and the transplant effect: lessons from six countries",
     World Bank Research Observer, 18(1): 89-112.

Ponzetto, Giacomo, and Patricio Fernandez. 2008. "Case law vs. statute law: an
    evolutionary comparison." Journal of Legal Studies, forthcoming.

Posner, Richard. 1973. Economic Analysis of the Law. Boston, MA: Little-Brown.

Priest, George. 1977. “The common law process and the selection of efficient rules.”
     Journal of Legal Studies, 6: 65-82.

Qian, Jun, and Philip Strahan. 2007. "How law and institutions shape financial contracts:
    the case of bank loans." Forthcoming in Journal of Finance.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial dependence and growth.”
    American Economic Review, 88(3): 559-586.


                                            76
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “The great reversals: the politics of financial
    development in the twentieth century.” Journal of Financial Economics, 69(1): 5-50.

Ramseyer, Mark, and Eric Rasmusen. 1997. “Judicial independence in a civil law regime:
   The evidence from Japan.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 13(2):
   259-86.

Reynolds, Thomas and Arturo Flores. 1989. Foreign Law: Current Sources of Basic
   Legislation in Jurisdictions of the World. Littleton, CO: Rothman and Co.

Roe, Mark. 2000. “Political preconditions to separating ownership from corporate
    control.” Stanford Law Review, 53(3): 539-606.

Roe, Mark. 2006. “Legal origins, politics, and modern stock markets.” Harvard Law
    Review, 120(2): 462-527.

Rostowski, Jacek, and Bogdan Stacescu. 2006. “The wig and the pith helmet –
    unbundling the impact of “legal school” and colonial institutions on economic
    performance.” Mimeo, Central European University.

Rubin, Paul. 1977. “Why is the common law efficient?” Journal of Legal Studies, 6: 51-
    63.

Safavian, Mehnaz, and Siddharth Sharma. 2006. "When do creditor rights work?"
    Journal of Comparative Economics 35(3): 484-508.

Sapienza, Paola. 2004. “The effects of government ownership on bank lending.” Journal
    of Financial Economics, 72(2): 357-84.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “A survey of corporate governance.” Journal
    of Finance, 52(2): 737-83.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2002. “Investor protection and equity markets.”
    Journal of Financial Economics, 66(1): 3-27.

Spamann, Holger. 2005. "On the insignificance and/or endogeneity of La Porta et al.'s
   'Anti-Director Rights Index' under consistent coding," Harvard Law School Olin
   Center Discussion Paper No. 7

Spamann, Holger. 2006. “Contemporary legal transplants: legal families and the diffusion
   of corporate law.” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Stone, Julius. 1985. Precedent and Law: Dynamics of Common Law Growth. Sydney,
    Australia: Butterworths.




                                           77
Stulz, Rene, and Rohan Williamson. 2003. “Culture, openness, and finance.” Journal of
     Financial Economics, 70(3): 313-49.

Sylla, Richard. 2006. “Schumpeter redux: a review of Raghuram Rajan and Luigi
     Zingales's saving capitalism from the capitalists.” Journal of Economic Literature,
     44(2): 391-404.

Sylla, Richard, and George Smith. 1995. “Information and capital market regulation in
     Anglo-American finance.” In Anglo-American Financial Systems, Michael Bordo
     and Richard Sylla eds., 179-208. New York: Irwin.

Tignor, Robert. 1984. State, Private Enterprise, and Economic Change in Egypt, 1918-
    1952. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Visaria, Sujata. 2006. “Legal reform and loan repayment: the microeconomic impact of
    debt recovery tribunals in India.” Mimeo, Boston University.

Watson, Alan. 1974. Legal Transplants. University of Georgia Press.

Wilkins, Mira, and Harm Schroter. 1998. The Free-Standing Company in the World
    Economy, 1830-1996. New York: Oxford University Press.

Woloch, Isser. 1994. The New Regime. New York: W. W. Norton.

Woolf, Stuart. 1992. “The construction of a European world-view in the revolutionary-
   Napoleonic years.” Past and Present, 137: 72-101.

Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. “Financial markets and the allocation of capital.” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 58(1-2): 187-214.

Yakovlev, Evgeny and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2007. "Deregulation of business".
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=965838

Zweigert, Konrad, and Hein Kotz. 1998. Introduction to Comparative Law. Oxford, UK:
   Clarendon Press.




                                            78
Figure I: The distribution of Legal Origin
               Figure II -- Legal Origin, Institutions, and Outcomes

                              Institution                                   Outcomes

                      z                                       Time to evict nonpaying tenant
                       Procedural Formalism
                                                              Time to collect a bounced check


                       Judicial Independence                   Property rights


                                                               Corruption
                       Regulation of Entry                     Unofficial economy


                       Government Ownership
                       of the media

                                                               Participation Rates
Legal Origin           Labor Laws
                                                               Unemployment

                       Conscription

                                                                Stock market development
                       Company Law                              Firm valuation
                       Securities Law                           Ownership structure
                                                                Control premium

                       Bankruptcy Law                          Private credit


                       Government Ownership
                                                               Interest rate spread
                       of Banks
          Figure III: Stock market capitalization over GDP based on Rajan and Zingales (2003)

1.40

1.20

1.00
          bb2326
0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
   1913        1923      1933        1943       1953     1963        1973       1983        1993

                                English Legal Origin            French Legal Origin
                                German Legal Origin             Scandinavian Legal Origin
   Figure IV: Stock market capitalization over GDP France and Great Britain (Bozio 2002, Michie 1999)
                                                                                     12.2325a
                  12.2325a
% 160
                  12.2325a
  140             12.2325a
                  12.2325a
  120             12.2325a
                  12.2325a
  100

   80

   60

   40

   20

    0
        1800

               1810

                      1820

                             1830

                                    1840

                                           1850

                                                  1860

                                                          1870

                                                                  1880

                                                                           1890

                                                                                  1900

                                                                                         1910

                                                                                                1920

                                                                                                       1930

                                                                                                              1940

                                                                                                                     1950

                                                                                                                            1960

                                                                                                                                   1970

                                                                                                                                          1980

                                                                                                                                                 1990
                                                         France          Great Britain
                                                   Figure V: Ownership concentration and GDP growth 1913-1945



                                              .4
 % owned by 3 largest shareholders -- LLSV 1998
                                                                                URY


                                                                GRC
                                   .2


                                                                                MEX         COL
                                                                     LKA
                                                             AUT ITATUR                      BRA
                                                                                           PER
                                                                    BEL
                                                                      ESP PRTARG                                 VEN
                                                                     DEU   NZL
                                                                         DNK CHL
                        0




                                                                           CHE CAN
                                                               IRLNLDIND
                                                                           FIN
                                                                           NOR
                                                               FRA

                                                                                AUS
                                                                                SWE
          -.2




                                                                      KOR
                                                                        GBRTWN               USA
                                                                       JPN
-.4




                                                    -2                      0                  2             4         6
                                                                                      GDP growth 1913-1945
                                                    coef = .00527212, (robust) se = .01614109, t = .33
                                   Figure VI: Labor laws and GDP growth 1913-1945


           .4
                                              RUS
                                                     PRT

                                     FRA ESP           SWE
                                                      FIN
                                       NLD
                    .2



                                         DEU
                                                      NOR
                                                                                       VEN
Index of labor laws




                                       ITA
                                                   MEX
                                                  DNK               BRA
                                    GRC
                                      BGR
                                  AUT BEL
         0




                                        LKA            CHL        PER
                                        KOR
                                         IND         TWN
                                                      CHE
                                       TUR

                                     IRL              AUS
                                                        ARG       COL
           -.2




                                               GBR URY
                                                            CAN
                                                                  USA
                                              JPN     NZL
           -.4




                         -2                      0                   2             4         6
                                                            GDP growth 1913-1945
                         coef = -.01115489, (robust) se = .02854897, t = -.39
                                                       Table I: Financial Institutions and Capital Markets Development

                                                      Panel A: Financial Institutions and Legal Origin
                                            (1)                      (2)                       (3)                  (4)                  (5)
                                                                                     Creditor Rights Index                       Bank Government
                                  Anti-Self-Dealing Index Prospectus Disclosure                              Debt Enforcement
                                                                                             (2003)                              Owernship (1970)
French Legal Origin                      -0.3334a                -0.3298a                  -0.8394a              -13.6361b            0.3316a
                                         (0.0511)                 (0.0577)                 (0.2251)               (5.6535)           (0.0755)
                                                 a
German Legal Origin                      -0.3454                 -0.2370b                   -0.1714                -8.8577            0.3456a
                                         (0.0736)                 (0.0966)                 (0.2579)               (5.8022)           (0.1060)
                                                 a                        a                         c
Scandinavian Legal Origin                -0.3820                 -0.2867                   -0.9435                  5.2707            0.3109
                                         (0.0642)                 (0.0478)                 (0.4865)               (5.8212)           (0.1545)
                                                 a
Ln (GDP per capita)                       0.0728                  0.0618b                   0.2022b               19.8980a           -0.1808a
                                         (0.0263)                 (0.0261)                 (0.0875)               (2.7517)           (0.0377)
                                                                                                                           a
Constant                                  0.0177                   0.2102                   0.6043              -124.6692             1.6206a
                                         (0.2433)                 (0.2422)                 (0.7560)              (26.9421)           (0.2876)
Observations                                 71                      49                       130                     85                 74
R-squared                                   45%                     0.45                      18%                    0.57               37%

                                                         Panel B: Financial Institutions and Capital Markets Development
                                           (1)                      (2)                       (3)                    (4)                  (5)                 (6)
                                  Stock-market-to-GDP         Ln(Firms/Pop)               Ownership                             Private-credit-to-GDP   Interest spread
                                                                                                              Control Premium
                                      (1999-2003)              (1999-2003)              Concentration                                (1999-2003)           (1970-95)
Anti-self-dealing Index                 0.8940b                   0.8004 c
                                                                                           -0.1277 c

                                        (0.3674)                 (0.4750)                  (0.0724)
                                                                                                                         a
Prospectus Disclosure                                                                                            -0.3254
                                                                                                                 (0.0807)
                                                                                                                                             c
Credit Rigths Index                                                                                                                    0.0645
                                                                                                                                      (0.0336)
                                                                                                                                             a
Debt Enforcement                                                                                                                      0.0053
                                                                                                                                      (0.0015)
                                                                                                                                                                   a
Government Ownership of Banks -- 1970                                                                                                                     22.0813
                                                                                                                                                           (7.3675)
Ln GDP per capita                         0.3204a                  0.9794a                -0.0495b                -0.0273              0.2546a               1.8522
                                         (0.0601)                 (0.1346)                (0.0200)               (0.0238)             (0.0604)             (3.0169)
                                                 a
Constant                                 -2.7604                  -6.9496a                 0.9844a               0.5524b              -2.1494a              -4.4219
                                         (0.5558)                 (1.2352)                (0.1761)               (0.2202)             (0.4912)            (23.0311)
Observations                                 72                       72                      49                     37                   85                   57
R-squared                                   40%                      47%                     20%                    36%                  52%                  10%

a
  Significant at the 1% level.
b
  Significant at the 5% level.
c
  Significant at the 10% level.
                                                         Table II: Government Regulation

                                                  Panel A: Government Regulation and Legal Origin
                                           (1)                    (2)                  (3)                      (4)
                                   Regulation of Entry   Regulation of Labor   Press Government
                                                                                                        Conscription (2000)
                                         (1999)                 (1997)         Ownership (1999)
French Legal Origin                     0.6927a               0.2654a               0.2095a                  0.5468a
                                       (0.0929)               (0.0362)              (0.0834)                 (0.0772)
                                               a
German Legal Origin                     0.5224                0.2337a                0.1100                  0.8281a
                                       (0.1206)               (0.0473)              (0.0926)                 (0.0794)
                                                                      a
Scandinavian Legal Origin               -0.1922               0.3978                0.1308b                  0.7219a
                                       (0.1352)               (0.0443)              (0.0555)                 (0.2015)
                                                a                                           a
Ln (GDP per capita)                    -0.1963                 -0.0083              -0.1753                   -0.0382
                                       (0.0367)               (0.0164)              (0.0307)                 (0.0331)
                                               a                      b
Constant                                3.4367                0.3703                1.6565a                   0.4702c
                                       (0.3037)               (0.1520)              (0.3024)                 (0.2802)
Observations                               85                     84                   95                       146
R-squared                                 61%                    42%                  37%                       34%

                             Panel B: Government Regulation, Corruption, Unofficial Economy, and Labor Market Outcomes
                                          (1)                   (2)                      (3)                   (4)                   (5)
                                    Corruption Index   Employment Unofficial   Labor Participation --   Unemployment Rate     Unemployment Rate
                                     (1996-2000)            Economy                   Male                 (1991-2000)        for Men Aged 20-24
                                                a                    a
Regulation of Entry                     -0.6733               13.2601
                                        (0.0998)              (4.4569)
                                                                                             a
Regulation of Labor                                                                  -5.2009                  6.0738b             14.8363a
                                                                                     (1.7319)                (2.7868)              (4.2699)
                                               a
Ln GDP per capita                       0.6194                -5.7288a               -1.9305a                -0.9913c               -1.1890
                                        (0.0537)              (2.0969)               (0.3982)                (0.5795)              (1.1308)
                                                a
Constant                                -3.6273              58.7496b               102.5096a                14.8245b              18.4049
                                        (0.5800)             (25.8820)               (3.3120)                (6.0449)             (11.4316)
Observations                               85                    46                     78                       65                    52
R-squared                                 80%                   42%                    32%                      11%                   15%

a
  Significant at the 1% level.
b
  Significant at the 5% level.
c
  Significant at the 10% level.
                                                     Table III: Judicial Institutions

                                  Panel A: Legal Origin and Judicial Institutions
                                                   (1)                      (2)                 (3)
                                           Formalism Check
                                                                   Tenure of judges          Case law
                                              Collection
                                                       a
French Legal Origin                             1.4945                  -0.2375a             -0.6733a
                                               (0.1841)                 (0.0620)             (0.0951)
German Legal Origin                             0.9917a                 -0.4627a              -0.2874
                                               (0.2013)                 (0.1459)             (0.2156)
Scandinavian Legal Origin                       0.7623a                  -0.0636               0.046
                                               (0.2966)                 (0.0470)             (0.0727)
Ln (GDP per capita)                            -0.2610a                  0.0412               -0.0004
                                               (0.0707)                 (0.0295)             (0.0337)
Constant                                        5.0505a                  0.6514
                                                                                a
                                                                                              0.9578
                                                                                                     a

                                               (0.6103)                 (0.2500)             (0.2850)
Observations                                      109                       65                   65
R-squared                                         45%                      25%                  44%

                                             Panel B: Judicial Instititutions and Outcomes
                                                (1)                         (2)                 (3)                   (4)
                                           Time to collect on
                                                                 Contract Enforcement Property Rights (2004) Property Rights (2004)
                                            bounced check
Legal Formalism -- Bounced Check               0.3095a                 -0.5099a
                                               (0.0519)                (0.0966)
Tenure of judges                                                                             1.2066a
                                                                                             (0.2547)
Case law                                                                                                             0.5596a
                                                                                                                    (0.2035)
Ln GDP per capita                               0.0402                 1.0544a                0.8673a                0.8767a
                                               (0.0546)                (0.1410)              (0.0818)               (0.0886)
Constant                                        3.7354                  -1.7313              -5.6499a               -5.0485a
                                               (0.5251)                (1.5253)              (0.7439)               (0.8288)
Observations                                      109                      52                    64                     64
R-squared                                        12%                      74%                   69%                    67%

a
  Significant at the 1% level.
b
  Significant at the 5% level.
c
  Significant at the 10% level.
                                                        Table IV: Creditor rights, Culture, and Legal Origin

                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)
                                                                  Dependent Variable: Creditor's rights in 2002
% catholic                                          -0.2561
                                                    [0.2283]
Power Distance Index                                            0.0013
                                                               [0.0096]
Individualism                                                             -0.0073
                                                                          [0.0079]
Uncertainty Avoidance Index                                                            -0.0100
                                                                                       [0.0062]
Masculinity                                                                                        -0.0198c
                                                                                                   [0.0099]
% agree child obedience is important                                                                              -0.4113
                                                                                                                  [0.7531]
% agree child independence is important                                                                                      1.3655b
                                                                                                                             [0.6010]
% agree parents must do their best for children                                                                                         -0.5432
                                                                                                                                        [0.9007]
% agree that parents must be respected regardless                                                                                                  -1.3109
                                                                                                                                                   [0.8417]
% agree family life is very important                                                                                                                          0.0726
                                                                                                                                                              [1.2854]
% agree strangers can generally be trusted                                                                                                                                 0.6841
                                                                                                                                                                         [0.8051]
French Legal Origin                                 -0.7585a   -0.8578b   -0.9374a     -0.4519     -1.0133a       -0.8542b   -0.7470b   -0.8351b   -0.7563b   -0.7979b   -0.8246b
                                                    [0.2383]   [0.3431]   [0.3417]    [0.3917]     [0.3669]       [0.3361]   [0.3447]   [0.3519]   [0.3468]   [0.3534]   [0.3302]
German Legal Origin                                  -0.1320    -0.5119    -0.5528    -0.2347       -0.2764        -0.2798     -0.327    -0.2318    -0.1893    -0.1542    -0.2004
                                                    [0.2603]   [0.4472]   [0.4197]    [0.4485]     [0.4253]       [0.3913]   [0.3470]   [0.3816]   [0.3519]   [0.3960]   [0.3623]
Scandinavian Legal Origin                           -1.0091b    -0.8831    -0.9013    -0.9597c     -1.7406b        -0.7378   -0.9349c    -0.6631   -1.0181b    -0.6091    -0.8950
                                                    [0.4804]   [0.5768]   [0.5625]    [0.5382]     [0.6865]       [0.5724]   [0.5316]   [0.5773]   [0.4938]   [0.5908]   [0.6500]
Log(GDP per capita in 2002)                          0.2415a     0.2573   0.3920c        0.277        0.248        -0.0823    -0.0991    -0.0835    -0.1771    -0.0685    -0.0780
                                                    [0.0893]   [0.2349]   [0.1956]    [0.1856]     [0.1887]       [0.1249]   [0.1214]   [0.1225]   [0.1409]   [0.1246]   [0.1190]
Constant                                             0.2311a     0.0177    -0.7691      0.3359       1.2775        3.3971a    2.6663b    3.6212a    5.0362a    2.9833c    2.9900a
                                                    [0.0882]   [2.4440]   [1.6375]    [1.5286]     [1.7662]       [1.2091]   [1.1083]   [1.2349]   [1.6400]   [1.5731]   [1.0425]
Observations                                           131         52         52           52           52            73         73         71         73         72         73
R-squared                                              21%        15%        16%         17%          20%            14%        19%        14%        17%        13%        15%

a
  Significant at the 1% level.
b
  Significant at the 5% level.
c
  Significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                                               Table V: Legal Origin and Politics

                                                                                                         Panel A: Legal origin and proportional voting
                                           (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)                (6)               (7)             (8)           (9)           (10)         (12)          (13)
                                                        Disclosure in                                      Govt Ownership                                                                       Judicial
                                    Anti-Self-Dealing                   Creditor Rights   Debt Enforcement                      Ln(Steps)         Labor laws    Media ownership    Draft                   Tenure Judges   Case Law
                                                         Prospectus                                             Banks                                                                          Formalism
French Legal Origin                     -0.3081a          -0.2396a         -0.8224a          -15.0560a           0.2821a           0.6588a          0.2500a         0.2589a        0.5324a      1.4287a      -0.1812a      -0.6951a
                                        [0.0508]          [0.0567]         [0.2496]           [4.7212]          [0.0887]          [0.1007]          [0.0401]       [0.0828]       [0.0877]     [0.1830]      [0.0597]      [0.0997]
                                                 a               b                                     b              b                 a                 a                 c              a          a               b
German Legal Origin                     -0.3651           -0.1817           -0.172           -12.8704            0.2876            0.4641            0.2278         0.1731         0.7956       0.8703       -0.3070        -0.1534
                                        [0.0610]          [0.0734]         [0.2874]           [5.0798]          [0.1168]          [0.1397]          [0.0564]       [0.0883]       [0.0977]     [0.2225]      [0.1215]      [0.2094]
                                                 a               b                  c                                                                     a                 a              a
Scandinavian Legal Origin               -0.3569           -0.1247          -0.9121             4.9701            0.2038           -0.2948c           0.3786         0.3036         0.6663       0.4976        0.0041        -0.0195
                                        [0.0686]          [0.0578]         [0.5194]           [5.4404]          [0.1744]          [0.1535]          [0.0555]       [0.0791]       [0.2185]     [0.3415]      [0.0534]      [0.1147]
                                                                 a                                     c                                                                    a                         b
Proportion Voting                        -0.0113          -0.0808           0.0285            -2.9350            0.0498            0.0567            0.0049        -0.0970         0.0144       0.1591        -0.0100       0.0577
                                        [0.0197]          [0.0212]         [0.0924]           [1.4869]          [0.0307]          [0.0354]          [0.0168]       [0.0289]       [0.0318]     [0.0732]      [0.0227]      [0.0466]
                                                 a               b                  c                  a               a                 a                                  a                         a
Ln(GDP per capita)                       0.0794            0.0662           0.1720            21.8143           -0.1866           -0.2134            -0.0067       -0.1406         -0.0303     -0.2953        0.0121        -0.0420
                                        [0.0259]          [0.0283]         [0.0979]           [2.7143]          [0.0423]          [0.0392]          [0.0176]       [0.0316]       [0.0347]     [0.0686]      [0.0230]      [0.0354]
                                                                                                           a          a                 a                 b                                           a               a
Constant                                 -0.0418           0.2453           0.7988           -135.4145           1.6261            3.5430            0.3580        1.4214a         0.4013       5.1870        0.9051        1.2672a
                                        [0.2349]          [0.2771]         [0.8054]           [27.1079]         [0.3200]          [0.3158]          [0.1597]       [0.3014]       [0.2901]     [0.5966]      [0.1897]      [0.2854]
Observations                                68               48               116                 77                70                80                79            87             132           93            60            60
R-squared                                  0.47             0.59             0.16                0.66              0.38              0.63              0.4           0.45           0.33          0.52          0.19          0.45

                                                                                                           Panel B: Legal origin and power of the left
                                           (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)               (6)                (7)            (8)           (9)           (10)         (12)          (13)
                                                        Disclosure in                                       Govt Ownership                                                                      Judicial
                                    Anti-Self-Dealing                   Creditor Rights   Debt Enforcement                       Ln(Steps)         Labor laws   Media ownership    Draft                   Tenure Judges   Case Law
                                                         Prospectus                                             Banks                                                                          Formalism
French Legal Origin                     -0.3356a          -0.3318a         -0.9337a          -18.2437a          0.3432a           0.7018a           0.2606a         0.0699        0.6459a       1.6322a      -0.2234a      -0.6417a
                                        [0.0478]          [0.0581]         [0.2932]           [5.7738]          [0.0737]          [0.0907]          [0.0357]       [0.0737]       [0.1041]     [0.2033]      [0.0705]      [0.1148]
                                                 a               b                                     b              a                 a                 a                                a          a               a
German Legal Origin                     -0.3255           -0.2395           -0.2227          -12.9735            0.3417            0.5590            0.2058         0.0357         1.6322       1.0687        1.6322        -0.2718
                                        [0.0753]          [0.0967]         [0.3249]           [5.4856]          [0.0870]          [0.1226]          [0.0496]       [0.0877]       [0.1165]     [0.2227]      [0.1461]      [0.2264]
Scandinavian Legal Origin               -0.2935a          -0.2763a          -0.7540            0.7023            0.0062            -0.1003           0.3365a        0.0189         1.6322a      0.5668b       0.0694        0.1708
                                        [0.0605]          [0.0659]         [0.5658]           [5.5078]          [0.1179]          [0.1552]          [0.0529]       [0.0680]       [0.1358]     [0.2564]      [0.0501]      [0.1127]
Left Power                              -0.1518b           -0.0248          -0.3157            -2.7732           0.3668a           -0.1782           0.1212b        0.0787         1.6322a      0.1608        1.6322a       -0.2380
                                        [0.0727]          [0.0966]         [0.3662]           [7.9727]          [0.1127]          [0.1302]          [0.0598]       [0.1091]       [0.1454]     [0.2493]      [0.1259]      [0.2236]
Ln(GDP per capita)                       0.0665b          0.0596b           0.0752            20.7717a          -0.1333a          -0.2244a           0.0104        -0.1058a        -0.0058     -0.2133b       0.0051        -0.0397
                                        [0.0274]          [0.0284]         [0.1302]           [3.0620]          [0.0336]          [0.0417]          [0.0173]       [0.0330]       [0.0425]     [0.0813]      [0.0275]      [0.0537]
                                                                                                           a          a                 a                                   a                         a               a
Constant                                 0.1488            0.2419           1.9708           -127.0101           1.1137            3.7683            0.1487         1.6322         0.0687       1.6322        1.6322        1.6322a
                                        [0.2701]          [0.2802]         [1.2386]           [31.9668]         [0.2521]          [0.3815]          [0.1674]       [0.3470]       [0.3970]     [0.7284]      [0.2402]      [0.5728]
Observations                               68                49               85                  65                60                86               85              71            83            79            54            54
R-squared                                  0.5              0.45             0.17                0.64              0.49              0.62             0.45            0.23          0.49          0.51          0.35          0.4

                                                                                                           Panel C: Legal origin and union density
                                           (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)           (9)           (10)         (12)          (13)
                                                        Disclosure in                                      Govt Ownership                                                                       Judicial
                                    Anti-Self-Dealing                   Creditor Rights   Debt Enforcement                     Ln(Steps)         Labor laws     Media ownership    Draft                   Tenure Judges   Case Law
                                                         Prospectus                                            Banks                                                                           Formalism
French Legal Origin                     -0.3652a          -0.3417a         -1.1527a          -14.1876b           0.3340a           0.6856a           0.2306a        0.0527         0.6006a      1.5479a      -0.1952a      -0.5835a
                                        [0.0491]          [0.0558]         [0.3483]           [5.8526]          [0.0851]          [0.1018]          [0.0395]       [0.0751]       [0.1226]     [0.2280]      [0.0644]      [0.1220]
                                                 a               a                                     c              a                 a                 a                                a          a               a
German Legal Origin                     -0.3465           -0.2336           -0.4663           -9.8379            0.3237            0.5845            0.1891         0.0795         0.7490       1.1105       -0.4707        -0.2458
                                        [0.0720]          [0.0836]         [0.3824]           [5.3885]          [0.1069]          [0.1160]          [0.0473]       [0.0975]       [0.1311]     [0.2358]      [0.1511]      [0.2198]
                                                 a                                                                                                        a                                a          b
Scandinavian Legal Origin               -0.2261            -0.1017          -1.1557            6.7209            0.0200            -0.2346           0.3363         0.0438         0.8458       0.9283        0.0865        0.4935b
                                        [0.0813]          [0.1063]         [0.7030]           [7.2616]          [0.1813]          [0.1845]          [0.0633]       [0.0945]       [0.1745]     [0.3883]      [0.1882]      [0.2430]
Union Density                           -0.2786b          -0.3567c          0.3122            -13.8014           0.2637            0.1718            0.0751         0.0371         0.0579       -0.4384       -0.3235      -0.7425c
                                        [0.1100]          [0.1789]         [0.7056]           [9.9588]          [0.2666]          [0.2108]          [0.0888]       [0.1274]       [0.1993]     [0.5227]      [0.3683]      [0.3918]
Ln(GDP per capita)                       0.0926a           0.0810a          0.0877            25.2792a          -0.1830a          -0.2432a           -0.0107       -0.1139a        -0.0623     -0.3230a       0.0912c       0.0175
                                        [0.0272]          [0.0264]         [0.1528]           [3.3672]          [0.0420]          [0.0356]          [0.0208]       [0.0405]       [0.0547]     [0.0886]      [0.0527]      [0.0459]
                                                                                                           a          a                 a                 b                 b                         a
Constant                                 -0.0729           0.1247           1.7383           -170.3391           1.5766            3.8136            0.3932         1.0863         0.7448       5.6368        0.2690        0.9510b
                                        [0.2576]          [0.2366]         [1.3894]           [33.9071]         [0.3010]          [0.2857]          [0.1956]       [0.4153]       [0.4974]     [0.7204]      [0.4138]      [0.4098]
Observations                                64               49               70                  58                58                71                70             61            68            69           51             51
R-squared                                  0.56              0.5             0.19                0.69              0.41              0.66              0.4            0.19          0.41          0.51         0.33           0.41

a
    Significant at the 1% level.
b
    Significant at the 5% level.
c
    Significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                   Table VI: Legal origin in countries with autocratic governments

                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)       (9)            (10)         (12)          (13)
                              Anti-Self-     Disclosure in                         Debt         Govt Ownership                               Media                   Judicial
                                                             Creditor Rights                                     Ln(Steps)    Labor laws                Draft                    Tenure Judges   Case Law
                               Dealing        Prospectus                       Enforcement           Banks                                 ownership                Formalism
                                      a                a                 a                b               b               a            a           a            a            a              a             a
French Legal Origin           -0.3421          -0.3642          -1.1816         -14.3174            0.2822        0.4438        0.2040       0.3632     0.5135        1.5754       -0.2245       -0.5494
                              [0.0792]         [0.0858]         [0.2685]         [6.6720]          [0.1172]      [0.0925]      [0.0464]     [0.1157]   [0.1041]      [0.2511]      [0.0781]      [0.1481]
German Legal Origin            -0.2508         -0.1145c         -0.7960b          -3.4763          0.3852b        0.0936       0.1333b       0.2438    0.8059a       0.6624c       -0.7610a       -0.4503
                              [0.1487]         [0.0639]         [0.3729]         [7.9660]          [0.1514]      [0.1618]      [0.0559]     [0.1711]   [0.1045]      [0.3676]      [0.1834]      [0.3774]
Ln(GDP per capita)                 0.1074b      0.0907
                                                      b
                                                                 0.2571
                                                                         b
                                                                                21.8679
                                                                                        a
                                                                                                   -0.1259
                                                                                                          c
                                                                                                                 -0.1023
                                                                                                                          b
                                                                                                                                0.0011     -0.2153
                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                        0.0185        -0.1181       0.0116        0.0288
                                  [0.0445]     [0.0401]         [0.0989]        [4.3514]           [0.0657]      [0.0392]      [0.0257]    [0.0435]    [0.0522]      [0.1121]      [0.0371]      [0.0695]
                                                                                            a            a                a                       a                        a                a
Constant                           -0.2647      -0.0156          0.3189        -141.9287            1.2749        2.8843        0.3142      1.8839      0.0311        3.9626        0.9107        0.7015
                                  [0.3658]     [0.3398]         [0.8444]        [39.5086]          [0.4261]      [0.3254]      [0.2157]    [0.3860]    [0.3999]      [0.8497]      [0.2851]      [0.5060]
Observations                          37           26              78               39                 47            47           46           52         84             51            38           38
R-squared                            0.36         0.46            0.22             0.51               0.18          0.32         0.28         0.36       0.27           0.46          0.3          0.26

a
  Significant at the 1% level.
b
  Significant at the 5% level.
c
  Significant at the 10% level.
                         Table VII: Stock Market Capitalization over GDP (Rajan and Zingales)

Country              Legal Origin    1913     1929     1938      1950     1960     1970         1980    1990    1999
Australia            English          0.39      0.5     0.91      0.75     0.94     0.76         0.38    0.37    1.13
Canada               English          0.74              1.00      0.57     1.59     1.75         0.46    1.22    1.22
India                English          0.02     0.07     0.07      0.07     0.07     0.06         0.05    0.16    0.46
South Africa         English                                      0.68     0.91     1.97         1.23    1.33    1.20
United Kingdom       English         1.09      1.38     1.14      0.77     1.06     1.63         0.38    0.81    2.25
United States        English         0.39      0.75     0.56      0.33     0.61     0.66         0.46    0.54    1.52
Avg Common Law                       0.53      0.68     0.74      0.53     0.86     1.14         0.49    0.74    1.30

Argentina            French          0.17                                  0.05     0.03        0.11            0.15
Belgium              French          0.99      1.31                        0.32     0.23        0.09    0.31    0.82
Brazil               French          0.25                                                       0.05    0.08    0.45
Chile                French          0.17                                  0.12     0.00        0.34    0.50    1.05
Cuba                 French          2.19
Egypt, Arab Rep.     French          1.09                                  0.16                 0.01    0.06    0.29
France               French          0.78               0.19     0.08      0.28     0.16        0.09    0.24    1.17
Italy                French          0.17      0.23     0.26     0.07      0.42     0.14        0.07    0.13    0.68
Netherlands          French          0.56               0.74     0.25      0.67     0.42        0.19    0.50    2.03
Russian Federation   French          0.18                                                                       0.11
Spain                French                                                                     0.17    0.41    0.69
Avg French Law                       0.66      0.77     0.40     0.13      0.29     0.16        0.12    0.28    0.74

Austria              German          0.76                                           0.09        0.03    0.17    0.17
Germany              German          0.44      0.35     0.18     0.15      0.35     0.16        0.09     0.2    0.67
Japan                German          0.49      1.20     1.81     0.05      0.36     0.23        0.33    1.64    0.95
Switzerland          German          0.58                                           0.50        0.44    1.93    3.23
Avg German Law                       0.57      0.78     1.00     0.10      0.36     0.25        0.22    0.99    1.26

Denmark            Scandinavian      0.36      0.17     0.25     0.10      0.14     0.17        0.09    0.67    0.67
Norway             Scandinavian      0.16      0.22     0.18     0.21      0.26     0.23        0.54    0.23     0.7
Sweden             Scandinavian      0.47      0.41      0.3     0.18      0.24     0.14        0.11    0.39    1.77
Avg Scandinavian Law                 0.33      0.27     0.24     0.16      0.21     0.18        0.25    0.43    1.05
                                                           Table VIII: Stock market capitalization over GDP (Goldsmith 1985)
         (1)       (2)          (3)     (4)      (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)     (11)       (12)        (13)           (14)         (15)        (16)       (17)
                 French Legal Origin                  German Legal Origin               Scandinavian Legal Origin                                     English Legal Origin
Year   Belgium   France        Italy   Mexico   Japan     Germany     Switzerland   Denmark     Norway       Sweden    Australia   Canada   Great Britain     India        Israel   South Africa   USA
1805                                                                                                                                                                                                7
1815
1830                                                                                                                                             14
1850     69        12                                         6                                                                                                                                    23
1860                                                                                                                                                           1
1861                            11
1875     64                                                   17                                                                                               2
1880               38                                                     80          63           14                                                                                              54
1881                            7
1885                                              4
1895     58                     11                            26                                                                                156            3
1899                                                                                               26
1900                                             32                       82          74                                                                                                           71
1912                                                                                                                                                                                               95
1913     88        65                            41           37          123         88           40                                           121            5                        130
1914                            6
1927                                                                                                                                            154
1929     69        23           3                             29          137         126                                                                      9                        85         193
1930                                    25       75                                                46
1937                                                                                                                                            182
1938                            2                             17          149         66                                                                                                139
1939     33                                                                                        28                                                          14                                  105
1940                                    47       118
1947                                                                                                                      61
1948     32                             44                                107         39                                                        110
1950               25                                         13                                                                                               12                                  58
1951                            19                                                                                                                                          5.67
1953                                                                                               11
1955                                             24                                                                                  59                                                 113
1956                                                                                                                      47
1957                                                                                                                                             51
1960              111                   37                    31          137         37                                                                       14
1962                                                                                                                                                                        5.59
1963                            57                                                                             43
1965     24                             30       46                       116         33           9                      48         46          83                         6.30        108        124
1966
1969                                                                                                           33
1970                                             29                                                                                                            15
1972               63                                         27                                   7
1973     20                     28      25                                92          30                       26         44         36          65                                     85         83
1975                                                                                                                                                           12
1976     17        39                                                                                                                                                       0.5
1977                            10               39           24                                                          21                     76
1978                                    53                                102         27           5           21                    41                                                 37         57
