NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ROUTES OF INFECTION:
EXPORTS AND HIV INCIDENCE IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Emily Oster
Working Paper 13610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13610

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Ward Cates, Jane Fortson, Daniel Halperin, Norman Hearst, Emir Kamenica, Lawrence Katz, Michael
Kremer, Steven Levitt, Kevin Murphy, Ben Olken, James Poterba, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer,
Rebecca Thornton and participants in seminars at the University of Chicago, UCL and Northwestern
provided helpful comments. Dwyer Gunn provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Emily Oster. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Routes of Infection: Exports and HIV Incidence in Sub-Saharan Africa
Emily Oster
NBER Working Paper No. 13610
November 2007
JEL No. F13,I12,J1,O24
ABSTRACT
I generate new data on HIV incidence and prevalence in Africa based on inference from mortality
rates. I use these data to relate economic activity (specifically, exports) to new HIV infections in Africa
and argue there is a significant and large positive relationship between the two: a doubling of exports
leads to as much as a quadrupling in new HIV infections. This relationship is consistent with a model
of the epidemic in which truckers and other migrants have higher rates of risky behavior, and their
numbers increase in periods with greater exports. I present evidence suggesting that the relationship
between exports and HIV is causal and works, at least in part, through increased transit. The result
has important policy implications, suggesting (for example) that there is significant value in prevention
focused on these transit oriented groups. I apply this result to study the case of Uganda, and argue
that a decline in exports in the early 1990s in that country appears to explain between 30% and 60%
of the decline in HIV infections. This suggests that the success of the Ugandan anti-HIV education
campaign, which encouraged changes in sexual behavior, has been overstated.

Emily Oster
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
eoster@uchicago.edu

Routes of Infection: Exports and HIV Incidence in Sub-Saharan
Africa
Emily Oster∗
University of Chicago and NBER
First Draft: March 25, 2007
This Draft: November 7, 2007

Abstract
I generate new data on HIV incidence and prevalence in Africa based on inference from
mortality rates. I use these data to relate economic activity (specifically, exports) to new HIV
infections in Africa and argue there is a significant and large positive relationship between the
two: a doubling of exports leads to as much as a quadrupling in new HIV infections. This
relationship is consistent with a model of the epidemic in which truckers and other migrants have
higher rates of risky behavior, and their numbers increase in periods with greater exports. I
present evidence suggesting that the relationship between exports and HIV is causal and works,
at least in part, through increased transit. The result has important policy implications,
suggesting (for example) that there is significant value in prevention focused on these
transit-oriented groups. I apply this result to study the case of Uganda, and argue that a decline
in exports in the early 1990s in that country appears to explain between 30% and 60% of the
decline in HIV infections. This suggests that the success of the Ugandan anti-HIV education
campaign, which encouraged changes in sexual behavior, has been overstated.

1

Introduction

In 1347, a ship arrived from the Black Sea in the port of Marseille carrying a full cargo, a sick crew,
and the Bubonic Plague. Over the next several years, the plague spread throughout Europe, killing
as much as a third of the population. Although many aspects of life in that period favored the
plague, it was international trade that was the ultimate source of the epidemic. With no trade at all,
the outbreak of plague in China in the 1330s might well have been confined. More generally,
migration, travel and trade are major drivers of many historical epidemics (Wilson, 1995; McNeill,
1976).
Data on individuals suggests that similar forces may be at work in the case of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic in Sub-Saharan Africa. Trucker and migrants in Africa are more likely to be
∗

Ward Cates, Jane Fortson, Daniel Halperin, Norman Hearst, Emir Kamenica, Lawrence Katz, Michael Kremer,
Steven Levitt, Kevin Murphy, Ben Olken, James Poterba, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Rebecca Thornton and participants in seminars at the University of Chicago, UCL and Northwestern provided helpful comments. Dwyer Gunn
provided outstanding research assistance.

1

infected with HIV (Lurie et al, 2003; Brewer et al, 1998; Brockerhoff and Biddlecom, 1999; Arnafi et
al, 1997; Arnafi, 1993), and it has been argued (in India, as well as in Africa) that HIV spreads along
trucking routes (Klitsch, 1992; Steinbrook, 2007). Motivated by the historical evidence and this
individual-level connection, this paper explores whether variations in trade – specifically, in exports –
drive HIV infections in Africa, and whether this relationship is large enough in magnitude to be an
important driver of overall HIV prevalence there.
The major challenge to this estimation is poor data on HIV infection rates. Until the early
2000s, most HIV testing in Africa focused on pregnant women or high risk groups (drug users, STI
patients), meaning we know very little about the level of infection in the general population.1 More
problematic, perhaps, is the fact that testing of even these non-representative groups is inconsistent
(variations in the areas or populations tested over time), making the prevalence data very noisy and
difficult to compare across years. Noisy data on prevalence, in turn, makes it almost impossible to
infer anything reliable about the number of new infections each year (incidence), which is the
ultimate variable of interest.2
The paper therefore begins by generating new estimates of HIV prevalence and incidence
based on inference from mortality data. These new estimates match well to estimates from
population-based testing, to the extent that the latter are available, but provide significantly more
information about the path of the epidemic over time. I then use these data to estimate the
relationship between exports and new HIV infections (incidence). I find a large and significant
positive relationship between HIV and exports: a doubling of exports appears to lead to as much as
a quadrupling in number of new HIV infections, which suggests that if exports overall had been 25%
lower in Africa over the course of the epidemic only about half as many people would have become
infected. In addition, this relationship seems to explain at least some of the very large decline in HIV
prevalence in Uganda in the 1990s, which is typically attributed to an anti-HIV education campaign,
which encouraged partner reduction and ABC (Abstain, Be faithful and use Condoms) and has been
widely replicated. A decline in the coffee market accounts for between 30% and 60% of the decline in
HIV incidence, suggesting the success of this education campaign may be overstated.
The estimation of HIV prevalence and incidence proceeds in two steps: first, estimating
deaths from HIV in Africa; second, translating these deaths into prevalence sometime in the past (in
1

In the last few years, excellent data based on testing of a random sample of the population have come out from the
Demographic and Health Surveys (Halperin and Post, 2004). However, this does not address issues of lack of consistent
data over time.
2
Incidence is the share of the population who becomes infected in a given year (the flow). Prevalence is the share
that is infected in a given year (the stock).

2

general, this is similar to the methodology to this is suggested in Weinreb, 1999). The concept
behind the first step is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows death rates by age in Egypt in the 1990s
(unaffected by HIV) and Botswana in 2001 (affected by HIV). Although death rates are similar
among young children and older people (suggesting similar levels of overall development), the death
rates in Botswana among prime-age adults are much higher than in Egypt. Virtually no other
disease has this pattern over the life-cycle, so the gap in mortality between the two countries is likely
to be due almost entirely to HIV.3 The difference in death rates generates an estimate of the number
of deaths due to HIV in Botswana.4
Translating deaths into infections requires an assumption about time from infection to
death. In the simplest case, if everyone died ten years after infection, then infections ten years ago
would be equal to deaths this year. In fact, time to death varies, with a significant faction of
individuals dying at any time between 4 and 20 years after infection. With this structure, infections
and deaths are linked by a system of equations, which can be solved given information on time to
death from infection.
I estimate incidence and prevalence from the early 1980s to the late 1990s for nine countries
in Sub-Saharan Africa.5 I validate the new estimates of prevalence by comparing them to estimates
from population-based testing (from the Demographic and Health Surveys) in cases where the latter
are available. The match is quite close in magnitude. In addition, even within a country,
mortality-based prevalence by age and gender group is strongly correlated with population testing
for that group. Consistent with recent evidence from population testing (Halperin and Post, 2004;
ORC Macro, 2006), the estimates here suggest that UNAIDS estimates in the late 1990s were
overestimated by as much as a factor of two.
Turning to the motivating question of the relationship between HIV and exports, I first
show a simulation model of the epidemic that serves both to pin down the theory behind the
HIV-export connection and generates hypotheses about variations in this relationship. In the model,
a share of the male population travels in each period; these travelers have more sexual partners and
also encounter partners with higher prevalence, both of which will drive up their infection rates. In
3

Other authors, notably Feeney (2001) and Timeaus and Jasseh (2004) have used the existence of this gap to discuss
the effect of HIV on mortality patterns.
4
Clearly, the quality of estimate of number of deaths relies heavily on the quality of the mortality data in Africa.
Official data on mortality in Africa are not widely available, so I make use of sibling mortality histories from the
Demographic and Health Surveys to construct mortality over time. Sibling histories have been used by other authors
to calculate death rates for countries with limited official reporting (Bicego, 1997; Timaeus and Jasseh, 2004; Gakidou,
Hogan and Lopez, 2004; Stanton, Abderrahim and Hill, 2000). Generally, they are thought to be reliable and match well
to official statistics. In the data section I discuss this in more detail and perform my own validation checks.
5
In particular, I provide estimates for all countries for which mortality data is available.

3

addition, the wives of these travelers are more likely to have non-marital partners than the wives of
men who do not travel (all of these assumptions are motivated by micro-level data on behavior). In
between periods, the travelers return to their wives, and this further interaction also drives infection
rates. The model makes a number of predictions. First, when the share traveling increases, the
number of new infections also increases. Second, there is an interaction with existing prevalence
rates: the higher the prevalence, the stronger the relationship between infection and share traveling.
Finally, the model suggests that there should be a relationship between both male infection rates and
share of men traveling and between female infection rates and share of men traveling, but the latter
relationship should be smaller. The model focuses on the share of men traveling as driving the
variation; in this section I also provide empirical evidence that travel is greater in period of higher
exports, thus linking (indirectly) infection rates to exports.
I use the new measures of HIV to estimate the HIV-export relationship. Consistent with the
predictions of the model, I find a significant relationship between the two series, controlling for
country and year fixed effects, as well as country-specific trends. The magnitude suggests that
doubling exports leads to approximately a quadrupling of new infections. Put differently, the results
suggests that if exports were 25% lower in all years in the sample HIV prevalence would be only
about half as high. Consistent with the secondary predictions of the model, I also find that the
relationship between exports and new infections is stronger when the baseline infection rate is
higher, and the relationship is smaller in magnitude when we consider female infections, although
still positive and significant.
A central concern with interpretation is the possibility that it is not the export-transit
mechanism which drives the result but, rather, some omitted variable (for example, GDP) which
drives both exports and HIV. Although this is potentially consistent with the primary results, I
argue that there is evidence in favor of a causal interpretation of exports. First, the relationship
between HIV and exports is stronger in areas with a greater density of roads and areas closer to
major cities, which is consistent with the transit mechanism. Second, instrumenting for export
volume with world commodity prices also points to a positive and significant relationship. Third, the
relationship between exports and HIV is stronger in countries where the major export is more closely
linked to trucking. Finally, new HIV infections can be linked directly to truck imports, which
strongly points to an effect of transit.6
6

In a robustness section I also present evidence that various assumptions used to generate the data on HIV are not
driving the export results.

4

It is important to note in interpreting these results that I estimate the short-term effect of
changes in exports on HIV incidence, within a given country. This is distinct from an estimate of the
long-term effect of exports: in the long run, higher levels of economic activity are likely to translate
into economic growth. As individuals become richer the epidemic may get worse (if money buys sex),
or better (if richer people have more incentives to avoid HIV, or more information to do so (Oster,
2007)). Neither of these forces will be captured here. In addition, the estimate here is distinct from
estimates of what determines cross-country patterns in HIV. Africa has, on average, lower levels of
exports than much of the rest of the world, and higher HIV, and variations in HIV across countries
within Africa do not always line up with aggregate variations in exports. This clearly points to some
other factor – for example, circumcision or overall health – which drives HIV, and is not captured
here. Although the estimates here may point to an important role for exports in explaining within
country variations – they by no means explain all of the cross-country or cross-region variation.
The final section of the paper applies the intuition from the export-HIV connection to
understanding prevalence declines in Uganda in the 1990s. There was a large drop in HIV prevalence
in Uganda in the 1990s, which is unique among Sub-Saharan African countries; this drop is generally
credited to educational programs, which promoted partner reduction (“zero grazing”), and to
elements of ABC (Abstain, Be faithful and use Condoms) (Green, 2004; Green et al, 2006; Slutkin et
al, 2006). This anti-HIV education campaign was among the first successful HIV prevention
strategies, and this type of education campaign has become a central tenant of HIV prevention in
Africa, with extensions to Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi and elsewhere. Both UNAIDS and PEPFAR
have taken this as a major focus of their prevention approaches; in 2004, PEPFAR spent $100
million of their budget on ABC-related programs.
During this period in Uganda, however, there was also a very large decline in exports, due
primarily to a decline in world coffee prices. The timing of this decline lines up extremely closely with
the decline in HIV incidence, as can be seen in Figure 2. The magnitude of the relationship between
HIV and exports suggests that between 30% and 60% of the incidence decline in Uganda during this
period can be attributed to changes in economic activity, which in turn suggests that some of the
success of the education campaign has been overstated (although, of course, a large share of the
incidence decline may well be due to this education campaign, and that should not be discounted).
This result on Uganda has obvious, potentially important, policy implications. The
connection between exports and HIV in general also suggests specific avenues of HIV prevention. In
particular, the implication that truckers and other migrants are a very important driver of the
5

overall epidemic supports targeting prevention activities at that group (similar to the targeting done
of prostitutes in Thailand). In addition, if increases in economic activity make the HIV epidemic
worse, it suggests that aid groups aiming to increase growth should do so in collaboration with those
seeking to decrease HIV.
In addition to the export-HIV result, this paper also contributes new estimates of HIV
prevalence. Historically, those interested in the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa have
relied on prevalence estimates reported by UNAIDS. This is true in policy circles (PEPFAR and the
World Bank websites both link directly to UNAIDS data on the epidemic), media reports (articles in
the New York Times (Editorial Desk, 2005; Altman, 2006a; Altman, 2006b) and the LA Times
(Maugh, 2006)) and academic research (Kalemi-Ozan, 2006; Werker, Ahuja and Wendell, 2006;
Young, 2006). The reliability of these estimates has been called into question in recent years by new
population-based testing (ORC Macro, 2006) and, although population-based testing has expanded
our knowledge about the current state of the epidemic, consistent data on the past are virtually
impossible to glean from existing sources. These data are crucial, however, to much of the academic
work on the epidemic (Kalemi-Ozan, 2006; Werker, Ahuja and Wendell, 2006; Young, 2006; Forston,
2006), as well as to understanding trends over time. The prevalence estimates here provide an
alternative to relying on either inconsistent testing data or model-generated prevalence for analyses
requiring a time series of HIV prevalence.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the methodology for
estimating HIV prevalence, the data used and presents the results of the estimation. Section 3
discusses the simulation model of the epidemic and derives predictions; Section 4 estimates the
relationship between HIV incidence and export volume. Section 5 discusses the case study of
Uganda, and Section 6 concludes.

2

Estimating HIV Incidence and Prevalence

This section presents the methodology for estimating HIV incidence and prevalence in Subsection
2.1, and the data used in Subsection 2.2. Subsection 2.3 then presents the resulting prevalence
estimates, with a focus on validating these estimates by comparing to existing HIV testing data.

6

2.1

Methodology

The methodology used here begins with deaths from HIV in a given year. The output is incidence or
prevalence rate, sometime in the past. Section 2.2 below describes how deaths from HIV are
calculated; this section starts from the assumption that deaths are known. Denote the number of
deaths from HIV among age group i in year t as µi,t .
As discussed in the introduction, time to death from HIV is a central input to this problem.
Detailed data on time to death is difficult to generate, particularly in developing countries, since it
requires knowing (roughly) the time of infection. For this reason, the best available data is drawn
from developed countries, from time periods before HIV treatment was available, and I will use these
data. It is possible, of course, that time to death is different (in particular, perhaps faster) in Africa,
but there is no empirical evidence suggesting this is true. In the robustness section I will explore the
robustness of the export results to different assumptions about time to death.
Figure 3 shows a graph of time to death from infection, drawn from existing work, by age
group (Collaborative Group on AIDS Incubation and HIV Survival, 2000; Stover, 2003; Statistics
South Africa, 2004). This distribution shows a large mass at virtually all periods between 4 and 20
years after infection. Since 90% of deaths occur during this period, I will focus on those 17 years.7
The figure also demonstrates that time to death is longer for individuals who are infected at younger
ages. The analysis across age groups will incorporate these differences. One important note is that in
an era with HIV treatment, these paths of time to death are likely to be very different. However, in
the period covered by this data, in Africa, treatment levels were extremely low, implying that it
seems reasonable to use the time path for a situation of no treatment.
Assume that a share dα of infected people die α years after infection, where dα is known
(for example, taken from Figure 3) and, for the moment, that no one dies from anything else (this
assumption is relaxed below, and in generating the estimates). Denoting bi,t as the number of
infections among age i in year t, we can write the total HIV deaths among age group i in year t (µi,t )
as:
µi,t = d4 bi−4,t−4 + d5 bi−5,t−5 + ... + d20 bi−20,t−20

(1)

This is a single equation with seventeen unknowns, and it is therefore not identified. Adding another
year of data on mortality generates another equation (see below), but also another unknown
7

Extending the time frame to 1-20 years does not make much difference; however, since very early deaths are rare and
poorly measured, we begin at 4 years where the share of deaths is large enough to be more reliable. Similarly, truncating
the end at 17 years also makes no difference.

7

(bi−21,t−21 ).
µi,t = d4 bi−4,t−4 + d5 bi−5,t−5 + ... + d20 bi−20,t−20

(2)

µi−1,t−1 = d4 bi−5,t−5 + d5 bi−6,t−6 + ... + d20 bi−21,t−21

(3)

The system of equations will be identified only given data such that
µi−x,t−x = d4 bi−x−4,t−x−4

(4)

That is, we must observe a year in which the only deaths are from people infected four years ago.
Assuming that d4 is known, equation (5) will identify bi−x−4,t−x−4 and we can solve the system of
equations backwards to solve for the entire b vector.
There are two ways to fulfill the requirement detailed in equation (5). One is to get data
from far enough back in time that there were no infections more than four year ago. The other is to
get data far enough back in the life cycle that this holds (i.e. from age groups who are likely to have
had their sexual debut four or fewer years ago). Either procedure (I will focus on the first) will make
it possible to solve the system by backward induction.
The discussion above focuses on the case in which individuals infected with HIV die only
from HIV, which is a simplification. In reality, some of these individuals would have died anyway,
even without HIV infection. If the expected non-HIV death rates are known (as they will be from
the data used to calculate deaths from HIV, described in the data section below) then adjusting the
procedure to take this into account is relatively straightforward. Define the probability that an
individual would have died even without HIV m years after infection as qm . In the first year (when
all deaths from HIV are due to infections four years before), equation (4) becomes
µi−x,t−x = d4

3
Y

(1 − qi ) bi−x−4,t−x−4

(5)

i=1

This adjustment increases the estimate of HIV infections, since more initial infections are necessary
to map into a given number of deaths when we assume that some people who were infected died
before they were killed by HIV. In later years, when deaths depend on more than one year of infection
data, the adjustment follows the same principles (although with more elements of the qi vector).
Having solved for the b vector, calculating incidence and prevalence is straightforward.
Number of new infections (incidence) is the elements of the b vector. Incidence rate among age i in
year t is bi,t divided by the population of age i in year t. The calculation of prevalence relies on the b

8

vector and the vector of death rates by time from infection. If we denote ci the share of individuals
still alive i years after infection, then total infections among age i in year t (pi,t ) is
pi,t = bi,t + c1 bi−1,t−1 + c2 bi−2,t−2 + ... + c20 bi−20,t−20
Prevalence rate is generated by dividing pi,t by the population of age i in year t.
With noiseless data on mortality rates solving the system of equations for the b vector will
work perfectly. In practice, however, data on deaths will be noisy. This produces inappropriately
high volatility across years – intuitively, a small amount of noise is translated into very large
deviations between periods because of the very limited additional information in each of the
simultaneous equations.8
To avoid this issue, I approach the problem as a minimization with a smoothness
restriction, rather than strictly as a set of simultaneous equations. Denoting the matrix of death
probabilities (dα ) as Θ and the vector of death rates (µi,t ) as Λ, I solve the following minimization.
 !
n−1
X

bi−1 + bi+1 2
0
min (Λ − Θb) (Λ − Θb) + γ
bi −
(6)
b1 ...bn
2
i=2

Without the second part (the expression after γ), this is simply minimized by the solution to the
system of equations Λ = Θb. The second element imposes a cost on the function if any given
element of the b vector differs from the two surrounding values, which will smooth out the elements
of b; the degree of smoothness will depend on the size of γ. In the primary analysis, I use a γ value
of 0.05. In the section on exports I also explore whether the results are sensitive to higher or lower
values of γ (more or less smoothing).9

2.2

Data on HIV Deaths

The methodology described above requires data on deaths from HIV. Because of poor reporting,
there are no direct data in Africa on HIV deaths, so deaths from HIV will be calculated by
comparing total mortality to expected mortality (based on a non-HIV environment). That is, we will
rely on the intuition in Figure 1: because HIV deaths have a very unusual age pattern, if we observe
8

This issue is discussed in more detail, including a simple example, in Appendix A.
Related to the issue of smoothness is the possibility that the function may be minimized when some of the elements
of the b vector are negative. Since it is not possible for there to be negative HIV infections, I solve the minimization
subject to the constraint that all values of b1 ...bn are positive. Obviously, if the model was frequently suggesting negative
values for elements of the b vector, this might call into question the technique. In reality, this is extremely unusual, and
the unconstrained results are very similar to the constrained results. To the extent that there are differences, they seem
to arise only in early years of the epidemic, and the unconstrained results generally do not allow us to reject zero.
9

9

total deaths in an HIV-infected country and total deaths in a country with no HIV but a similar
level of development, we can subtract to estimate the number of deaths from HIV.
Total Mortality in HIV Affected Countries One possible source for total mortality is official
mortality statistics – for example, those reported in the United Nations Demographic Yearbook.
Unfortunately, there are no consistent official statistics for Sub-Saharan Africa. As an alternative, I
use information from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) sibling mortality histories to
calculate death rates. The DHS are household surveys run in a number of African countries
beginning in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The focus of the surveys is fertility behavior, maternal
and child health. A number of the surveys included “sibling history” modules in which women were
asked to list all of their siblings and give information about their gender, their date of birth and date
of death (if deceased). Using these reports, it is possible to construct mortality rates over time. For
example, if we are interested in the mortality rate of 25 year old men in the last year, we can use
these data to figure out how many living 25 year old male siblings the survey participants had one
year ago, and then observe how many have died in the last twelve months. Using the same
technique, the data can be extended into the past: the mortality rate of men aged 25 ten years ago is
constructed by counting the living 25-year-old siblings eleven years ago and then counting deaths
over the year after that.
Other researchers have used these data to construct mortality profiles in Africa and argued
that, on average, the sibling mortality history data matches relatively well with official data on
mortality (Bicego, 1997; Timaeus and Jasseh, 2004; Stanton, Abderrahim and Hill, 2000). However,
at least one paper has argued that relative to United Nations life tables, sibling histories
underestimate mortality (Gakidou, Hogan and Lopez, 2004), although it is possible this reflects
overstatement by the UN life tables.. In Appendix B I discuss in more detail the validity of this data
and provide evidence that – where we can compare directly (the Philippines and Zimbabwe) – the
sibling mortality histories line up very closely with official mortality data. Together with the support
from the existing work, this should provide confidence in the use of these data.
Expected Non-HIV Mortality The other important component of the calculation of HIV
deaths is expected mortality from non-HIV causes. I draw these comparison data on mortality from
the United Nations Demographic Yearbook Historical Supplement. I rank country-years from those
data based on their child mortality, and use the highest-mortality one-third as the comparison set. I
assume that adult mortality in the HIV-affected countries in the absence of HIV would be the same

10

as the adult mortality in this comparison set.10
This procedure effectively ignores country-specific non-HIV mortality causes, assuming
instead that all countries in the sample have similar non-HIV mortality. Of course, in reality we
would expect some differences in the non-HIV mortality rates across areas. This analysis relies on
the fact that, on average, total adult mortality in areas not affected by HIV seems to be very low.
For prime age adults, the expected death rate is generally between 2 and 4 in 1000, which is very
small compared to the estimated death rates in HIV-affected countries (as high as 20 in 1000 in some
country-years). This large differences means that small perturbations in the non-HIV mortality rate
are unlikely to make a large difference in the estimates.11
Web Appendix W.1 (available on the author’s website) shows the all of the mortality data –
actual and predicted mortality rates, as well as the excess deaths per 100,000 implied by these figures.
Existing Data on HIV Prevalence I compare the HIV rates estimated from the mortality
data to two sets of existing HIV prevalence estimates. The first are from UNAIDS. These are
reported yearly in the UNAIDS fact sheets and are estimates for adults aged 15-49. These estimates
rely on data from studies done in each country, as well as epidemiological models of the epidemic and
imputation. Exactly how this is done in each year is not obvious, although the reported prevalence
does rely heavily on estimates of HIV rates for women in ante-natal clinics.
The second type of data come from the DHS surveys themselves, and are based on testing
done in six of the nine countries in the most recent survey year. The testing is of the general
population (all survey respondents are asked to submit to a test), so the estimates should be much
more representative and comparable to the mortality-based estimates. The major drawback is that
the testing data represent prevalence from a slightly later period than the mortality data (an average
of 5 years later) so it is possible that the mortality-based prevalence rates will be somewhat lower. In
addition, although these data are clearly more representative than ante-natal clinic testing, they do
10

An alternative to using the United Nations data would be to use DHS sibling histories from the few countries
with sibling history data that are unaffected by HIV (only Brazil and the Philippines). Although this may have some
advantages, it has the disadvantage that the results could be driven by events in those two countries, which is not ideal.
The procedure here smoothes such idiosyncratic events over a much larger number of observations.
11
One thing that is could, in principle, make a large difference here is deaths from war. If the countries in the
sample were actively involved in major wars during this time period, this could skew the estimates of HIV rate up,
since some of the deaths of prime-age adults would, in fact, have happened in war. Empirically, however, in the
countries in this sample, during the sample period, the data suggests there are not many deaths from war (available at
http://users.erols.com/mwhite28/warstat3.htm). The one place where, early on, there would have been some conflictrelated deaths is Northern Uganda. To address this, I have generated data for Uganda excluding the Northern providence.
This does not change the results or conclusions, either on the export relationship or on the education campaign. Further,
war is likely to be a cause of excess deaths primarily for men; the relationships estimated later also hold for women, also
suggesting this is not a major issue in these data.

11

suffer from relatively high refusal rates (as high as 40% in some groups). This could bias the
estimates either upward or downward, depending on the source of the refusals. Despite this, the
potential comparability between the mortality-based estimates and the DHS is clearly higher than
between the former and the UNAIDS numbers.

2.3

Estimates of HIV Prevalence

Using the methodology and data described above, I generate estimates of HIV prevalence for nine
countries in Africa (Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Namibia, Uganda, Zambia and
Zimbabwe) beginning in the mid-1980s and going through the late 1990s or early 2000s (exact years
vary by country). The specific choice of countries is determined by data availability: I use all
countries for which there are DHS sibling histories, and therefore mortality data available, starting in
the 1990s. Table 1 shows all of the estimates of HIV prevalence generated, for individuals aged 16-35.
In general, the data generated seem to line up well with levels and trends observed in the
epidemic over time. The countries which are known to be high HIV in the sample (for example,
Zambia and Uganda) have higher prevalence estimates than those known to be low-prevalence (for
example, Burkina Faso and Mali). Most countries show increasing prevalence through the 1980s and
early 1990s, and then there is some flattening out, consistent with, for example, modeling of the
epidemic by UNAIDS. The data also show a large decline in prevalence in Uganda in the early 1990s,
which echoes what we see in consistent testing data from that country (i.e. as described in
DeWalque (2005)).
These broad observations provide support for the validity of the mortality-based procedure.
As a more formal test, I focus on comparing these mortality-based estimates to data from DHS
population testing. In particular, I look at the match between age-gender groups in the two samples.
This match will only be possible for six of the countries in the sample with DHS-based testing
(Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Kenya, Mali, Zambia and Zimbabwe). I generate estimates by five-year
age group (15-20, 20-25, 25-30, 30-35, 35-40 and 40-45) for men and women, and match these with
the appropriate estimate from the DHS. I generate data for the most recent three years available,
and take the average, to eliminate some of the noise. It is important to recall that the DHS
estimates therefore come from an average of 5 years later than the mortality-based estimates so they
may, on average, be higher.
The comparison of estimates is shown in Figure 4, which graphs the mortality-based
estimates against the DHS estimates and includes the 45 degree line. For a large share of the sample,
12

the mortality-based estimates lie very close to the 45 degree line. The primary exception comes at
very high HIV rates, where the DHS estimates are generally somewhat higher than those based on
mortality data. This may reflect growth in the epidemic over time (since the testing data are from
four years later), or it may reflect underestimates by the mortality data at these high levels (or, less
likely, overestimates by the DHS).
Even with the slight mismatching levels at the highest rates, the correlation between the
two series is extremely high. This can be seen statistically in Table 2, which shows a regression of
the mortality-based prevalence on DHS testing rates by group. Columns 1 and 2 include the whole
sample: Column 1 controls for age and gender fixed effects, and Column 2 includes country fixed
effects. In both cases, the relationship is positive and highly significant (t-statistic between 10 and
20). Columns 3 and 4 limit the sample to women and men, respectively, and also include age group
and country fixed effects. The significant coefficients in these latter columns suggest that the match
between the datasets is close enough that it can be identified off of differences in the age pattern of
the epidemic in different countries. From the perspective of the export analysis, this close link is
quite important. It suggests that the mortality-based estimates are accurately picking up even
relatively small variations in HIV prevalence, similar to what we will identify off of in the analysis of
the HIV-export relationship.12
A second check on the reliability of these data relies on a falsification test: what prevalence
does the data generate for a country with virtually no HIV? Similar sibling mortality data is
available for the DHS survey in the Philippines. Using the same mortality-based procedure, I
estimate an HIV prevalence of 0.1% among 15-25 year-olds and 0.4% among 25-35 year-olds in 1999
(neither is statistically distinguishable from zero), providing further support for this approach.
Mortality rates by year for the Philippines are also shown in Web Appendix W.1: the data suggest
that actual and predicted death rates are extremely close, with little or no apparent “excess” death.
The close match with the DHS and the falsification test above both support the validity of
these mortality-based estimates. However, there are at least two specific patterns in the data that do
not seem to match as well with existing evidence, which deserve mentioning. The first is that the
data suggest that prevalence increases a bit toward the end of the 1990s in Uganda. Observing
Figure 2, we can see this is driven by higher incidence levels between 1993 and 1995. Existing data
following antenatal clinics in Kampala and elsewhere (see, for example, Stoneburner and Low-Beer,
12
In the export analysis I will rely on the incidence data that generates this prevalence as the dependent variable.
Variations in prevalence are generated by variance in incidence, so matching the small prevalence variations provides
confidence in the incidence data.

13

2004) does not suggest an increase of this type at the end of the 1990s. This may, of course, reflect
errors in the data. It may also be the case that the patterns for women of childbearing age are
different than for the overall population. We see some evidence in support of this in Appendix
Figure 1, which graphs incidence for the overall population and for women of childbearing age.
Women in this group also have an increase toward the end of the 1990s, but it is of much smaller
magnitude (for example, compared to the late 1980s) than the overall population. It is possible,
therefore, that the differences simply reflect differences across populations.
A second issue is the estimates for Namibia, which are much lower than what we would
expect based on testing data. This pattern is more difficult to reconcile. Testing data in Namibia is
fairly limited, which may mean it is more selected, but this is largely speculation, and it is also
possible that this represents a situation in which mortality reporting does not accurately capture
deaths for some reason.13 Despite this issue, however, the bulk of the evidence in cases where we can
make a good comparison do point to a very strong relationship between the mortality-based
estimates and data from population testing.
Before moving on to exports, it is worth looking at the relationship between the HIV
prevalence generated by mortality data and the year-matched prevalence reported by UNAIDS. The
recent population testing data from the DHS has suggested that UNAIDS overestimates the
prevalence in the general population. I find a similar result comparing with the mortality data.
Figure 5 graphs the prevalence generated by mortality data alongside the estimates from UNAIDS.
The series are positively correlated, but the UNAIDS numbers seem to be twice or three times as
large as the mortality numbers. Interestingly, Uganda is a fairly close match in the two series. This
may be due to the fact that Uganda is one of the few areas with reliable population testing early on
in the epidemic; this may have allowed UNAIDS to report accurate overall prevalence.
The discussion above, in particular Figure 4 and Table 2, should provide confidence in these
mortality-based estimates of HIV rates. The remainder of the paper focuses on the relationship
between the measure of HIV incidence and exports.

3

Epidemic Model: Exports and HIV

This section outlines a simple model of the HIV epidemic which makes explicit how HIV and
economic activity may be linked. In addition to generating an overall connection between HIV and
13
In terms of the analysis of exports, any issue that is specific to Namibia will not affect the results, since Namibia is
excluded from the export analysis due to lack of good data on exports.

14

exports, the model also makes additional predictions about how this relationship should vary across
groups and initial conditions. The model builds off three observations. First, truck drivers and other
migrants (i.e. those who spend time living or traveling away from home) tend to have more sexual
partners than the average in the population (Lurie et al, 2003a; Brewer et al, 1998; Brockerhoff and
Biddlecom, 1999; Arnafi et al, 1997; Arnafi, 1993; Orubuloye, Caldwell and Caldwell, 1993). Second,
the sexual partnerships these people have away from home tend to be higher risk than those they
have at home, largely because their partners are more likely to be infected: for example, are more
likely to be bar girls or commercial sex workers (Orubuloye et al, 1993). Finally, the partners (for
the most part, wives) of those who travel may be more likely to have additional sexual partners
while their spouses are away (Lurie et al, 2003b).
These observations suggest that in times when there are more people traveling, there may
be more HIV infections; that link is formalized in the model here. I begin by describing the model
setup and then discussing the predictions. At the end of this section I provide evidence for the other
necessary link here – namely, a positive relationship between economic activity (exports) and the
share traveling away from home.
Model Setup
Sexual Behavior There are two types of individuals, men and women, all of whom are matched to
someone of the opposite sex in marriage. Men may travel (trucking, migrant work), but women do
not. Men are of two types: high-sex and low-sex, which captures their desire for non-marital
partners (all individuals partner with their spouse). Women are of only one type, but their sexual
behavior varies: if their spouse is home, they have s non-marital partners; if their spouse is traveling,
they have j > s sexual partners. Low-sex type men never travel, and always have s non-marital
partners.14 When high-sex type men travel, they have t non-marital partners, who will be drawn
from an outside population. When they are home, they would like to have j sexual partners, with
s < j ≤ t (more than the low-sex type, but less than when they travel, since they are also partnering
with their spouse), drawn from the home population. Since the sexual market must clear, however,
they may be restricted in their number of partners if there are not enough women with husbands
away to match with the high-sex men who are at home. In this case, only some share of the high-sex
14
The assumption that low-sex types never travel follows directly from an alternative (sensible) assumption that nonmarital sex is easier to obtain when you are not living at home. If this is true, then those for whom non-marital sex is
a larger perk will be willing to pay more (take a lower wage) for a job that allows them to travel. As long as the share
traveling is lower than the share in the high group, no one in the low group will ever travel.

15

men will have j partners, and the rest will have s < j.
In the calibration, I make assumptions about the values of s, j and t. Based on overall data
from the DHS surveys, which show relatively low rates of non-marital sexual behavior, I assume that
s = 0.10. For individuals in these surveys with at least one non-marital partner (which we will
assume are the high types), the average number of partners is 1.5, so I will assume j = 1.5. In
choosing a value of t, I drawn on work which indicates that t may be very high. For example, in a
sample of truck drivers from Nigeria the average number of partners in the last year is 12, and the
average current partnerships is 6.3 (Orubuloye et al, 1993). This leads me to consider values of t = 6;
sensitivity tests suggest that the results are similar with values of t anywhere between 1.5 and 10.
Timing Each period in the model has two sub-periods. In the first sub-period (sub-period
A), a share p of individuals are chosen to travel (all from the high-sex group). During this period,
these individuals have sex with partners outside of the model; those partners have an average HIV
prevalence of ĥ. Individuals who do not travel during this sub-period have sex with their spouse
(assuming their spouse is not traveling) and with either s or j non-marital partners (depending on
their type), chosen randomly from the population of those at home.15 At the end of this sub-period,
infection status is realized based on the sub-period behavior. In the second sub-period (sub-period
B), no individuals are traveling, and sex happens only with one’s spouse.
The timing of the model is intended to capture the idea that individuals who travel tend to
return home periodically, and have sex with their spouse. The second sub-period represents this
periodic return.
HIV Transmission The probability of HIV infection given x sexual partners, a transmission
rate of β and an HIV rate of h is equal to βhx.16 In the model, I assume that the HIV transmission
rate, β, varies based on the recency of infection, consistent with data on the epidemic. Wawer et al
(2005) find transmission rates within 10 weeks after infection are roughly 8 times higher than
transmission rates more than 10 weeks after infection. I assume a low transmission rate for mature
infection (per-partnership transmission rate of 0.01) and 8 times higher for new infections (0.08).
New infections are defined as occurring one sub-period before the current period. In other words, if
your spouse travels in sub-period 2A and becomes infected, you face a high transmission rate in
sub-period 2B. The HIV rate h among the general population is, of course, calculated based on the
15

Since j > s, on average people will be more likely to meet a high type for sex than a low type; this is captured in
the model.
16
In fact, the infection probability is (1 − (1 − βh)x ). However, as long as x is not too large – i.e. lower than 50 or so
– this will be a good approximation, and it simplifies the expression of the comparative statics.

16

observed infections in each period. I assume that the HIV rate among outside partners (ĥ) is equal
to 50%.
Traveling Calibration I randomly generate serially correlated values of p (the share
traveling) for 15 periods for 10 “countries”.17 I seed the model with an HIV rate of 0.005 by
assigning 0.5% of the individuals in the sample to be HIV positive before the first period. I then
simulate the model forward and generate data on expected HIV prevalence and number of new
infections in each period. Using these model-generated “data”, I mimic the regressions I will run
later with the actual data. Specifically, I regress the log of new infections on the log of number of
people traveling. As with the regressions later, I include period fixed effects, “country” fixed effects
and “country”-specific trends.18
Model Predictions
Figure 6 gives a sense of the data generated by the model. This figure graphs the number of
infections in each subperiod, for high-sex and low-sex (including women) groups, under the
assumption that travel is constant at 2% of men traveling, except in a single year where the share
jumps to 10%. The dynamics of the model can be seen clearly. In the sub-period in which travel is
elevated, infections are higher for the high sex type because a larger share of them are traveling.
Infections are also higher for the non-travelers, since women whose husbands are traveling have more
sexual partners; with more men traveling, the number of partnerships at home increases. In the
sub-period immediately following the higher travel times, when people have sex only with their
spouse, we also see elevated infection rates. This comes from the fact that individuals newly infected
in the last sub-period are more infectious, so there is an immediate effect of new infections.
Table 3 estimates this relationship statistically (by period, rather than by subperiod).
Column 1 estimates the baseline relationship: new infections this year regressed on number traveling
this year. The relationship is positive and strongly statistically significant, which is consistent with
the model setup, as well as with Figure 6. Columns 2 and 3 consider the issue of lags. Figure 6
shows strong evidence of lags across sub-periods; in fact, there are lags across complete periods as
well, as illustrated in Column 2, which includes both travel this year and last year as independent
variables. Column 3 regresses new infections on the average of travel this year and last year, which
17
I do this by randomly generating a beginning value of p in period 1, uniform over the interval from 0 to 20%. For
each year the increase or decrease is equal to 0.03 times a random draw from normal distribution with mean 0 and
standard deviation 1.
18
The use of logs is primarily to parallel the later analysis, in which this is necessary, since the levels of exports and
HIV are wildly different across countries, and log-ing both series normalizes them.

17

has a positive and significant effect, larger than the effect of either year alone. The regression in
Column 3 mimics the regressions that will be run later with the empirical data, which use the
average exports over a two year period as the independent variable to allow for lags.19
Column 4 of Table 3 includes an interaction between number traveling (in this case, the two
year moving average) and the HIV rate in the area. The results suggest another prediction of the
model: the effect of increases in the number traveling should increase with the overall HIV
prevalence. The interaction between HIV prevalence and number traveling is positive.20
Finally, Column 5 of Table 3 shows the relationship between traveling and HIV infections
just among those who do not travel. The relationship is still positive and significant, but slightly
smaller in magnitude than the relationship with overall infection rates (i.e. small compared to
Column 3). This suggests that for those not involved in migration (for example, women) the
relationship between infections and economic activity should still appear, and be positive, but may
be smaller.
Based on Table 3 there are a number of predictions about the data. If this model accurately
captures the world, we should expect to see a positive relationship between travel and HIV, positive
interaction with existing infection rates, and smaller (but still positive) effects for those who do not
travel or migrate. The regressions in the next section, of course, focus on exports rather than the
share traveling as the independent variable. The subsection below therefore discusses briefly the
evidence for a link between exports and travel.
Exports and Travel
Thus far, I have discussed specifically two types of travel – migration for work and truck driving. For
migration, data that would test for a connection between HIV and economic activity are very
limited. Certainly in specific cases (for example, mining in Zambia) we know that increases in the
demand for copper increase the demand for migrant labor to work in the mines. In agricultural areas
this link may be less strong, but there are little data to test it in any context.
In the case of trucking, however, it is possible to get a sense of how the volume of goods
trucked, or number of trucks directly, varies with exports. In the first case, the World Development
Indicators report data on export value and on the volume of goods trucked by country-year for a
19
When using actual data, the average also captures the fact that the timing of both measured exports and HIV
infections is likely to be imprecise.
20
The level effect of HIV is negative, although this is driven by the inclusion of country-year trends, which make it
difficult to interpret the level effect in this type of generated data where the correlation between level and time is very
high.

18

number of countries worldwide (although generally not those in the sample used here). Column 1 of
Table 4 shows the relationship between log export value and log volume of goods transported, with
controls for country and year fixed effects, plus country-specific trends. The coefficient is positive
and significant, with a magnitude of around one. This suggests that doubling exports approximately
doubles the volume of goods trucked, which is not surprising.
Within the sample of countries used here, we can look directly at the relationship between
volume of exports (from the data discussed below) and the weight of trucks and truck parts
imported (also from the data below). If more exports mean more demand for trucks, this will
translate into more demand for truck drivers. The relationship between log export volume and log
number of imported trucks is shown in Column 2 of Table 4. Here, the magnitude is around 0.70,
slightly smaller (although the point estimate is noisier) but still positive and significant.
In general, these results provide evidence in favor of the link between exports (economic
activity more generally) and trucking and, combined with the results in Table 3, a theoretical link
between exports and HIV.

4

HIV Incidence and Exports

This section begins by presenting the primary results in the paper, showing regressions of the
number of new HIV infections on exports. I then discuss the mechanism and identification and argue
that there is evidence that the relationship in the first subsection is being driven by the mechanism
described in Section 3. The third subsection briefly discusses the robustness of the results to
variations in the assumptions in Section 2 used to generate incidence.
The data on HIV used is described above. For exports, I rely on the NBER-United Nations
Trade Data (NBER data) from Feenstra et al (2004).21 I use several measures of exports. First, for
the period from 1980 onward I sum the value of all exports reported in the database. However, the
reporting of some exports is inconsistent over time, leading to concerns that this methodology
produces noisy exports measures. I therefore also generate two measures based on the major exports
only, beginning by identifying the major exports in each country based on these data. I aggregate
the export data for 1997, 1998 and 1999 by country. For each country, I then identified the top two
exports, by value (in nominal US dollars), over that three year period. I compared the value of these
exports to the total export value. For countries in which the top export represents at least 50% of
21

The data for Namibia are extremely limited, so it was necessary to leave this country out of the analysis.

19

the total export value (Burkina Faso, Malawi, Mali and Uganda) I focus only on this top export. For
the remaining countries I focus on both of the top two exports. In all cases this covers at least 50%
of the total value of exports from the country, and in most countries it is much higher than that. I
then use these same NBER data to calculate the trade value and volume beginning in 1983 (the first
year in which the volume data are available) for these top exports in each country.

4.1

Primary Results

Table 5 shows the baseline relationship between log of new HIV infections and the three measures of
exports used. As discussed, in all case the measure of exports is the log of the average of the current
and previous year’s exports, to capture the possibility of a lag in the relationship between exports
and HIV, as well as eliminate some of the noise in the timing.22 Column 1 shows the relationship
between HIV infections and the value of all exports reported in the NBER database; Columns 2 and
3 show the relationship with export value and volume of the most important exports, respectively,
from the NBER data. In all three columns there is a highly significant positive relationship between
exports and HIV. In terms of magnitude, the results suggest that doubling exports will lead to
around a quadrupling of new HIV infections.
Figure 7 shows these results graphically. For each country, the residual of new HIV
infections and export volume (after removing country and year fixed effects and country-specific
trends) are graphed over time. In most cases, the link between the two series is clear – for example,
in Burkina Faso we see (again, with the trends removed) both series increasing, then decreasing,
then increasing again.
Panels A and B of Table 6 turn to testing two of the other predictions based on the model.
Panel A replicates Table 5, but includes an interaction between the level of HIV prevalence and
export volume. As predicted by the model, the interaction between exports and baseline prevalence
is positive and significant: the effect of changes in exports is larger in years when the baseline rate of
HIV is higher. In Panel B, the dependent variable is infections for women only. The model suggested
that for individuals who did not travel, the effect of increases in exports should be positive, but
smaller. Indeed, the coefficients here are positive and significant, but smaller (on average) than those
seen in Table 5.
The relationship estimated here is quite large in magnitude and, hence, the effect of changes
22

Appendix Table 1 shows this regression with separate controls for this year’s exports and last years; in all three
cases, both are significant.

20

in exports overall on HIV may be big. Based on the coefficients in Table 5, I create a simple
counterfactual: if exports in all years in the sample were lower by 25%, what effect would that have
on HIV infections? Although the exact value depends on which measure of exports is used, on
average the counterfactual suggests that a 25% decline in exports would mean a reduction of roughly
60% in the number of new infections. This effect is somewhat larger than what we would expected
based on the model in Section 3. However, given that the model is fairly stylized, it is difficult to
draw strong conclusions about the expected magnitude of the relationships in the data. The
qualitative predictions are likely to be more portable.

4.2

Mechanisms and Identification

The results in Tables 5 point to a relationship between HIV infection and exports, and the evidence
in Table 6 is consistent with the secondary predictions of the model in Section 3. However, these
results may also be consistent with other mechanisms. For example, increases in overall income may
be correlated with increases in exports, but may also increase individual ability to purchase sex,
which could increase HIV. Alternatively, the introduction of a government that focuses on economic
growth and not on HIV prevention could, in principle, drive both of these effects. This subsection
focuses on linking the reduced form export-HIV connection more directly to the transit mechanism,
and (broadly) making the case for a causal effect of exports.23 I provide a number of pieces of
evidence in favor of an export mechanism – exploiting varitions across areas and across export types,
instrumenting for exports with commodity prices and looking directly for a link with trucking
specifically.
It is worth noting that GDP is perhaps the most obvious confound here. Given that, one
simple approach would be to control for GDP (for example, from the World Development Indicators)
in the regressions shown previously. It is worth noting that in at least one salient case – Uganda –
the overall economy was not doing well in the late 1980s, although exports were high (Figure 2), and
HIV seems to follow exports, not GDP. More generally, inserting GDP as a control into the previous
regressions makes almost no difference to the results (for example, the coefficient on export volume
in Table 5 moves from 2.79 to 2.96 with the same level of significance), and the control for GDP is
not significant (results not shown). This test is not, however, sufficient in general since official
measures of GDP are so flawed and inaccurate. So, while this simple test certainly does not support
23

It is worth noting first that the controls for country-specific trends in Table 5 rule out some alternative stories.
Specifically, any changes which will lead to gradual changes over time (like a new government) are not going to drive the
results.

21

a role for GDP rather than exports, it is difficult to conclude anything firm.
Variations Across Region: Road Traffic To the extent that the relationship described above
is a product, in part, of increases in road traffic, we would expect it to be stronger in areas where
changes in economic activity have a larger effect on the movement of people. This is likely to be
urban areas and areas with a greater density of roads. In the extreme, areas with no roads are
unlikely to be affected much by an increase in traffic. To test this hypothesis, I generated incidence
estimates over time for each region in the countries in the sample.24 I then explore how the
relationship between incidence and exports varies with roads and urbanization.25
Panel A of Table 7 shows the relationship between exports and HIV in regions that do, or
do not, contain the capital city. Columns 1 and 2 focus on the relationship between HIV and export
value, with Column 1 including regions that contain the capital and Column 2 other regions.
Columns 3 and 4 focus on the relationship between HIV and export volume, with Column 3
including regions with the capital and Column 4 the other regions. Although in the case of export
volume the coefficients are very similar, with export value the relationship is much larger in areas
that contain the capital.
Panel B of Table 7 looks at variation in the magnitude of the relationship based on road
density, only for areas outside of the capital region. Panel B mimics Panel A, splitting areas based
on whether they have the highest road density (Columns 1 and 3) or not (Columns 2 and 4). Here,
for both export value and volume, the relationship with HIV incidence is larger in areas with higher
road density. The data here are somewhat noisy, since regions tend to be relatively small and there
are only a limited number of deaths per region in a given year. Nevertheless, the direction of the
effects support an interpretation consistent with the mechanism described in Section 3.
Variations Across Export Type A second source of variation, this time across countries
rather than regions, is export type. Major exports vary across countries in this sample: to the extent
that the primary export is more or less dependent on trucking, we would expect the relationship
between HIV and exports to be more or less strong.
To identify which exports are linked to trucking, I rely on input-output matrices. The ideal
would be to have these matrices from the sample countries, or at least from Africa. With detailed
24

The procedure for this is the same as described above with one additional assumption. Respondents are asked only
about their own region of residence, not about their siblings. It is necessary, therefore, to assume that individuals live
in the same region as their siblings. Obviously this will not always be true, which may introduce noise into the data.
However, as long as there is correlation between sibling region of residence (which is presumably the case) then there is
some signal included here, making this analysis appropriate even if the results may be attenuated.
25
Data on road density comes from the ArcGIS database, which provides information on square miles of area and miles
of roads by region. Dividing these gives a crude measure of road density.

22

enough input-output data I could identify the contribution of trucking to each export category.
Input-output matrices from Africa are, however, limited, and those that are available do not
differentiate trucking from other transport (i.e. trains, air transport, pipelines), making it difficult to
use them for this purpose. Instead, I use input-output matrices from the United States and
calculate, for each export type, the percentage contribution of road trucking to total output.
Although, of course, using data from the United States is not ideal, the hope is that with broad
categories the patterns will be the same.26
Most of the countries in the sample export either agricultural products (coffee, tea, cotton)
or forestry products (logging). In the input-output matrices from the United States, trucking seems
to make similar contribution to all of these industries, so I combine these countries into one
“farming” category. Two of the sample countries, however, have different export types. Zambia
exports primarily mining products. In the input-output matrices from the United States, trucking
contributes a much larger share to mining than to farming. Cameroon, in contrast, exports primarily
oil, for which trucking is only a very small input. I therefore separate these countries out, and run
three regressions: HIV on exports for the sample minus Zambia and Cameroon, HIV on exports for
Zambia and HIV on exports for Cameroon; in each of the latter cases, I include a control for a linear
time trend.
These regressions are reported in Table 8. I limit to value and volume for major exports
since this hypothesis focuses on variations in those exports. In both cases (for value and volume) we
see the expected patterns. The relationship for the sample minus Zambia and Cameroon is similar to
what we see overall and is positive and significant. For Zambia, where the major export involves
significantly more trucking activity, the relationship is much larger in magnitude. For Cameroon,
where the major export does not involve much trucking, the relationship is actually negative, and we
can reject a sizable positive relationship. To some extent, we can see these differences in the graphs
in Figure 7. For Zambia, the sharp drop in exports accompanies the sharp drop in HIV infections
toward the end of the sample. In Cameroon, if anything the two series seem to move opposite from
one another.
It is important to note, of course, that at some level the results here simply suggest that
two countries differ from the rest, and this could be for reasons unrelated to the differences in export
type. Nevertheless, the results are at least supportive of the overall hypothesis that exports drive
26

An alterative way to explore the relative contribution of trucking is to look across countries at the correlation between
number of trucks imported and exports. This yields similar results.

23

trucking and trucking, in turn, drives HIV prevalence.
Instrument for Exports with Commodity Prices Moving away from variations across space,
an alternative way to identify whether we are truly observing a relationship with exports is to use an
instrument. I instrument for export volume with world commodity prices. Short run variations in
world commodity price will drive exports (this is especially true here since exports from the countries
in this sample tend to be raw commodities like coffee and tea), but are less likely to drive things like
GDP (except through exports) and should not affect governance or other internal variables in the
very short run. Using these prices as an instrument therefore allows me to uncover the causal effect
of exports. To preform the instrumental variable analysis, for each country, I generate a price
measure that is a weighted average of the world prices for each export, with the weights determined
by the share of the total exports accounted for by each commodity. Historical commodity prices are
drawn from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics database (year 1980-2001).
Column 1 of Table 9 shows the first stage regression of export volume (average of this year
and last year) on commodity price (average of last year, two years ago and three years ago, to allow
for lags). The coefficient is positive and highly significant. Note that since the dependent variable is
export volume, not value, this relationship is not mechanical. Column 2 of Table 9 shows the second
stage reduced form relationship, also positive and significant: increasing the average world prices of a
country’s major exports increases the number of new HIV infections. Column 3 shows the IV
coefficient, which is very large and also significant. This coefficient seems much too large, which may
well be due to a too-small magnitude in the first stage, driven by noise in the export and price data.
However, the positive and significant relationship, especially in the reduced form, provides significant
support for the role of exports and, by extension, the trucking/migration mechanism.
Truck Imports As a final mechanism test, I can test directly the link between HIV and
trucks imports. Table 4 finds a positive relationship between truck imports and export volume; the
same data on imports can be used to look directly at the relationship between HIV incidence and
number of trucks. Column 1 of Table 10 estimates the relationship between new HIV infections this
year and the log weight of of trucks and truck parts imported this year. The coefficient is positive
and significant, with a magnitude of around 0.62, which suggests that doubling the number of trucks
imported leads to about a 60% increase in the number of new HIV infections.
All Imports Although it is not necessarily a direct test of the mechanism, it is worth noting
that the mechanism described here may also suggest a relationship between imports (as opposed to
exports) and HIV. Since imports are transported around the country in the same way exports are, in
24

principle they should have a similar effect. There are at least two reasons, however, why we may
expect a weaker relationship with imports than with exports. First, since urban areas are richer,
imports will be disproportionably consumed in these central areas. Relative to exports, which
require movement from more remote areas of production (agricultural areas, mines) to denser areas,
imports are more likely to simply arrive in the denser areas and stay. The link to transport traffic is
therefore likely to be weaker (indeed, there is no significant relationship between import volume and
truck imports in these data). Second, the measure of imports over time is much noisier than the
measure of exports, since the exports of these areas focus largely on only a few easily tracked items,
but the imports cover a wide variety of goods.
With these caveats in mind, Columns 2 and 3 of Table 10 shows the relationship between
new HIV infections and imports, again focusing on the major imports for each country. The results
are smaller and statistically weaker than in Table 5, but they are both positive and significant at at
least the 10% level.
In sum, although it is difficult to prove that the mechanism described in Section 3 is
responsible for the overall relationship seen in Table 5, the results here provide significant support
for that mechanism, particularly over an alternative story that both exports and HIV are driven by
some third variable.

4.3

Robustness to Assumptions Generating Incidence

One important concern with all of the analyses above is that the relationship between HIV and
exports is being driven by the assumptions that generate incidence, rather than by the underlying
relationship. This section briefly considers the relationship between HIV and exports if we vary three
of the assumptions: the assumption about the degree of smoothing (γ in equation 5), the assumption
about time to death after infection, and the assumption about the level of non-HIV mortality.
The value of γ used in the main results is 0.05. I re-estimate the regressions if this is varied
either up or down (γ = 0.01 or γ = 0.5). Panel A of Table 11 shows the coefficients from regressions
of the form reported in Table 5, with either of these alternative assumptions. The coefficients remain
significant and of similar magnitudes, even with these large changes in the smoothing parameter.
To address the issue of time to death, I generate incidence based on two alterative paths of
time to death. One of the alternative paths assumes a faster time to death: the faster time path
assumes that everyone has the time to death profile of the oldest age group. The other alternative
path models time to death as flatter but with similar speed: 8% of people die every year between 5
25

and 14 years after infection, rather than the more peaked shape observed in Figure 3 (both
alternative paths are illustrated in Appendix Figure 2). Panel B of Table 11 shows the coefficients on
exports in regressions using each of these alternative assumptions. Although the coefficients differ a
bit across specifications, they are all in a similar range, positive and significant. Of course, while
these results in Panel B suggest that the HIV-export connection is robust to small changes in
assumptions about time to death, they are unlikely to be robust to large changes in these time paths.
For example, the results are likely to be quite different if we assume that all deaths happen in years
9 and 10. The conclusions here rest on the claim that, broadly, the time path assumed is a
reasonable one.
Finally, Panel C of Table 11 explores whether the coefficients vary if we change the assumed
level of non-HIV mortality. In particular, I consider what happens if we assume no non-HIV
mortality (i.e. all observed deaths are due to HIV) and if we assume that non-HIV mortality is 25%
higher than in the baseline specification. Again, as in Panels A and B, the results are very similar
with these changes.
Overall, the results in Table 11 indicate that while the exact magnitude of the relationship
between HIV and exports is obviously affected by the assumptions about generating incidence, the
general conclusions of this section are generally robust to changes in any of these three elements of
the estimation.

5

Application: Prevalence Declines in Uganda

The previous section provides evidence that, at the macro level, new HIV infections and economic
activity are linked. This section considers whether that link may be at least partially responsible for
one of the more striking patterns in HIV prevalence in Africa over the 1990s.
HIV prevalence declined sharply in Uganda in the early 1990s, a decline unique among
Sub-Saharan African countries (this can be seen in Table 1, as well as in existing data). This decline
is generally attributed to anti-HIV educational efforts, including those by the Uganda National AIDS
Program (NACP) and the ABC campaign, both of which encouraged changes in sexual behavior,
including partner reduction, “zero-grazing”, abstinence and condom use (Green, 2004; Green et al,
2006; Slutkin et al, 2006).27 Among the more important components of the educational efforts were
27

Although there is a fair amount of agreement on the success of education in general in Uganda (although see Gray
et al, 2006), there is less agreement on the relative success of the partner reduction elements, versus ABC specifically,
and within the ABC on the various merits of A versus B versus C; for a summary and citations on this controversy, see
Green et al, 2006.

26

in-school education, communication with faith-based organizations and billboards and other forms of
public advertising (for a good summary of the specific aspects of ABC, see Green, 2004; Slutkin et
al, 2006 provide a summary of non-ABC partner reduction efforts, for example, NACP). Recent work
has argued that changes in concurrency as a result of this program were important in the decline in
HIV (Epstein, 2007).
Uganda was among the first countries to address the epidemic head on and the subsequent
decline in prevalence was seen as a signal of the success of the behavioral education approach.
Subsequently, a number of other countries adopted this type of prevention strategy (Kenya,
Tanzania, Rwanda, Malawi and others). Outside aid groups have pursued similar interventions.
PEPFAR, in particular, has adopted this campaign as a major part of their anti-HIV strategy:
roughly one hundred million dollars of their funding was spent on ABC programs in 2004.
However, in the early 1990s Uganda also saw a major decline in exports. This was likely
due in large part to a decline in coffee prices and production.28 Figure 2 demonstrates that the
decline in export value lines up extremely closely with the changes in incidence in Uganda,
mimicking both the decline in the early 1990s and the increase afterwards; in Figure 7, we can see
also that the decline in export volume lines up closely with this decline (in other words, volume of
exports also fell when prices did).29
Given the relationship estimated in Section 5, the decline in export volume in Uganda
during this period suggests that HIV incidence would have declined somewhat even without any
education campaign. Using the coefficients from Table 5, it is possible to evaluate the expected
magnitude of the decline between the 1980s and early 1990s due solely to changes in exports. The
methodology for this calculation is straightforward. Based on the regressions behind Table 5, I
predict the expected new HIV infections in the late 1980s in Uganda and in the early 1990s.
Subtracting these two predicted values generates the predicted decline based on exports; by
comparing this to the actual decline, we can calculate what share would be expected based on
changes in exports alone.
The results are shown in Table 12. The share explained depends on the choice of export
measure, and the range is between 30% and 60%. It is worth noting that the changes in exports over
time also match with the apparent increase in incidence in the 1993-1995 period, which is seen in
28

There was also a significant decrease in airport usage over this period, after Uganda Airlines shut down. Between
1985 and 1991, the number of flights out of Enteebe fell from 717 to 205.
29
This change in exports did not reflect a collapse of the Ugandan economy in general. It was driven by a world coffee
price shock, which was caused by factors outside of Uganda, and decreased exports.

27

Figure 2, and perhaps reflected in other literature suggesting an increase in prevalence toward the
end of the decade (Shafer et al, 2006). This increase is harder to explain with the education
campaign, which continued at similar levels (if anything, is likely to have increased) during this
period (although others have argued that this is due to less preventative behavior after prevalence
declines).
It is important to note, of course, that the decline in exports certainly does not explain all
of the decline in prevalence in Uganda in the 1990s; there is clearly still a role for changes in the
choices of sexual behavior. Further, in some sense the decline due to exports comes from the same
underlying source as the decline due to an education campaign: a drop in sexual behavior. The
crucial distinction between the two, however, is that the success of an education campaign lies in
changing individual (unconstrained) choice of non-marital partners, whereas the “success” of a
decline in exports lies in changing individual opportunities for such relationships.
This result may have important implications for overall HIV policy in Africa. If this
education campaign was half as successful as previously thought there may well be other polices
which overtake it in terms of cost-effectiveness. In particular, policies that seek to change viral
transmission rates (for example, male circumcision) may appear much more attractive in light of
these findings. Funding for HIV in Africa is, unfortunately, too limited to make all types of
interventions feasible simultaneously. Understanding the relative cost-effectiveness of various inputs
is therefore crucial to formulating optimal policy.

6

Conclusion

This paper addresses the connection between HIV and economic activity, arguing that increases in
economic activity actually significantly increase HIV incidence. This result – particularly the
magnitude – may have important implications for HIV prevention. Interventions that target those
involved in trucking, or those more generally targeted at migrants, may have an even larger effect
than previously expected. Further, HIV is only one focus of development aid to Africa. Significant
amounts of aid are also spent trying to increase trade. Policies like the African Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA) are designed specifically to encourage exports of African textiles, and
smaller efforts, like those made by Fair Trade, also aim to increase trade and contact with the west.
The results here suggest that, while those policies may well improve trade, they may actually make
the HIV epidemic worse. Combining other prevention efforts (male circumcision, for example) with

28

trade policies may ameliorate some of these interaction concerns. It is, of course, worth noting that in
the long run increases in economic growth are likely to help the HIV epidemic, both because people
who are richer have more incentive to avoid the virus (Oster, 2007) and because health care improves
with economic growth, and with that improvement will come changes in the ability of these countries
to deal with the virus. It is in the more short run that the negative interactions are most salient.
Outside of the specific analysis of HIV and economic activity, this paper provides a new set
of estimates of HIV prevalence and incidence that could be used to analyze the connection between
HIV and other outcomes – for example, fertility or human capital attainment. Existing papers on
these topics (Kalemi-Ozcan, 2006; Young, 2006; Forston, 2006) generally rely on somewhat flawed
data from testing of pregnant women over time or on model-generated estimates of prevalence. The
estimates here are likely to be superior to either – they have the consistency of model-generated
data, but are based on actual data in the population rather than assumptions about epidemic
growth over time.

29

References
Altman, Lawrence, “AIDS Is on the Rise Worldwide, U.N. Finds,” The New York Times, 2006,
November 22, 2006.
, “Report Shows 2005 to Be ’Least Bad Year’ of AIDS Epidemic,” The New York Times, 2006,
May 31, 2006.
Anarfi, John, Ernest Appiaha, and Kofi Awusabo-Asareb, “Livelihood and the risk of
HIV/AIDS infection in Ghana: the case of female itinerant traders,” Health Transition Review,
1997, 7-S.
Arnafi, John, “Sexuality, migration and AIDS in Ghana-A socio-behavioral study,” Health
Transition Review, 1993, 4, 273–295.
Bicego, George, “Estimating adult mortality rates in the context of the AIDS epidemic in
sub-Saharan Africa: analysis of DHS sibling histories,” Health Transition Review, 1997, 7.
Brewer, Toye, Julia Hasbun, Caroline Ryan, Stephen Hawes, Samuel Martinez et al.,
“Migration, ethnicity and environment: HIV risk factors for women on the sugar cane
plantations of the Dominican Republic,” AIDS, 1998, 12, 1879–1887.
Brockerhoff, Martin and Ann Biddlecom, “Migration, Sexual Behavior and the Risk of HIV in
Kenya,” International Migration Review, 1999, 33 (4), 833–856.
Collaborative Group on AIDS Incubation and HIV Survival, “Time from HIV-1
seroconversion to AIDS and death before widespread use of highly-active antiretroviral therapy:
a collaborative re-analysis,” The Lancet, 2000, 355, 1131–1137.
DeWalque, Damien, “How Does the Impact of an HIV/AIDS Information Campaign Vary With
Educational Attainment: Evidence from Rural Uganda,” 2005. Mimeo, World Bank.
Editorial Desk, “The State of AIDS,” The New York Times, 2005, December 1, 2005.
Epstein, Helen, The Invisible Cure, New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2007.
Feeney, Griffith, “The Impact of HIV/AIDS on Adult Mortality in Zimbabwe,” Population and
Development Review, 2001, 27 (4), 771–780.
Feenstra, Robert, Robert Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson Ma, and Hengyong Mo, “World
Trade Flows: 1962-2000,” NBER Working Paper no. 11040, 2004.
Forston, Jane, “Mortality Risks and Human Capital Investment: The Impact of HIV/AIDS in
Sub-Saharan Africa,” 2006. Mimeo, Princeton University.
Gakidou, Emmanuela and Gary King, “Death by Survey: Estimating Adult Mortality without
Selection Bias from Sibling Survival Data,” Demography, 2006, 43 (3), 569–585.
, Margaret Hogan, and Alan D Lopez, “Adult mortality: time for a reappraisal,”
International Journal of Epidemiology, 2004, 33, 1–8.
Gray, Ron, David Serwadda, Godfrey Kigozi, Fred Nalugoda, and Maria Wawer,
“Ugandas HIV Prevention Success: The Role of Sexual Behavior Change and the National
Response. Commentary on Green et al. (2006),” AIDS and Behavior, 2006, 10 (4), 347–350.
30

Green, Edward, Rethinking AIDS Prevention: Learning from Successes in Developing Countries,
Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 2004.
, Daniel Halperin, Vinand Nantulya, and Janice Hogle, “Ugandas HIV Prevention
Success: The Role of Sexual Behavior Change and the National Response,” AIDS and Behavior,
2006, 10 (4), 335–346.
Halperin, Daniel and Glenn Post, “Global HIV Prevalence: The Good News Might be Even
Better,” Lancet, 2004, 364 (9439), 1035–1036.
Kalemi-Ozcan, Sebnam, ““AIDS, Reversal of the Demographic Transition and Economic
Development: Evidence from Africa”,” NBER Working Paper, No. 12181, 2006.
Klitsch, M, “Rural Ugandan Women’s HIV Infection Rates Seem Related to Truck Routes,”
International Family Planning Perspectives, 1992, 18 (2), 79.
Lurie, Mark, Brian Williams, Khangelani Zuma, David Mkaya-Mwamburi, Geoff
Garnett, Michael Sweat, Joel Gittelsohn, and Salim Abdool Karim, “Who Infects
Whom? HIV-1 Concordance and Discordance Among Migrant and Non-Migrant Couples in
South Africa,” AIDS, 2003a, 17 (15), 2245–2252.
Lurie, MN, BG Williams, K Zuma, D Mkaya-Mwamburi et al., “The Impact of Migration
on HIV-1 Transmission in South Africa: A Study of Migrant and Nonmigrant Men and Their
Partners,” Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 2003b, 30 (2), 139–156.
Maugh, Thomas, “AIDS Growth Slowing Worldwide, U.N. Finds,” The Los Angeles Times, 2006,
May 31, 2006.
McNeill, William, Plagues and Peoples, Garden City, NY: Anchor Press, 1976.
Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch, “Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 1990, 8 (2), 202–229.
ORC Macro, “HIV Notes from Measure DHS,” Technical Report, USAID 2006.
Orubuloye, I.O., Pat Caldwell, and John Caldwell, “The Role of High-Risk Occupations in
the Spread of AIDS: Truck Drivers and Itinerant Market Women in Nigeria,” International
Family Planning Perspectives, 1993, 19 (2), 43–48.
Oster, Emily, “HIV and Behavior Change: Why Not Africa?,” 2007. Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Shafer, L.A., S. Biraro, A. Kamali, H. Grosskurth, W. Kirungi, E. Madraa, and
A. Opio, “HIV prevalence and incidence are no longer falling in Uganda a case for renewed
prevention efforts: evidence from a rural population cohort 1989-2005, and from ANC
surveillance,” Abstract at XVI International AIDS Conference, 2006.
Slutkin, Gary, Sam Okware, Warren Naamara, Don Sutherland, Donna Flanagan,
Michel Carael, Erik Blas, Paul Delay, and Daniel Tarantola, “How Uganda Reversed
Its HIV Epidemic,” AIDS and Behavior, 2006, 10 (4), 351–361.
Stanton, Cynthia, Noureddine Abderrahim, and Kenneth Hill, “An Assessment of DHS
Maternal Mortality Indicators,” Studies in Family Planning, 2000, 31 (2), 111–123.

31

Statistics South Africa, “Mid-year population estimates, South Africa,” Technical Report,
Statistics South Africa 2004.
Steinbrook, Robert, “HIV In India – A Complex Epidemic,” New England Journal of Medicine,
2007, 356 (11), 1089–1093.
Stoneburner, Rand and Daniel Low-Beer, “Population-Level HIV Declines and Behavioral
Risk Avoidance in Uganda,” Science, April 2004, 304, 714–718.
Stover, James, “AIM version 4. A computer program for HIV/AIDS projections and examining the
social and economic impacts of AIDS,” Spectrum system of Policy Models. The Futures Group
International., 2003.
Timeaus, Ian and Momodou Jasseh, “Adult Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from
the Demographic and Health Surveys,” Demography, 2004, 41 (4), 757–772.
Trussell, James and German Rodriguez, “A Note on the Sisterhood Estimator of Maternal
Mortality,” Studies in Family Planning, 1990, 21 (6), 344–346.
UNAIDS, AIDS Epidemic Update: Special Report on HIV/AIDS: December, 2006, UNAIDS and
WHO, 2006.
United Nations, Demographic Yearbook, United Nations, 2001.
Wawer, Maria, Ronald Gray, Nelson Sewankambo et al., “Rates of HIV-1 Transmission per
Coital Act, by Stage of HIV-1 Infection, in Rakai, Uganda,” Journal of Infectious Diseases,
2005, 191, 1403–1409.
Weinreb, Alex, “Estimating HIV+ Incidence from Mortality Rates: A Method and Agenda,” 1999.
Presentation, Durbin South Africa.
Werker, Eric, Amrita Ahuja, and Brian Wendell., “Male Circumcision and AIDS: The
Macroeconomic Impact of a Health Crisis,” 2006. Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Wilson, Mary, “Travel and the Emergence of Infectious Disease,” Emerging Infectious Diseases,
1995, 1 (2), 39–46.
Young, Alwyn, “In Sorrow to Bring Forth Children: Fertility amidst the Plague of HIV,” 2006.
Mimeo, University of Chicago.

32

Figure 1:
Death Rates by Age, Botswana in 2001 and Egypt, 1990s
40

35

30

Deaths Per 1000

25

20

Botswana
Egypt

15

Excess HIV Mortality

10

5

0
0-1

1-4

5-9

10-14

15-19

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

50-54

55-59

60-64

Age Group
Notes: Death rates are from the United Nations Demographic Yearbook, 2002 edition and Historical Supplement. The Botswana data is for 2001, and the Egypt data is an average for
the 1990s. Death rates are deaths (all individals, both genders) per 1000 people in the age group. Botswana is affected by HIV; Egypt is largely not in this period.

700000

140000

600000

120000

500000

100000

400000

80000

300000

60000

200000

40000

100000

20000

0

# New Infections

Export Value

Figure 2:
HIV Incidence and Export Value in Uganda

Export Value
HIV Incidence

0
Time (1983-1997)

Notes: This figure shows export value for Uganda and HIV incidence for Uganda, as calculated using the mortality-based methodology in this paper for 1983 through
1997. Export value comes from the NBER trade database (sourced from Comtrade, described in Feenstra et al, 2004).

33

Figure 3:
Distribution of Time from HIV Infection to Death
1.00

0.90

0.80

Cumulative Prob. of Death

0.70

0.60
Ages 15-19
Ages 25-29
Ages 35-39

0.50

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Years from Infection
Notes: Figure presents the cumulative probability of death as a function of years from infection with HIV, by age group. The figure is based on data from Collaborative Group on AIDS
Incubation and HIV Survival, 2000.

Figure 4:
Mortality-Based Estimates and DHS Testing Estimates by Country-Gender-Age Group
40%

35%

HIV Rate, Mortality-Based Estimate

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

HIV Rate, DHS Estimate
Notes: This figure shows HIV prevalence estimated by the mortality data for each country-gender-age group (5-year age groups) for the most recent year in the sample
graphed against the DHS estimated prevalence from an average of five years later (average of three years of mortliaty estimates). Countries include: Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Kenya, Mali, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

34

Figure 5:
HIV Rates Estimated From Mortality Data Versus UNAIDS Estiamtes
40%

35%

30%

HIV Rate

25%
Mortality-Based
Estimate

20%
UNAIDS (Year
Matched)

15%

10%

5%

0%
Burkina Faso Cameroon
(1999)
(2000)

Kenya
(1999)

Malawi
(2000)

Mali (1997)

Namibia
(1996)

Uganda
(1997)

Zambia
(1997)

Zimbabwe
(2001)

Notes: Solid bars are the estimated HIV rates for the general population (adults aged 16-35) based on mortality data. The black stripped bars are the HIV rates in the
same years as reported by UNAIDS. Standard errors are provided around the mortality estimates,

Figure 6:
HIV Infections over Time, Model-Generated Data
4500

250
Low Sex Type,
Sub-period A

One-Period Increase in
Travel at this Time

4000

High Sex Type,
Sub-period A
200

3000
150
2500

2000
100
1500

1000

Low Sex Type,
Sub-period B

New Infections, Sub-Period B

New Infections, Sub-Period A

3500

High Sex Type,
Sub-period B

50

500

0

0
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

27

29

31

33

35

37

Sub-Period

Notes: This graph illustrates the output of the model, graphed over time. Sub-Period A takes place in the odd-numbered periods; Sub-period B in the even numbered
ones. Travel takes place during sub-period A; in sub-period B everyone has sex with their spouse. The model assumes that 2% of men travel in all periods other than
period 17, when 10% travel. 50% of men are high sex types; everyone else (the other 50% of men and all women) are low-sex types.

35

Figure 7:
HIV Infections and Exports, by Country
Export Value, residuals

New HIV
Infections, residuals

Cameroon

Burkina Faso
1.5

0.6

1

0.5

1.5

0.15

0.1
1
0.4
0.5

0.05

0.1
-1
0

0.5

0
0
-0.05

# New Infections

Export Value (Millions)

0.2
-0.5

# New Infections

Export Value (Millions)

0.3
0

-0.5

-1.5

-0.1

-0.1

-2
-0.2

-1
-0.15

-2.5

-0.3

-1.5
-3

-0.2

-0.4

Time (1980-1994)

Time (1980-1994)

Kenya
1.5

Malawi
0.2

2

0.15

0.1

1.5

0.15
1

0.05
1

0

-0.5

0
0.5
-0.05
0
-0.1
-0.5
-0.15

-0.05
-1
-0.2
-1
-0.1

-1.5

-0.15

-1.5

-0.25

-2

-0.3

Time (1980-1994)

Time (1980-1994)

36

# New Infections

0

Export Value (Millions)

0.05

# New Infections

Export Value (Millions)

0.1
0.5

Mali

Uganda

1.5

0.15

3

0.3

2
1

0.1

0.2
1

0.5

0.1

0.05

-0.5

-0.05

-1

-0.1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13
0

-1

-2

-0.1

-3
-0.2

# New Infections, Residuals

0

Export Volume, Residuals

0

# New Infections

Export Value (Millions)

0

-4
-0.3
-5

-1.5

-0.15
-0.4
-6

-2

-0.2

-7

-0.5

Time (1980-1994)

Time (1980-1997)

Zambia
3

Zimbabwe
0.15

1.5

0.35

0.3
0.1

2
1
0.25

0.05

0.1
-1
0.05

0

-2

0.5
0

0

-0.05

# New Infections

0.15
0

Export Value (Millions)

0.2

# New Infections

Export Value (Millions)

1

-0.1
-0.5

-0.15
-0.05
-3

-1
-0.1

-4

-0.2

-0.15

Time (1980-1994)

-1.5

-0.25

Time (1980-1994)

Notes: This figure shows the time path of exports and new HIV infections, by country, for each country in the sample. Both
series have country fixed effects, year fixed effects and country-specific trends removed.

37

Table 1. Estimated HIV Rates over Time

Country
Year HIV Rate
Burkina Faso 1987
0.75%
Burkina Faso 1989
1.02%
Burkina Faso 1991
2.58%
Burkina Faso 1993
2.39%
Burkina Faso 1995
1.77%
Burkina Faso 1997
1.38%
Burkina Faso 1999
1.08%
Cameroon
1986
0.00%
Cameroon
1988
0.09%
Cameroon
1990
0.24%
Cameroon
1992
1.27%
Cameroon
1994
2.99%
Cameroon
1996
4.05%
Cameroon
1998
4.41%
Cameroon
2000
2.93%
Kenya
1985
0.23%
Kenya
1987
0.08%
Kenya
1989
0.11%
Kenya
1991
1.82%
Kenya
1993
2.04%
Kenya
1995
2.21%
Kenya
1997
4.29%
Kenya
1999
3.23%
Malawi
1986
4.02%
Malawi
1988
6.24%
Malawi
1990
5.62%
Malawi
1992
8.53%
Malawi
1994
12.23%
Malawi
1996
10.78%
Malawi
1998
8.30%
Malawi
2000
5.59%
Mali
1987
0.80%
Mali
1989
0.94%
Mali
1991
0.61%
Mali
1993
0.58%
Mali
1995
1.22%
Mali
1997
1.43%
Namibia
1986
4.17%
Namibia
1988
1.83%
Namibia
1990
1.24%
Namibia
1992
0.89%
Namibia
1994
2.46%
Namibia
1996
4.25%
continued on the next page

5% Lower
0.31%
0.43%
1.53%
1.46%
1.18%
0.94%
0.70%
0.00%
0.00%
0.02%
0.33%
1.80%
2.76%
3.02%
2.35%
0.00%
0.00%
0.03%
0.80%
1.19%
1.50%
2.67%
2.44%
2.94%
4.95%
5.03%
7.71%
10.99%
9.74%
7.43%
5.01%
0.37%
0.42%
0.31%
0.27%
0.74%
0.84%
2.86%
1.16%
0.82%
0.54%
1.65%
3.23%

38

95% Upper
1.61%
1.84%
3.53%
3.34%
2.42%
1.92%
1.45%
0.29%
0.33%
0.94%
2.25%
4.38%
5.28%
5.11%
3.48%
0.53%
0.19%
0.69%
3.02%
3.05%
2.87%
6.40%
3.91%
5.08%
7.61%
6.21%
9.37%
13.49%
11.89%
9.17%
6.21%
1.44%
1.47%
1.02%
1.18%
1.83%
2.03%
5.50%
2.59%
1.78%
1.26%
3.35%
5.22%

Country
Year HIV Rate 5% Lower
95% Upper
Uganda
1985
5.29%
4.19%
6.41%
Uganda
1987
10.16%
8.75%
11.60%
Uganda
1989
10.08%
8.82%
11.35%
Uganda
1991
15.31%
13.89%
16.72%
Uganda
1993
8.37%
7.35%
9.34%
Uganda
1995
7.02%
6.03%
7.98%
Uganda
1997
11.69%
10.39%
13.06%
Zambia
1985
1.74%
0.97%
2.47%
Zambia
1987
6.29%
5.16%
7.47%
Zambia
1989
12.71%
11.21%
14.09%
Zambia
1991
14.79%
10.76%
20.31%
Zambia
1993
9.95%
8.82%
11.05%
Zambia
1995
12.76%
11.15%
14.14%
Zambia
1997
11.47%
10.29%
12.59%
Zimbabwe
1985
0.04%
0.00%
0.29%
Zimbabwe
1987
0.69%
0.00%
1.65%
Zimbabwe
1989
2.71%
1.67%
4.09%
Zimbabwe
1991
3.84%
2.68%
5.33%
Zimbabwe
1993
6.60%
4.91%
8.40%
Zimbabwe
1995
8.64%
7.01%
10.23%
Zimbabwe
1997
10.05%
8.26%
11.94%
Zimbabwe
1999
13.98%
9.90%
15.62%
Zimbabwe
2001
8.49%
7.53%
9.23%
Notes: These are estimates of HIV rates in the nine sample countries over
time. The rates are estimated for 16-35 year old individuals of both genders.
Column 3 is the average, Column 4 is the bootstrapped fifth percentile and
Column 5 is the bootstrapped ninety-fifth percentile.

39

Table 2. Mortality-Based Estimates and DHS Population Testing
Dependent Variable: Mortality-Based Prevalence Estimate, by Group
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All
All
Women
Men
Explanatory
Variables:
DHS Testing Estimate
.7111∗∗∗
.5972∗∗∗
.5372∗∗∗
.6562∗∗∗
(.069)
(.027)
(.043)
(.022)
Age Group 20-25
.0158
.0194
.0173
.0238∗
(.011)
(.012)
(.015)
(.012)
Age Group 25-30
−.009
.0002
−.0084
.0114
(.013)
(.01)
(.016)
(.013)
∗∗
Age Group 30-35
−.0167
−.0044
−.0172
.009
(.01)
(.013)
(.015)
(.006)
.0077
−.0057
−.0196∗∗
Age Group 35-40
−.0178∗
(.008)
(.011)
(.01)
(.005)
Age Group 40-45
−.0238
−.014
−.0206
−.0098
(.013)
(.009)
(.014)
(.007)
Female
−.0056
−.0024
(.004)
(.003)
∗∗∗
constant
.022
.023∗∗∗
.034∗∗∗
.01
(.006)
(.005)
(.006)
(.009)
Country FE
NO
YES
YES
YES
Number of Observations
72
72
36
36
R2
.88
.93
.94
.95
standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: This table shows the relationship between the mortality-based estimates of HIV
prevalence and the DHS testing data. An observation is an age group-gender (age groups
15-20, 20-25, 25-30, 30-35, 35-40).

40

Table 3. HIV and Travel: Model-Generated Data
Dependent Variable: Log Number of New HIV Infections
All
All
All
All
Low Sex Types Only
Explanatory
Variables:
Log # Traveling
Log # Traveling Last
Year

.3691∗∗∗
(.017)

.3739∗∗∗
(.016)
.0685∗∗∗
(.018)
.5205∗∗∗
(.027)

Two Year Average #
Traveling

.4001∗∗∗
(.027)

.3504∗∗∗
(.036)

2.8524∗∗∗
(.558)

Average # Travel ×
HIV Prev.

−36.8914∗∗∗
(6.585)
YES
YES
YES
174
.99

HIV Prevalence

“Country” FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
“Year” FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Country-Year Trend
YES
YES
YES
YES
Number of Obs.
179
174
174
174
R2
.98
.98
.99
.95
a standard errors in parentheses
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: This table shows regressions run using “data” generated by the model, described in Section 3.
Columns 1-4 include all infections, Column 5 only infections among low-sex types in the model. The
two year average is the log of the average of number traveling this year and last year.

41

Table 4. Exports and Road Traffic
Dependent Variable

Explanatory
Variables:
Log Export Value (WDI)

Log Weight of Goods Trucked
Non-Sample, WDI Data
(1)

Log Weight of Trucks and Parts Imported
Sample, NBER Import Data
(2)

1.0813∗∗∗
(.244)
0.6670∗∗∗
(.185)
YES
YES
YES
136
.82

Log Export Volume (NBER)

Country FE
YES
Year FE
YES
Country-Year Trend
YES
Number of Observations
543
2
R
.86
standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regression
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: Column 1 shows the relationship between the weight of goods transported by truck and export
value within countries over time. The data is drawn from the World Development Indicators and
covers a wide range of countries, outside of the HIV sample here. Column 2 shows the relationship
between log weight of trucks imported and exports within the sample of countries used here. The data
on truck imports comes from the NBER trade database (Feenstra, 2004), as does the data on export
volume. Both columns include country fixed effects, year fixed effects and country-specific trends.

42

Table 5. HIV Incidence and Exports
Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections
(1)
Explanatory
Variables:
Log Export Value, all Exports (Average of year t, t-1)
Log Export Value, Major Export(s)(Average of year t, t-1)
Log Export Volume, Major Export(s) (Average of year t, t-1)

(2)

(3)

2.6046∗∗∗
(.53)
2.0199∗∗∗
(.452)
2.5984∗∗∗
(.773)
YES
YES
YES
117
.72

Country FE
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
Country-Specific Trends
YES
YES
Number of Observations
117
117
R2
.77
.76
standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regression
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: This table estimates the relationship between log new HIV infections, generated by the
mortality-data model, and export value of all exports reported in the NBER-United Nations Trade
Database (Column 1), export value for major exports from the same database (Column 2) and export
volume for major exports from that database (Column 3). In all cases, the measure of exports is the
log of the average of this year and last year’s exports.

43

Table 6. HIV Incidence and Exports: Interactions and Female Infections
Panel A: All Infections, Interactions
Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections
(1)
(2)

(3)

Explanatory Variables:
4.7394∗∗∗
(.651)
.6192∗∗∗
(.178)

Log Export Value, all Exports (2 year MA)
Log Export Value × HIV Rate
Log Export Value, Major Export(s) (2 year MA)
Log Export Value × HIV Rate

4.2548∗∗∗
(.586)
.5612∗∗∗
(.143)

Log Export Volume, Major Export(s) (2 year MA)
Log Export Volume × HIV Rate
−9.1615∗∗∗
−8.195∗∗∗
(2.362)
(1.815)
Country FE
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
Country-Specific Trends
YES
YES
Number of Observations
115
113
R2
.88
.88
Panel B: Female Infections
Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections for Women
Explanatory Variables:
1.3344∗∗∗
Log Export Value, all Exports (2 year MA)
(.434)
1.8351∗∗∗
Log Export Value, Major Export(s) (2 year MA)
(.344)
HIV Rate

Log Export Volume, Major Export(s) (2 year MA)

4.3877∗∗∗
(.987)
.4494∗∗
(.18)
−6.4597∗∗∗
(2.298)
YES
YES
YES
113
.79

2.5902∗∗∗
(.421)
YES
YES
YES
117
.83

Country FE
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
Country-Specific Trends
YES
YES
Number of Observations
117
117
R2
.80
.85
standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regression
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: This table estimates the relationship between log new HIV infections, generated by the
mortality-data model, and export value of all exports reported in the NBER-United Nations Trade
Database (Column 1), export value for major exports from the same database (Column 2) and export
volume for major exports from that database (Column 3). In all cases, the measure of exports is the
log of the average of this year and last year’s exports. Panel A covers all infections, Panel B only
female infections.

44

Table 7. HIV Incidence and Exports, by Region Characteristics
Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Distance from Capital
Capital
Not Capital
Capital

(4)
Not Capital

Explanatory Variables:
Log Exp. Value, (Major Exports)

2.5476∗∗∗
(.616)

.9891∗∗∗
(.204)

1.5742
1.2685∗∗∗
Log Exp. Volume, (Major Ex(1.092)
(.296)
ports)
Region FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Country-Specific Trends
YES
YES
YES
YES
Number of Obs.
117
608
117
608
R2
.56
.71
.49
.70
Panel B: Road Density (Outside of Capital)
Highest Density Lower Density Highest Density Lower Density
Explanatory
Variables:
.7235∗∗∗
2.1376∗∗∗
Log Exp. Value, (Major Ex(.214)
(.514)
ports)
2.1635∗∗
1.138∗∗∗
Log Exp. Volume, (Major Ex(.869)
(.302)
ports)
Region FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Country-Specific Trends
YES
YES
YES
YES
Number of Obs.
117
449
117
449
R2
.68
.75
.63
.75
Standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regressions.
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: This table estimates the relationship between log new HIV infections by region within countries,
generated by the mortality-data model, and export volume. Panel A splits the sample by distance
to the capital city (regions that contain the capital are in Columns 1 and 3; regions that do not are
Columns 2 and 4). Panel B splits the sample outside of the capital city by road density. Columns 1
and 3 contain the regions with the highest density, Columns 2 and 4 the other regions. Exports are
the average of this year and last year.

45

Table 8. HIV and Exports by Export Type
Major Export
Explanatory
Variables:
Log Export Value,
Major Export(s)

Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections
Farming
Mining
Oil
Farming

2.0797∗∗∗
(.481)

6.6496∗∗
(2.765)

Mining

Oil

−1.3876
(1.69)

2.2366∗∗∗
10.7661∗∗∗
−8.8008∗∗
Log Export Volume,
(.84)
(3.051)
(3.206)
Major Export(s)
Country FE
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
Year FE
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
Country-Specific
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Trends
Number of Obs.
88
13
16
88
13
16
R2
.74
.65
.26
.66
.71
.51
a Standard errors in parentheses
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: This table estimates the relationship between log new HIV infections and exports for countries
with differing exports. Zambia is the country with mining as a major export; Cameroon is the country
with oil. All countries other than Zambia and Cameroon are in Column 1. Farming includes logging
(forestry).

46

Table 9. Exports and HIV: Instrumenting with Prices

Dependent Variable
Explanatory
Variables:
Log Commodity Price

First Stage
Log Export Volume
(1)

Reduced Form 2nd Stage
IV Estimates
Log New HIV Infections
(2)
(3)

.3367∗∗∗
(.108)

2.163∗∗∗
(.852)

7.651∗∗∗
Log Export Volume,
(2.553)
Major Export(s)
Country FE
YES
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
Country-Year Trend
YES
YES
YES
Number of Observa128
117
117
tions
.65
.59
R2
.99
standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regression (IV with Newey-West)
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: Column 1 shows the first stage relationship between export volume (average of year t and year
t − 1) and commodity price (average of year t − 1, t − 2 and t − 3). Column 2 shows the second stage
reduced form relationship between new HIV infections (year t) and price; Column 3 shows the full IV
regression.

47

Table 10. HIV and Truck Imports, All Imports
HIV and Truck Imports
HIV and All Imports
Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections
(1)
(2)
(3)
Explanatory
Variables:
Log Weight Trucks Imported

.5343∗∗
(.259)
1.195∗
(.694)

Log Imp. Value, Major Imports

.713∗∗
(.296)
YES
YES
YES
117
.64

Log Imp. Volume, Major Imports

Country FE
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
Country-Year Trend
YES
YES
Number of Observations
125
117
2
R
.63
.64
standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regression
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: Column 1 relates new HIV infections directly to truck imports, as reported in the NBER trade
database. Columns 2 - 3 relate new infections to value and volume of major imports reported in the
NBER. All total import measures are the average of the current year and previous year, as with the
export measures.

48

Table 11. Effect of Exports on Incidence, Alternative Assumptions
Panel A: Change in Smoothing
Value, All Value, Major
Volume, Major
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
1.711
2.327
2.672∗∗∗
Less Smooth (γ = 0.01)
(.5333)
(.4606)
(.7989)
1.247∗∗∗
1.633∗∗∗
2.372∗∗∗
More Smooth (γ = 0.5
(.4691)
(.4029)
(.6446)
Panel B: Alternative Time to Death
Export Measure
Value, All Value, Major
Volume, Major
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
1.928
2.562
3.842∗∗∗
Faster, Same Shape
(.6244)
(.5353)
(.9131)
1.549∗∗∗
2.476∗∗∗
3.142∗∗∗
Flatter, Same Time
(.5292)
(.4111)
(.7466)
Panel C: Alternative Assumptions about Non-HIV Mortality
Export Measure
Value, All Value, Major
Volume, Major
∗∗∗
∗∗
1.524
1.051
1.678∗∗
No Non-HIV Mortality
(.4793)
(.4783)
(.7628)
1.826∗∗∗
2.150∗∗∗
2.720∗∗∗
Non-HIV Mortality Increased
(.5126)
(.4565)
(.7931)
by 25%
Notes: This table replicates Table 5 using alternative data on HIV incidence, generated
based on different assumptions about smoothing, time to death from infection or non-HIV
mortality. The assumptions about time to death can be seen visually in Appendix Figure
2.
Export Measure

49

Table 12. Explaining the Ugandan Incidence Decline
Pred. Decline in HIV
Late 1980s (87-89) to
Early 1990s (91-93)

Actual Decline in HIV
Late 1980s (87-89) to
Early 1990s (91-93)

% Expl. by Exports

Explaining All Infections (Log HIV)
Export Value
All Exports

1.631

3.192

51%

Export Value
Major Exports

1.931

3.192

60%

Export Volume
Major Exports

1.040

3.192

33%

Notes: This table shows the share of the Ugandan incidence decline that can be accounted
for by changes in export volume or value. The predicted decline is based on the regressions
in Table 5. % Explained is simply predicted divided by actual decline.

50

Appendix Figures and Tables
Appendix Figure 1:
HIV Incidence in Uganda, Two Groups
140000

70000

120000

60000

100000

50000

80000

40000

60000

30000

40000

20000

20000

10000

0

# New Infections, Women

# New Infections, All

HIV Incidence, All
Women, Childbearing Age

0
Time (1983-1997)

Notes: This figure shows HIV incidence for Uganda, as calculated using the mortality-based methodology in this paper for 1983 through 1997 for the entire poulation,
and women of child-bearing age.

Appendix Figure 2
Time to Death from AIDS, Alternative Assumptions
0.12

0.10

Probability of Death

0.08

Baseline
Flatter
Faster

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Years from Infection
Notes: Figure shows the PDF of time to death from HIV, under the baseline assumption, the assumption of flatter time path to death and the assumption of faster time to death

51

Appendix Table 1: HIV Incidence and Exports, current and lagged
Dependent Variable: Log New HIV Infections
(1)
(2)
Explanatory
Variables:
Log Value, All Exports, Current Year
Log Value, All Exports, Last Year

(3)

1.0253∗∗
(.479)
1.562∗∗∗
(.486)
1.0398∗∗∗
(.372)
1.0161∗∗∗
(.383)

Log Value, Major Exports, Current Year
Log Value, Major Exports, Last Year

1.1578∗∗
(.527)
1.4555∗∗∗
(.527)
YES
YES
YES
117
.68

Log Volume, Major Exports, Current Year
Log Volume, Major Exports, Last Year

Country FE
YES
YES
Year FE
YES
YES
Country-Specific Trends
YES
YES
Number of Observations
117
117
R2
.73
.72
standard errors in parentheses, Prais-Winston regression
∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%
Notes: Notes: This table estimates the relationship between log new HIV infections, generated by the
mortality-data model, and export value of all exports reported in the NBER-United Nations Trade
Database (Column 1), export value for major exports from the same database (Column 2) and export
volume for major exports from that database (Column 3).

52

Appendix A: Details of Smoothing in Estimation
This appendix provides more details on why, when estimating prevalence, it is necessary to impose a
smoothing restriction.
Recall that we begin with the concept of solving a system of equations, as below (for simplicity, this
appendix notation abstracts away from deaths from non-HIV causes):
µi,t

=

d4 bi−4,t−4 + d5 bi−5,t−5 + ... + d20 bi−20,t−20

(7)

µi−1,t−1

=

d4 bi−5,t−5 + d5 bi−6,t−6 + ... + d20 bi−21,t−21

(8)

...

(9)

µi−x,t−x = d4 bi−x−4,t−x−4

(10)

With noiseless data on mortality rates solving the system of equations for the b vector will work
perfectly. However, noisy data on mortality will produce inappropriately high volatility in predicted infection
rates. To see why, consider a simple example: a world with just two years of infections and two years of data
on mortality.
µi,t

=

d4 bi−4,t−4 + d5 bi−5,t−5

µi−1,t−1

=

d4 bi−5,t−5

Assume that the actual values in the b vector are bi−4,t−4 = bi−5,t−5 = ψ and that d4 = d5 = 0.1. If we
observed the exact mortality, we would see µi,t = 0.2ψ and µi−1,t−1 = 0.1ψ and would conclude that
bi−4,t−4 = bi−5,t−5 = ψ. If the mortality rates are observed with noise, however, we could see µi,t = 0.2ψ + ε
and µi−1,t−1 = 0.1ψ + η. Solving the system of equations will yield
bi−5,t−5
bi−4,t−4

η
.1
ε−η
= ψ+
.1

=

ψ+

If we assume that ψ = 0.011, η = 0.002, and ε = −0.002, then instead of estimating that
bi−4,t−4 = bi−5,t−5 = 0.011, we will estimate that bi−5,t−5 = 0.031 and bi−4,t−4 = −0.029. Intuitively, a small
amount of noise is translated into very large deviations between periods because of the very limited additional
information in each of the simultaneous equations. The smoothing restriction will address this issue. By
penalizing the maximization when any year is far from the two years surrounding it, this does not allow the
system to diverge wildly across years (this is similar to an approach in Murphy and Welch, 1990).

Appendix B: Details on the Reliability of Sibling Mortality Histories
This appendix provides some additional defense of the use of sibling mortality histories by providing direct
evidence on the comparison between these sibling histories and official mortality statistics, in a few cases
where both are available. I also outline the theoretical issues associated with this type of data.
In general, there are two primary concerns with using sibling mortality histories. The first is a
simple concern about underreporting, since individuals may forget siblings who have died or may not know
that their siblings have died. In addition, even with perfect reporting sibling mortality data have the potential
for either upward or downward bias. Sibling reports may overstate the overall death rate since they do not
take into account the reporters themselves, who are alive. They may understate the overall death rate since
families with low mortality profiles will be misrepresented, and families in which all siblings are dead will not
be observed at all (Gadikou and King, 2006). Remarkably, Trussell and Rodriguez (1990) prove that with a
random sample of the population if mortality is uncorrelated with sibship size these factors will cancel out and
the report is unbiased. Although the assumption about independence sibship size is probably unrealistic when
considering individual mortality in childhood, in terms of thinking about adult mortality from HIV it may be
more appropriate (indeed, in the samples here we do not see a strong correlation).
Rather than relying simply on the result in Trussell and Rodriguez (1990), however, I provide some
direct evidence on the match between sibling mortality histories and official death data, using data from two

53

countries in which I have both sources: the Philippines and Zimbabwe. For the Philippines, I match death
rates from sibling mortality histories collected by the DHS to official death rates reported in the United
Nations Demographic Yearbook. The data come from 1980, 1983, 1984, 1986 and 1988-1991, and I generate
mortality rates for each year by ten year age groups (15-25, 25-35 and 35-45) and gender. The data are shown
in Figure B.1, along with the 45 degree line. On average, the death rates from sibling histories are very close
to the official rates. A regression of the sibling history death rate on the official death rate for women yields a
coefficient of 1.07 (standard error of 0.07) and, for men, a coefficient of 0.94 (standard error of 0.06). In
neither case are these statistically distinguishable from a coefficient of one.
For Zimbabwe, data based on DHS sibling histories are compared with registration data from Feeney
(2001), for 1982, 1986, 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1995 (although these are official registration data, it is worth
noting that in no year do they cover more than 60% of the population). Figure B.2 replicates Figure B.1.
Again, the match between the two datasets is quite strong. For women, the coefficient on the relationship is
1.02, not distinguishable from 1. For men, the coefficient is slightly smaller (at 0.81). This could reflect larger
problems with under-reporting when women are asked about their brother, although the absolute magnitude
of the errors is still very small. In general, Figures 4 and 5 show strong evidence (although for a limited set of
countries) that sibling histories generate accurate mortality rates, similar to what we would see if we had access
to official death registration data. This is true even in Zimbabwe, where mortality is heavily affected by HIV.
The evidence in Figures B.1 and B.2 suggests that the naive estimator of death rates from this data
(sibling deaths over a period divided by siblings alive at the start) provides a good fit to registration data. It
is also worth noting that similar results are obtained if I use the adjustments for bias worked out in Gakidou
and King (2006).

Figure B.1:
Death Rates, DHS and Registration Data, Phlippines
7
35-45
35-45

35-45

6
Deaths Per 1000 People from DHS Sibling Histories

Regression coefficient on
relationship for women:
1.07 (0.07)
Regression coefficient on
relationship for men:
0.94 (0.06)

35-45

25-35

5
35-45
25-35

35-45

4

35-45

35-45
15-25 15-25
15-25 15-25 35-45
35-45

3

35-45

25-35
25-35

35-45

Women
45-Degree Line
Men

35-45

25-35
25-35

35-45
15-25
15-25 15-25
15-25 25-3525-35
35-45
25-3525-35
25-35
15-25
15-25
15-25
15-25
15-2525-35
25-35
15-25 15-25 25-35
15-25

2

1

25-35

25-35
35-45

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Deaths Per 1000 People from Registration Data
Notes: This figure shows the death rate from sibling histories done in 1993 for age-gender groups (15-25, 25-35, 35-45) in the Philippines (years of data match: 1980,
1983,1984, 1986,1988,1989,1990,1991), graphed against matched mortality rates from the United Nations Demographic Yearbook Historical Supplement.

54

Figure B.2:
Death Rates, DHS and Registration Data, Zimbabwe
25

Regression coefficient on
relationship for women:
1.02 (0.06)
Regression coefficient on
relationship for men:
0.81 (0.05)

Death Rate from DHS Sibling Histories

20
35-45

35-45

15

25-35
25-35

Women
Men
45 degree line

35-45

10
35-45

35-45 35-45
25-35
35-45

25-35
15-25
35-45
35-45
15-25
25-35
25-35
25-35
25-35
15-25
15-25
15-25
15-25
15-25
35-45
25-35
15-25
15-25
25-35
15-25
25-3525-35
15-25
35-45
15-25

5

35-45

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

Death Rate from Registration Data
Notes: This figure shows the death rate from sibling histories for age-gender groups (15-25, 25-35, 35-45) in Zimbabwe in 1982, 1986, 1990, 1991, 1992 and 1995
graphed against matched mortality rates from registration data. Registration data is from Feeney (2001).

55

