NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REVISITING THE INCOME EFFECT:
GASOLINE PRICES AND GROCERY PURCHASES
Dora Gicheva
Justine Hastings
Sofia Villas-Boas
Working Paper 13614
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13614

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Severin Borenstein, Keith Chen, J.P. Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, Eric
Hurst, George Judge, Aviv Nevo, Sharon Oster, Jon Quinn, Sergio Rebelo, Fiona Scott-Morton, Jesse
Shapiro, Matt Turner and participants at the Yale Macroeconomics Workshop, the Yale Industrial
Organization Lunch and the New York Federal Reserve Workshop for helpful comments. We thank
Rosangela Bando, Joshua Berning, Grant Chen, Melissa Hidrobo, Kristin Kiesel, Quoc Luong, and
Bruno Romani for help conducting the store survey and Steve Flaming for help with the scanner data.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Dora Gicheva, Justine Hastings, and Sofia Villas-Boas. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Revisiting the Income Effect: Gasoline Prices and Grocery Purchases
Dora Gicheva, Justine Hastings, and Sofia Villas-Boas
NBER Working Paper No. 13614
November 2007
JEL No. E21,E31,L10,L16,L81
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the importance of income effects in purchase decisions for every-day products
by analyzing the effect of gasoline prices on grocery expenditures. Using detailed scanner data from
a large grocery chain as well as data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES), we show that
consumers re-allocate their expenditures across and within food-consumption categories in order to
offset necessary increases in gasoline expenditures when gasoline prices rise. We show that gasoline
expenditures rise one-for-one with gasoline prices, consumers substitute away from food-away-from-home
and towards groceries in order to partially offset their increased expenditures on gasoline, and that
within grocery category, consumers substitute away from regular shelf-price products and towards
promotional items in order to save money on overall grocery expenditures. On average, consumers
are able to decrease the net price paid per grocery item by 5-11% in response to a 100% increase in
gasoline prices. Our results show that consumers respond to permanent changes in income from gasoline
prices by substituting towards lower-cost food at the grocery store and lower priced items within grocery
category. The substitution away from full-priced items towards sale items has implications for microeconomic
discrete-choice demand models as well as for macroeconomic inflation measures that typically do
not incorporate frequently changing promotional prices.

Dora Gicheva
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
dora.gicheva@yale.edu
Justine Hastings
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
justine.hastings@yale.edu

Sofia Villas-Boas
UC, Berkeley
Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics
310 Giannini Hall
CA 94720-3310
sberto@are.berkeley.edu

As many drivers struggle to cope with soaring fuel prices, working-class
people like Ms. Lopez who commute long distances to their jobs are
suffering the most..... Ms. Lopez looks for weekly specials at the
supermarket. Salmon, her favorite fish is $7 a pound these days. So she
buys the tilapia for $2.99 instead.
-- Full Tanks Put Squeeze on Working Class, NY Times, May 13, 2006

1

Introduction

The extent to which relatively small income shocks change consumer purchase behavior
has significant implications for our understanding of business cycles, fiscal policy and the
macro economy. For example, some argue that increases in oil prices may lead to
recessions through an income effect on overall consumption (Hamilton, 1983).1 If spikes
in gasoline prices significantly decrease disposable income, and if consumers react by
curbing expenditures in other categories, then oil prices may have a significant impact on
the macro-economy through their effect on consumption. Several recent studies present
empirical evidence that households do not smooth consumption over income fluctuations,
but instead adjust current consumption to changes in current income more than would be
expected under the Permanent Income Hypothesis (Poterba, 1988; Shapiro and Slemrod,
1995; Parker, 1999; Mankiw, 2000; Stephens, 2003; Cullen et al., 2004; Shapiro, 2005;
and Card et al., 2006). This paper uses data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CES) and detailed scanner data from a large grocery retail chain in California to examine
if and how consumers adjust every day purchases in response to relatively small changes
in disposable income caused by sharp increases in gasoline prices. We find that
consumers re-allocate their expenditures across and within food-consumption categories
in order to offset necessary increases in gasoline expenditures when gasoline prices rise,
1

Other mechanism through which oil prices may affect GDP focus on the role of oil as an input to
production in a variety of sectors of the economy (Rotemberg and Woodford,1996; Hamilton, 1983), or the
price of oil as a factor that affects investment and value added through increased uncertainty (Bernanke,
1983). Barsky and Killian (2004) summarize the empirical evidence suggesting that oil prices spikes cause
recessions, and the mechanisms through which this effect might occur.

3

as we might expect under the Permanent Income Hypothesis when gasoline prices follow
a random walk.

From 2000 through 2005 gasoline prices were very volatile, following a random walk
that ranged from less than $1.50 to around $3.00 per gallon. We first use data from the
CES to examine how gasoline prices affect reported gasoline expenditures and
expenditures on frequently purchased categories such as food-away-from-home and
groceries. CES data imply that gasoline purchases constitute a significant fraction of
household expenditures, and most empirical estimates show that gasoline demand is
extremely price inelastic (Dahl and Sterner, 1991; Espey, 1998; Puller and Greening,
1999; Nicol, 2003;, Hughes, et al., 2006). Using data from the detailed diary files we find
that gasoline expenditures increase one for one with gasoline prices. Hence, for a
household that spends 5% of disposable income on gasoline, a doubling of gasoline
prices would lead to a 5% decrease in disposable income available for other weekly
purchases such as groceries, restaurants and entertainment.

Using the CES data we find that food expenditures away from home decrease
significantly when gasoline prices rise, with a 45-56% decline in expenditures on foodaway-from-home associated with a 100% increase in gasoline prices. Although
consumers appear to decrease expenditures on food-away-from-home, we find that these
savings are partially offset by increases in food purchased at grocery stores. We find a
positive but marginally significant increase of 15-19% in grocery food expenditures for a
100% increase in gasoline prices. Hence consumers appear to substitute away from more
expensive expenditures on food-away-from-home towards less expensive grocery
purchases in order to reduce expenditures on food consumption when expenditures on
gasoline rise.

Although the analysis using the CES data tells an interesting story of how consumers may
adjust food expenditures in response to income shocks caused by gasoline price spikes,
the story is incomplete. The CES data contain relatively small samples and do not have
the detail necessary to examine how consumers adjust what they buy at the grocery store

4

when gasoline prices increase. Hence we turn to detailed scanner data from a large
grocery retailer in California to examine if the suggestive patterns in CES data are born
out in grocery purchases, and how consumers adjust what they buy within grocery
categories in response to income shocks. We use weekly store-level data on revenues and
sales from 180 West Coast grocery stores for products (UPCs) in frequently purchased
consumer food categories. We find that consumers adjust to higher gasoline prices by
substituting within category towards products that are on sale: the fraction of purchases
within a product category from items on sale increases significantly with gasoline prices.
We also show that on average, quantity-weighted price paid for products decreases when
gasoline prices increase, so consumers save money on groceries by shifting purchases
towards promotional items. Using data from the grocery retailer on consumer-level
demographics for each store, we show that this effect is generally strongest for stores
serving lower-income families and weakest for those serving high-income households.

Overall, we find evidence that consumers significantly adjust food consumption to reduce
expenditures in response to decreases in disposable income caused by gasoline price
increases. Our approach provides a number of benefits for identifying the effect of small
changes in disposable income on consumer purchase behavior. First, gasoline demand is
very inelastic, so increases in gasoline prices translate directly into decreases in income
available for other expenditures. Second, since gasoline is not a substitute for grocery
products, finding an effect of gasoline prices on product choice for a category such as
cereal can be attributed to an income rather than a substitution effect. Third, gasoline
prices are arguably exogenous to local store product selection, to changes in relative
prices within product categories (e.g. the price of Corn Flakes versus Wheaties), and to
other inter-temporal or idiosyncratic shocks to household income. They also follow a
particular pattern of spikes and troughs in California over the three years in our analysis,
reducing the chance that any identified effect of gasoline prices on grocery purchases
could be caused by other potentially confounding trends in household preferences or
income levels over time.

5

Our results imply that changes in income affect every-day purchase decisions. A back-ofthe-envelope calculation based on our results implies that consumers offset about 70% of
the increased expenditures when gasoline prices double by substituting away from eating
out towards groceries and by substituting towards promotional items at the grocery store.
Since food expenditures are approximately 20% of total expenditures (from CES data),
this implies a more-than-proportional income effect in this category relative to other
expenditure categories that may be less easily adjusted in the short-run such as mortgage,
gasoline expenditures, and car payments (Chetty and Szeidl, 2007). Typical discretechoice demand models abstract from income effects when modeling purchase decisions
in relatively small-priced product categories like groceries. Although an individual
grocery product’s price is small in comparison to overall income, grocery expenditures
may be one of the easiest margins on which to adjust expenditures in response to
unexpected changes in permanent income, hence grocery product choice may be one of
the most sensitive rather than least sensitive expenditures to income shocks in the shortrun. In addition, the ability of consumers to significantly decrease expenditures by
simply substituting towards promotional items suggests that measures of inflation that do
not flexibly incorporate sale and promotional prices may not fully capture changes in
overall cost of consumption.

2

Gasoline Prices, Income, and Food Expenditures in the CES

Gasoline prices have increased dramatically several times over the past five years. This
volatility has been particularly prominent in California markets where gasoline prices
have spiked due not only to spikes in crude oil prices, but also due to regional supply
shortages from refinery outages and other supply disruptions.2 In addition, run-ups in
gasoline prices are often more severe than in other regions of the country even when
caused by the same underlying changes in crude oil prices. From 2000 through the end of
2005, California gasoline markets experienced several large increases in gasoline prices.
2

California requires its own formulation of gasoline to meet California Air Resources Board emissions
standards. This formulation is not required in other regions of the country, separating California to some
degree from gasoline supply in the rest of the nation.

6

Figure I plots weekly average retail prices for regular unleaded gasoline for California,
the West Coast excluding California, and the United States as a whole.3 It also plots the
price of crude oil in dollars per gallon.4 A few things are important to note. First, there
are several instances in which gasoline prices increase by over 25%. Moreover, these
spikes are strongest in California, and many of the California price spikes do not appear
to be linked to changes in crude oil prices, but rather to temporary regional supply
shocks. Second, the pattern of spikes and troughs is particular to gasoline prices, and
most likely exogenous to other factors that affect household income or household product
preferences. If these spikes translate into real changes in disposable income, then we will
be able to examine the effect of these income fluctuations on consumer expenditures,
controlling for trends and seasonal effects that may affect food expenditures and grocery
purchases. We test if gasoline prices during this time period follow a random walk using
an augmented Dickey-Fuller test and cannot reject that the time series follows a random
walk, implying that consumer’s best prediction of future gasoline prices are today’s
gasoline prices.5 Thus, changes in gasoline prices translate into changes in permanent
income available for expenditures in other categories.
How might a 50% increase in gasoline prices affect household disposable income? In
order to calculate this we need to know how much a typical household spends on
gasoline, and how gasoline prices affect total gasoline expenditures. Table I provides
summary statistics on household expenditures by category taken from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CES) for respondents in the West Coast region and in California
respectively.6 We use the CES detailed diary files which provide data on weekly
expenditures for relatively narrow subcategories of products and services (e.g. gasoline,
3

These data come from the Energy Information Administration website www.eia.doe.gov. The data are for
regular unleaded gasoline for all formulations in the West Coast (PADD 5) and the U.S., and for regular
unleaded reformulated gasoline in California.
4
Crude oil prices are the weekly spot price at WTI: Cushing, Oklahoma, as posted by the Energy
Information Administration.
5
The reported Dickey-Fuller test statistics was -0.978, and the MacKinnon approximate p-value for the unit
root test was 0.7613.
6
The “West” geographic region consists of Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho,
Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. The CES data contain a flag
for urban or rural residence and a state Federal information processing standards (FIPS) code for each
respondent. In order to preserve confidentiality the state FIPS code is suppressed for some respondents. In
our calculations, we count any respondents with a state FIPS code for California as a California resident.

7

food-away-from-home, alcoholic beverages). This survey is specifically designed to track
expenditures of approximately 200 households per week across the entire U.S. Each
household stays in the survey for only two weeks, so the sample frame is a repeated
cross-section. During the two consecutive weeks respondents are interviewed and asked
to fill out detailed forms that break down their expenditures by category for each of the
two weeks. A new sample of the population is drawn for each interview period. The
sample is relatively small, but is designed to be reflective of the overall population. In
order to construct aggregate expenditure statistics for Table I from the diary files, we add
up expenditures for each consumer over the two survey weeks. Since reported income is
annual, we divided this number by 26. Dividing expenditures by this bi-weekly income
variable allows us to obtain expenditures as a share of after-tax income as reported in
Table I.7

Table I suggests that gasoline accounts for a significant part of expenditures, especially
for people in lower income categories. For example, Panel A of Table I, which provides
statistics for respondents in the “West” geographic region, shows that in 2002 the average
consumer spent 3.37% of their income on gasoline. This number is almost double, 6.21%
for consumers in the lowest quintile of the income distribution. If we calculate gasoline
expenditures as a percent of disposable income (income after mortgage or rent) then
gasoline expenditures account for 4.5% and 12.4% of disposable income for the average
respondent and the average respondent in the lowest income quintile respectively. For
Californians in Panel B, whose average share of income devoted to gasoline expenditures
is both higher than respondents in other states, these numbers are 5.1% and 13.3%
respectively.

Because gasoline consumption is very inelastic in the short run, changes in gasoline
prices translate directly into changes in gasoline expenditures. Table II presents
regression results of gasoline expenditures on gasoline prices using the CES detailed
diary files data for consumers in West Coast markets for 2000-2004 (the most recent
years available). Since we do not know the exact price respondents in CES paid for
7

We only include consumers that the survey identifies as complete income respondents.

8

gasoline, we use weekly regional average gasoline prices for regular unleaded gasoline as
reported by the Energy Information Administration as our measure of the price paid for
gasoline. We use the West Coast (PADD 5) excluding California average retail gasoline
price for all formulations, regular unleaded gasoline for respondents who did not live in
California, and the California retail average price for regular unleaded reformulated
gasoline for respondents with state FIPS code for California.8 Table II presents weighted
least squares regression of log gasoline expenditures on log gasoline prices, controlling
for demographic variables such as income and its square, number of vehicles in the
household and its square, race, gender and employment status.9 The regression controls
also include monthly dummies, yearly dummies and a time trend. The results in Table II
imply that gasoline expenditures increase 100% when gasoline prices increase by 100%.
The exact point estimates are 1.03 and 1.05 for the entire sample and for urban
households respectively, and both are significant at less than 0.01 level.10
Given that gasoline expenditures rise exactly with gasoline prices, we would expect a
100% increase in gasoline prices to decrease the disposable income available for other
purchases by 100% of baseline gasoline expenditures. Recent empirical research has
shown using expenditure data, consumption data, and data on instantaneous consumption
that consumers do not smooth consumption over changes in income or over income
cycles as would be predicted by the Permanent Income Hypothesis (Poterba, 1988;
Parker, 1999; Stephens, 2003; Cullen et al., 2004; Shapiro, 2005).11 Potential reasons for
excess sensitivity of current consumption to current income include liquidity constraints
(Deaton, 1991; Gruber, 1997; among others), consumer myopia (Shapiro and Slemrod,
1995; Mankiw, 2000; Card, et al. 2006), impatience (Shapiro, 2005) and mental
8

The EIA reports several gasoline price statistics for West Coast markets. Geographically they report a CA
average, a West Coast without CA average, and an entire West Coast average. We use the first two of these
statistics. The West Coast is defined by PADD 5 boundaries and includes the states Alaska, Arizona,
California, Hawaii, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington. We use the average price for regular unleaded
gasoline for all formulations.
9
Weights are given by the Consumer Expenditure Survey.
10
We run the estimation separately for urban households since the retail gasoline prices may be more
representative of what urban households pay, and because FIPS codes are less likely to be suppressed for
urban residents.
11
In particular, consumption is found to increase due to predictable increases in union wages (Shea, 1995),
predictable tax refunds (Souleles, 1999), temporary tax refunds (Shapiro and Slemrod, 1995), and monthly
food stamps (Shapiro, 2005).

9

budgeting (Thaler, 1985; Shapiro and Slemrod, 1995; Heath and Soll, 1996; Read et al.,
1999).12 However, since gasoline prices follow a random walk, consumption in food
categories may be very sensitive to changes in gasoline prices because they are a
relatively easy short-term margin to adjust expenditures relative to more ‘committed’
portions of consumption such as commute patterns, auto fuel efficiency, and mortgage
payments (Chetty and Szeidl, 2007).

Table III presents regression results showing how food expenditures change when
gasoline prices change. We focus on food expenditures for three reasons. First, they are
purchased often, allowing us to have a reasonable sample size for frequent changes in
gasoline prices despite the overall small sample in the CES detailed diary files. Second,
they represent a relatively large expenditure category (see Table I), and a relatively easy
margin on which consumers can adjust weekly expenditures. Third, they allow for a nice
comparison with the detailed scanner data in the next section. The first two columns of
Table III present regression results for log expenditures for food-away-from-home on log
gasoline prices for all respondents and urban respondents respectively. The same controls
that were used in the regressions in Table II are also included in these regressions. The
results show that expenditures on food-away-from-home decrease by 56% in the sample
and 45% among urban respondents when gasoline prices increase by 100%. The
coefficients are highly significant and imply an economically significant decrease in
expenditures on food away from home in response to increases in gasoline prices. Given
that the average respondent in California spends 6.86% of after-tax income on foodaway-from-home (see Table I), decreasing expenditures on food-away-from-home by
56% translates into savings of almost 4% of income (5% of disposable income).

Columns 3 and 4 of Table III show the effect of gasoline prices on expenditures on food
purchased at the grocery store for all respondents and urban respondents respectively.13
12

Moreover Card, et al (2006) and Shapiro and Slemrod (1995) present empirical estimates and find survey
evidence that the percentage of “myopic” consumers is non trivial, and on the order of fifty to seventy
percent.
13
We use the log of weekly expenditure for food and non-alcoholic beverages purchased at grocery store
(in the CES diary files called JGRCFDWK) as the dependent variable.

10

The coefficients imply that grocery purchases increase when gasoline prices increase,
although the effect is only significant for urban respondents. The point estimates imply a
15% and a 19% increase in grocery expenditures in response to a 100% increase in
gasoline prices. Table I shows that the average household in California spends 11.77% of
income on food from the grocery store, so increasing grocery purchases by 15% means
spending an extra 1.8% of income (2.4% of disposable income).

Overall the evidence from CES data implies that gasoline price increases translate
directly into gasoline expenditure increases due to the extreme inelasticity of gasoline
demand. Since consumers cannot substitute for gasoline, they decrease expenditures on
food items in order to make up for increased expenditures on gasoline. Although this
finding is another piece of evidence that runs contrary to the Permanent Income
Hypothesis, the patterns of substitution seem quite rational. Consumers decrease
spending on more expensive and perhaps luxury expenditures on food-away-from-home
and substitute towards less expensive food purchased at the grocery store in order to
make up for lost income spent on high gasoline prices. Taken together, our estimates
imply that when gasoline prices increase by 100%, an average respondent in California
who spends 3.7% of income on gasoline decreases overall food expenditures by 2.2% of
income (a 4% decline in food away from home plus a 1.8% rise in grocery expenditures)
to offset the necessary doubling of gasoline expenditures.

In order to further understand how consumer behavior changes when disposable income
decreases due to increased gasoline prices, we analyze detailed scanner data from a major
California retail grocery chain. Scanner data allow us to examine transactions from
hundreds of thousands of recorded consumer purchases at the UPC level to see how
consumers substitute between grocery products when gasoline prices increase.

3

Results from Retail Grocery Data

Our analysis of retail grocery purchases and how they adjust to changes in gasoline prices
involves two data sets. The first data set comes from customer surveys conducted at three
11

of the grocery stores in our scanner data sample. The second data set is scanner data on
four product categories from 180 retail grocery stores in California. The survey
information helps us to understand how, if at all, customers perceive that they adjust their
grocery purchases when gasoline prices rise. The survey was conducted during the week
of November 6, 2006 at three of the grocery stores in our scanner data. The survey
collected information on customer demographics, customer commute and gasoline
expenditure behavior, and information on their grocery store purchase behavior.14
Overall, a total of 1,200 surveys were completed.

3.1

Survey Analysis

There were two main questions about behavioral responses to gasoline prices. First,
respondents were asked to state how they felt about the following statement: “When
gasoline prices are very high, I tend to save money by watching what I buy at the grocery
store”. They circled a number from 1 to 7 that corresponded to the degree to which they
disagreed or agreed with the statement. Circling a 1 indicated that they strongly disagreed
with the statement, circling a 4 meant that they neither agreed nor disagreed, and circling
a 7 meant that they strongly agreed. We will refer to this question as Question 1 from
here forward. Table IV shows average demographic information for each store as well as
the average response to Question 1.15 The average response to Question 1 is highest at the
low-income store, and lowest at the high-income store. Over the entire sample, about
46% of respondents agree to some extent that they adjust their grocery purchases when
gasoline prices are high (response to Question 1 equal to 5 or higher).

14

The main purpose of the survey was to collect information on consumer purchasing habits and sensitivity
to packaging and labeling for a separate study. We added in questions about gasoline prices and grocery
purchases to this survey. The grocery stores were chosen to represent a low, middle, and a high income
neighborhood. Participants were approached by a surveyor outside of each store, and offered an incentive
of a $10 store credit to fill out a survey form.
15
The demographic information collected from the respondents is very similar to demographic information
calculated from the census block groups of residence for each store’s customers. For example, the average
block-group Median Household Income from the 2000 Census is $56,214, $68,806, and $89,697 for
customers at the low-, middle-, and high-income stores respectively.

12

Table V presents logistic regression of an indicator if the response to Question 1 was a 5
or higher (i.e., the customer agreed to some degree with Question 1) on demographics.16
Model 1 includes a linear effect of income while Model 2 allows for a spline in income
with a break point at the median reported income of $50,000. The estimated coefficient
on stated household income is negative and significant; decreasing the extent to which
the respondent states they adjust grocery expenditures when gasoline prices are high. An
increase in income of 1 translates into increase in stated income of $10,000. Thus the
coefficient on income in Model 1 implies a 2% decrease in the probability of agreeing
with Question 1 (-0.01/0.46) for every $10,000 increase in reported income.17 Model 2
allows for a different marginal effect of income below and above $50,000, and shows that
this average 2% effect of income is generated by a larger significant effect among
respondents with above median income. The coefficients imply that income significantly
decreases the probability that a respondent agrees with Question 1 only among abovemedian income respondents. The marginal effect of an increase in income of $10,000 is
2.7 percentage points which corresponds to a 6 percent decrease in probability of
agreeing with Question 1.

The other two significant factors that determine the response to Question 1 are the
responses to two questions that attempt to measure how carefully a consumer pays
attention to product characteristics (like prices and labels) when purchasing groceries.
These questions ask respondents to indicate how much they agree with the statement that
they often read the nutritional label when deciding what product to purchase and to what
extent they shop at multiple stores to get lower prices.18 An increase by 1 in the stated
degree to which a customer pays attention to nutritional facts leads to an increase in
probability of adjusting groceries purchases of 2.5 percentage points (or a 6% increase).
16

We also ran models using an ordered logit with the response to Question 1 as the dependent variable and
obtained qualitatively similar results.
17
The coefficients in the logit in Model 1 give the change in the log odds of agreeing with Question 1.
Since the mean probability of agreeing with Question 1 is 46%, the coefficient on income implies a 1
percentage point increase in the probability of agreeing with Question 1 when income decreases by $10,000
(-0.040*0.46*0.54).
18
The exact questions were“ In general, how often do you read the NUTRITION FACTS panel that reports
nutrient information on food products” (ranked 1-7 for Not Often to Very Often), and “I will grocery shop
at more than one store to take advantage of low prices” (ranked 1-7 for Strongly Disagree to Strongly
Agree).

13

An increase by 1 in the extent to which consumers feel they are willing to price shop
across stores to get the best price leads to a significant 4.2 percentage points (or roughly
10%) increase in the probability of adjusting grocery purchases when gasoline prices rise.

The survey then asked customers questions related to how they adapt their grocery
purchases to save money when gasoline prices are high. They were asked to rank from 1
to 7 the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with the following four statements.
“When gasoline prices are very high, I watch what I buy at the store by doing the
following:
1. I try to buy the items that are on sale
2. I try to buy the store brand or the generic instead of the brand name item
3. I buy more packaged foods and fewer fresh foods
4. I try to purchase less meat and less prepared foods”
These options were not exhaustive, but were selected based on consumer interviews in
media and the press. We will refer to these questions as Questions 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4
respectively. Table VI presents summary statistics for Questions 2.1-2.4. Column 1
shows that buying items on sale has the highest average response. The next two columns
of Table VI are indicators for the highest mark and lowest mark given by customer across
the four questions.19 Almost all people ranked buying sale items the highest: the strongest
agreement was given to buying sale items for 86% of respondents.20 The next strongest
response is for substituting towards store brands and decreasing purchases of meat
products, but for these only 45% and 28% of respondents (respectively) ranked them
highest.

The last two columns of Table VI give the fraction of respondents who agree (>4) and
fraction who disagree (<4), where a response of 4 is excluded. Notice again that buying
on sale is the strongest response in terms of those who agree. The agreement rate is 89%.
More importantly, a very small fraction (5%) disagrees to any extent with Question 2.1.
19

Ties for highest would show up for columns with ties: if customer ranks all four possible ways to cut
back on grocery expenditures as a 7, then that customer appears as ranking all of them the highest.
20
Respondents could circle a number greater than 4 for all 4 categories. This measure gives the response
with the highest rank out of the 4.

14

This measure is similar to measures used in political polling. As important as approval or
agreement rating is the fraction of people who disapprove or disagree with a statement.
Almost all respondents look for sale items; however there is a sizeable fraction who state
that they don’t switch to the store brand or to purchasing less meat or packaged products
in order to save money on groceries in response to high gasoline prices.

In summary, based on the survey responses, about 46% of respondents state that they
adjust their grocery purchases to save money when gasoline prices are high.21 The
probability is highest among low-income consumers. Among those who adjust their
purchases to save money when gasoline prices are high, the main way they adjust
purchases is by purchasing items that are on sale instead of their preferred brand (in the
case that they differ). We now analyze the panel of scanner data to see if these patterns
are born out in actual consumer purchases.

3.2

Scanner Data Analysis

We have access to weekly store-level data for a sample of 180 grocery stores from a retail
chain in California. The retailer is a standard grocery store chain and has stores in a broad
range of socio-economic neighborhoods. We selected 200 stores at random from the
stores in the retail chain, with a higher sampling probability placed on stores in lowincome neighborhoods and those with higher average reported commute times. We
dropped stores from the final sample that were not open for our entire observation period
or did not have customer-level demographic data. This left us with 180 stores total.

We have access to membership card data for the primary customers of each of our 180
stores, with demographic information on each customer attached to their membership
card number. These demographics include household characteristics purchased by the
retailer from marketing companies as well as demographic data from the 2000 US Census
for each customer’s Census block-group of residence. We aggregate the customer data at
the store-level to show how customer characteristics vary across the stores in our

21

It is interesting to note that 46% is roughly in the range of ‘myopic’ consumers found in various studies
in the prior literature (Shapiro and Slemrod, 1995; Mankiw, 2000l; Card , et al. 2006).

15

sample.22 Table VII reports summary statistics for the customer demographics across
stores. There is a large variation in income across the stores in our sample, allowing us to
test if store-level purchase patterns respond more to gasoline price spikes at stores
serving low-income customers.

For each of the stores we have weekly UPC-level data for all items within four product
categories. The data include the total unit quantity of each product sold, the total gross
revenue, the total revenue net sale discounts, and the total weight sold where needed (for
example, pounds of meat where price is measured in dollars per pound). We use these
variables to construct the average gross price per week for each UPC, the average price
net of discounts per week, and the total volume sold for each UPC in each week. Because
the grocery retailer changes promotions and sales on a weekly basis, the aggregated data
yield the correct prices and promotional discounts for each weekly observation.

We match weekly average gasoline prices for Los Angeles to weekly measures of
consumer purchase behavior in each category.23 The average gasoline price in Los
Angeles is a good approximation for local prices that customers at our stores face, but is
constant across stores, avoiding potential local endogeneity between gasoline prices and
grocery sales (i.e. in one neighborhood, gasoline prices are particularly high, causing
customers to buy gasoline and groceries in an adjacent neighborhood). If income effects
are important, as suggested by survey results, we would expect to see that when gasoline
prices are high, consumers purchase a higher fraction of products on sale, and that the
quantity weighted net price paid per unit falls.

The first category we examine is all-family cold cereal (cereal from here on). We
examine this category because it is a frequently purchased item, has frequent promotions
that significantly discount the items, and doesn’t have close substitutes. This category
22

Using the demographic information on the sample of customers based on their residential location is a
better measure of the demographics of the store’s customers than information based on the store location
since stores are typically located in retail-zoned zip-codes or census tract with different demographics than
the residential neighborhoods that they draw customers from.
23
The prices used are the Energy Information Administrations weekly average price of regular unleaded
reformulated gasoline in Los Angeles, CA.

16

also represents a large portion of store revenues. Cereals for this grocery chain are
approximately 12% of weekly revenues. So they represent an economically important
category for retail firms and consumers alike. In addition, the prices for boxed cereals are
non-trivial, and it is a category with frequent and substantial promotional sales. The mean
price for a box of cereal in our sample is $4.22, with a standard deviation of $0.83. The
mean price net promotional discount is $3.78 with a standard deviation of $1.07. The
average promotion is a 34% discount of the regular price with a standard deviation of
16%. The large average promotional discount is driven by frequent buy one get one free
sales. Approximately 32% of the UPC observations in our data set are on sale.

For the dependent variable we construct the log of the fraction of sales in each week in
each store that are from sale (or price discounted) items.24 We adjust the prices of cereals
to account for differences in box sizes, standardizing the prices so that they are
comparable across boxes. Table VIII presents regression results for the effect of the log
of gasoline prices on the log of the fraction of cereal that is purchased on promotion.
Each regression includes a full set of controls: store level fixed effects, regional time
trends, regional monthly dummies, and holiday fixed effects. Holiday effects include
separate dummies by year for major holidays and the week before and after the holiday if
it falls on a weekend (Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Years, and Fourth of July). We also
control for the fraction of UPCs that are on sale within a given week and its square. We
allow for first-order autocorrelation in the error terms.25

The first column in Table VIII presents the coefficients of interest for all stores in the
sample. Gasoline prices enter positively and significantly with a coefficient of 0.19. On
average, if gasoline prices rise by 100%, the fraction of within-store cereal purchases that
come from promotional items rises by 19%. The mean of the fraction of items on sale is
listed in the table as well. This percent increase is relative to a mean of 65%, hence it
represents a 12 percentage point increase in the fraction of cereal that is bought on
24

We use all cereals in this category, but drop cereals that appear very infrequently (for example holiday or
themed versions of cereals that only appear for a short duration).
25
Since we have a very long time series, the bias introduced from autocorrelation in the fixed-effects model
is negligible (Hsiao, 1986).

17

promotion. This is more than a one standard-deviation increase in the fraction of items
sold on sale.

Columns 2 through 5 present regression results separately for quartiles of the income
distribution. Column two presents results for stores with a median customer income of
less than $50,000. Columns 3, 4 and 5 present results for stores where the median
customer income is between $50,000 and $69,500, between $69,500 and $90,500, and
greater than $90,500 respectively.26 The coefficient on gasoline prices is strongest for the
lowest income category and generally decreases as we move from 2 to column 5. A 100%
increase in gasoline prices translates into a 27%, 17% 18% and 15% increase in the
fraction of cereal sold on promotion respectively across the four income categories.

Figure II plots a smoothed nearest-neighbor regression line for the residuals from the
regression in Table VIII Column 3 excluding gasoline prices, and the residuals from a
regression of gasoline prices on the other right-hand-side variables from the regression in
Table VIII (excluding gasoline prices) for four different stores. The four stores were
selected from our sample using a random number generator. These residual regression
lines represent the variation in the percent of cereal purchases from promotional items
and the variation in gasoline prices after controlling for regional trends, monthly effects,
holidays, store fixed effects, and the fraction of UPCs on sale at that store during that
week and its square. The figures graphically illustrate the relationship between gasoline
prices and the percent of purchases coming from promotions after other factors have been
appropriately controlled for. They show a positive relationship between the percent of
cereal purchases coming from items on sale and gasoline prices, although it appears that
the response in the residual for cereal purchases follows the gasoline price residuals with
a slight lag, indicating that consumers may adjust their purchases as they realize changes
in account balances through the month.

26

These categories were determined by the quartiles of the distribution of median customer-level income
across stores in our sample.

18

Table IX presents regression results with the quantity-weighted net price paid for cereals
sold over our time period. The regression specification is identical to that of Table VIII,
with “the log of quantity-weighted net prices” instead of the “log of percent of items sold
on promotion” as the dependent variable. The results show that the quantity weighted net
price falls significantly when gasoline prices increase. If gasoline prices increase by 100
percent, the quantity weighted price paid by consumers falls on average by 5 percent. The
average quantity weighted price is approximately $3 and this implies that the quantityweighted net price paid falls by about 15 cents. Interestingly, comparing the low with the
high income category estimated effects, the high income type has smaller responses to
gasoline prices in percent of products purchased on promotion and also has a smaller
decrease in standardized net prices compared to the lowest income category.

An average savings of 5 percent on the price of cereal paid in response to a doubling in
gasoline prices represents a sizable, but not unreasonable income effect. Using the
statistics in Table I on category expenditures form California CES respondents, a 100%
increase in gasoline prices would lead to a 3.74% decrease in income for non-gasoline
consumption. Using our estimates from Table III, this 100% increase in gasoline prices
results in a -0.56*6.86%=-3.84% decrease in food-away-from home expenditure and a
0.15*11.77=1.76 increase in food-at-home expenditure. If consumers substitute towards
sale items across all grocery categories in a similar manner, they would save 0.05*11.77=-0.59% of income spent on groceries simply by substituting towards
promotional items.

We may be concerned that grocery prices change in a strategic way when gasoline prices
increase due to an expected demand response. We do know that the grocery retailer that
we are working with does not adjust retail prices with gasoline prices, and we also know
that shelf prices are very sticky, not changing as frequently as gasoline prices have over
this period (Bils and Klenow; 2004, Eichenbaum, Jaimovich, and Rebelo, 2007; Kehoe
and Midrigan, 2007; and Nakamura and Steinsson, 2007). However, we create a price
index to examine if prices consumers faced change with gasoline prices. The index
weights each cereal by a time-constant share of sales over the time period at each store so

19

that it varies with price level but not with quantity purchased over time.27 We create two
indexes; one that uses shelf-prices and one that uses prices net of promotional discounts
(net-prices are equal to shelf-prices if there is no discount). Table X shows the effect of
gasoline prices on each of the price indexes, controlling for store-level fixed-effects and
regional time trends. The first column shows that gasoline prices have no effect on shelfprices, as expected. However, the second column shows a positive and significant impact
of gasoline prices on net prices. The point estimate implies a 5 percent increase in net
prices as a result of a 100 percent increase in gasoline prices, which is similar to other
estimates of cost-based increase in PPI and CPI resulting from fuel price increases (see
e.g., Chinkook, 2002; Reed et. al, 1997; Urbanchuk, 2007). Hence product prices appear
to adjust flexibly with gasoline prices through the size of discounts and promotions,
which change weekly even though shelf-prices remain stable over long time periods.

Note that an increase in net-prices when gasoline prices increase will work against our
findings, since increases in net-prices (with no impact on gross-prices) should make
promotional items relatively less attractive to consumers and lower their ability to
decrease category expenditures by purchasing promotional items. We can control directly
for changes in net-price index in our regression analysis. Table XI presents the
specification in Table IX, but also controls for the log of the net-price index as well. The
effect of gasoline prices is now slightly larger, implying that a 100 percent increase in
gasoline prices leads to a 6.4% decrease in net-price paid.28
27

We create this index only for the brands of cereal which are always sold in every store over our period.
This approach is similar to the approach others have taken in the literature (Chevalier et al., 2003; Hoch et
al., 1995). This index is correlated with price changes due to changes in input costs but does not change due
to changes over time in which products we observe being sold. The products we observe being sold change
when new products enter, when products exit, or when infrequently-purchased items are sold. These
changes the products purchased are part of the variation we want to include when measuring fraction of
products sold on sale and quantity-weighted price paid, but not when measuring changes in prices due to
input costs, for example.
28
One thing we cannot examine is if gasoline prices affect the relative prices of all grocery products
differently, since we only have access to a handful of product categories. For example, in Connecticut,
where apples are grown locally, it may be the case that gasoline prices cause larger increases in net prices
for oranges than for apples, causing low-income and more price sensitive consumers to substitute away
from oranges towards apples, and thus increasing the fraction of items purchased on sale and the net price
paid for apples independently of a direct income effect from gasoline. We do examine four product
categories that a priori may not have such easy substitutes and find similar overall effects as we do in the
cereal category. We are currently working on incorporating income effects into a model of grocery-product
choice.

20

Tables XII through XIV present similar regressions to those presented in Table IX for
three additional product categories: Family Yogurt, Fresh Chicken, and Refrigerated
Orange Juice (hereafter yogurt, chicken and orange juice respectively).29 Each table
contains two panels of regressions, one showing the effect of log of gasoline prices on the
log of percent of products sold on promotion and the other showing the effect on the log
of quantity-weighted prices.
Table XII presents results for yogurt. 30 This category has frequent promotions with 30%
of the UPC observations in our sample on sale. The average gross price is $0.81 for a sixounce serving, with a standard deviation of $0.22, while the average net price is $0.73
with a standard deviation of $0.24. The average promotional discount is a 34% discount
off the regular price with a standard deviation of 12%. Typically all flavors of a particular
brand go on sale at the same time. The top panel of regressions in Table XII shows that as
gasoline prices increase by 100 percent, the percent of yogurt sold that is on promotion
increases by 25%. Again, the largest effect is for stores located in low-income
neighborhoods. The second set of regressions in the bottom panel show that the quantity
weighted price paid for yogurt falls as gasoline prices increase. The quantity weighted
price paid falls by approximately 5.2 cents per cup of yogurt if gasoline prices rises by
100 percent. The effect on net price paid is not significantly different across the different
income categories.

Table XIII presents results for fresh chicken. In this category, the main product
differentiation is by cut of meat; boneless-skinless, breast, leg, thigh, drumsticks, etc.
There are not many brand varieties, and organic or free-range varieties were not prevalent
at this retail chain during this time period. Price is measured in price per pound, and
quantity sold is measured in pounds. For fresh chicken, 32% of the observations in the
data set are on promotion. The average gross price per pound across products is $3.37
29

In each category, we account for different container sizes when calculating prices. For example, yogurt is
in price per six ounce serving and chicken is in price per pound.
30
For the yogurt category, we considered only cup yogurt and excluded large yogurt tubs used primarily for
cooking.

21

with a standard deviation of $1.76, and the average net price per pound is $3.10 with a
standard deviation of $1.75. The average markdown is 27% of the price with a standard
deviation of 15%. Hence the average markdown as a percent of price is lowest for this
category. The fist set of regressions in the top panel of Table XIII show that a 100%
increase in the price of gasoline is associated with a 49% increase in the fraction of fresh
chicken purchased on promotion on average. The effect of gasoline prices on the percent
sold on promotion does vary across the store-location income categories as it did for the
previous two products. Interestingly the increase in promotional purchases translates into
decreases in prices paid more for stores located in middle-income neighborhoods than for
stores in the lowest-income neighborhood. This implies that consumers at stores in
income groups 2-4 purchase items with higher average markdowns when they substitute
towards items on sale.

Table XIV presents results for the fresh orange juice category. The regression results in
the top panel indicate that a 100% increase in the price of gasoline is associated with a
10% increase in the fraction of orange juice purchased on promotion. The effect of
gasoline prices on the percent sold on promotion however, is smallest for the lowest
income category and similar for the other three income categories. This may be due to
differences in the relative wealth of those who purchase fresh orange juice (instead of
frozen or shelf-stable sweetened drinks) or the relative substitutability of fresh orange
juice for other drinks in stores serving consumers with lower median income levels
versus stores serving customers with higher median income. In addition, the decrease in
quantity weighted price paid is significant, but statistically the same across all income
categories.

Finally, Table XV considers the effect of gasoline prices on overall net revenues for the
retailer. The analysis of the CES data implied that grocery expenditures rise when
gasoline prices rise, as consumers substitute away from food purchased away-from-home
towards less expensive grocery products. We will not be able to look at total volume sold
and total store revenues for all grocery food products, but we can look at how these two
statistics change for the four categories in our analysis. The top panel shows the effect of

22

gasoline prices on total quantity sold in each of our categories, and the bottom panel
shows the effect on total revenues. We include the same regression controls as those in
Tables VIII-XIV. Across all four categories, total quantity sold increases significantly
with gasoline prices. It is important to note that this increase in quantity sold includes
both potential increases in volume sold due to substitution away from eating-out towards
groceries as well as substitution within groceries between categories (e.g. from beef to
chicken). The second panel shows increases in revenues, which takes into account both
increases in sales when gasoline prices rise as well as decreases in average price paid as
consumers substitute towards items on promotion. The increases in revenues for cereal
and orange juice are similar to the estimates for increases in grocery expenditures in the
CES data: the estimates imply that expenditures increase by 30% and 12% for those two
categories respectively when gasoline prices increase by 100%. The estimates for chicken
and yogurt are substantially higher. This may be because across all groceries, these two
items are easy substitutes for lunches and snacks (yogurt) or dinner (chicken). In
addition, chicken sales and revenues may increase more as people substitute within store
away from more expensive beef and towards the cheaper chicken.

4

Conclusion

This paper uses data from the detailed diary files of the Consumer Expenditure Survey
and detailed scanner data to examine if grocery and food expenditures change with small
shocks to disposable income. We use spikes in gasoline prices to examine how changes
in disposable income affect stated food expenditures in the CES and actual scanner-data
grocery purchases at the grocery store. We find several interesting results. First, we show
that gasoline expenditures as reported in the CES increase one for one with gasoline
prices. While consumers cannot easily substitute away from gasoline when prices rise, we
find using the CES diary files that they decrease expenditures on food-away-from-home
and substitute towards purchasing food at grocery stores. We then show that consumers
substitute further within their grocery store purchases. Using survey data and scanner
data for four frequently purchased food categories, we find that consumers substitute
towards items that are on sale and away from full-price items when gasoline prices spike.

23

This significantly reduces their overall price paid per unit purchased by an average of 511% in the categories we study.

These findings have a variety of implications for modeling in micro and
macroeconomics. Given that we find significant effects of gasoline prices on grocery
purchases, price sensitivity, and product choice, discrete choice models used to estimate
consumer choice and competition between products (e.g., McFadden, 1974; Berry 1994;
and Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995) might be adapted to incorporate income effects
(de Palma and Kilani, 1999 or Allenby and Rossi, 1991). A second implication relates to
the important role of product substitution and consumption smoothing analysis in the
presence of income shocks. First we find evidence that consumption patterns respond to
changes in disposable income due to spikes in gasoline prices. However, we find that
consumers display both across-category substitution (food-away-from-home versus
groceries) and within-category substitution towards products on promotion. Hence actual
consumption might not change as much in response to small income shocks as overall
expenditures do. Aguiar and Hurst (2005, 2007a and 2007b) provide evidence of the
importance of substitution to explain consumption and expenditure effects at the time of
retirement. We find that consumers smooth consumption across categories, reducing
expenditures by substituting towards lower-cost food at the grocery store, and lower
priced items within grocery category in order to curb expenditures when gasoline prices
rise.

24

REFERENCES
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst, 2005. “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113, N. 5, 919-948.
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst, 2007a. “Measuring Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five
Decades,” forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2007, 122, N. 3.
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst, 2007b. “Lifecycle Prices and Production,” forthcoming
American Economic Review.
Allenby, G. and P. Rossi, 1991. “Quality Perceptions and Asymmetric Switching
between Brands,” Marketing Science, 10 (3) , 185-204.
Bernanke, B. S., 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. February, 98:1; 85–106.
Barsky, R. B, and L. Killian, 2004. “Oil and the Macroeconomy Since the 1970s,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, N. 4, 115-134.
Berry, S., 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 25, No. 2:242-262.
Berry, S., J.Levinsohn, and A. Pakes, 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 63, No. 4: 841-890.
Bils, M. and P.J. Klenow, 2004. "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"
Journal of Political Economy, 112 (5): 947-985.
Blattberg, R. C. and K. Wisniewski, 1989. “Price-Induced Patterns of Competition,”
Marketing Science, 8, 291-310.
Card, D., R. Chetty, and A. Weber, 2006. “Cash-on-Hand and Competing Models of
Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market”, forthcoming
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Chetty, R. and A. Szeidl, 2007. “Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2): 831-877.

Chevalier, Judith, A. Kashyap, and P. Rossi, 2003 “Why Don’t Prices Rise During
Periods of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data,” American Economic
Review, 93(1), 15-37.
Chinkook, L, 2002. “The Impact of Intermediate Input Price Changes on Food Prices: An
Analysis of “From the Ground Up” Effects.” Journal of Agribusiness 20 (1).

25

Cullen, J. B., L. Friedberg, and C. Wolfram, 2004. “Consumption and Changes in Home
Energy Costs: How Prevalent is the Heat or Eat Decision?, working paper,
March.
Dahl, C. and T. Sterner, 1991. "Analyzing Gasoline Demand Elasticities: A Survey."
Energy Economics 3(13): 203-210.
De Palma and K. Kilani, 1999. “Discrete Choice Models with Income Effects,” working
paper, November.
Deaton, A., 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, Vol. 59, No. 5.
(Sep.): 1221-1248.
Eichenbaum, M., N. Jaimovich and S. Rebelo, 2007. "Reference Prices and Nominal
Rigidities," mimeo, Northwestern University.
Espey, M., 1998. "Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International Meta-Analysis of
Elasticities." Energy Economics 20: 273-295.
Gruber, J., 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 1. (March): 192-205.
Hamilton, J.D., 1983. “Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II,” The Journal of
Political Economy, 91, N. 2; 228-248.
Hamilton, J.D., 1983. “A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business
Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, 96, June 1988, pp. 593-617.
Heath, C. and J. B. Soll, 1996. “Mental Budgeting and Consumer Decisions,”
The Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 23, No. 1. (June); 40-52.
Hoch, Steven J., B.-D. Kim, A. L. Montgomery, and P. E. Rossi, 1995. "Determinants of
Store-Level Price Elasticity, " Journal of Marketing Research, 32 (1):17-29.
Hughes, J. E., C. R. Knittel, and D. Sperling, 2006. “Evidence of a Shift in the Short-Run
Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” working paper.
Hsiao, C., 1986. “Analysis of Panel Data,” Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Kamakura, W. A. and G. J. Russell, 1989. “A Probabilistic Choice Model for Market
Segmentation and Elasticity Structure,” Journal of Marketing Research, 26, 379390.
Kehoe, P. J. and V. Midrigan, 2007 "Sales and the Real Effects of Monetary Policy,"
mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

26

Mankiw, N. G., 2000. “The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred
Twelfth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. (May); 120125.
McFadden, D., 1974. "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior," in P.
Zarembka (ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics, 105-142, Academic Press: New York.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson. 2007. "Five Facts About Prices: A Re-evaluation of Menu
Cost Models," mimeo, Harvard University.
Nicol, C. J., 2003. "Elasticities of Demand for Gasoline in Canada and the United States."
Energy Economics 25(2): 201-214.
Parker, J., 1999. “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
Social Security Taxes.” American Economic Review 89 (4): 959-73.
Poterba, J. M., 1988. “Are Consumers Forward Looking? Evidence from Fiscal
Experiments,” American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 2, Papers and
Proceedings of the One-Hundredth Annual Meeting of the American Economic
Association. (May): 413-418.
Puller, S. L. and L. A. Greening, 1999. "Household Adjustment to Gasoline Price
Change: An Analysis Using 9 Years of Us Survey Data." Energy Economics
21(1): 37-52.
Read, D., G. Loewenstein, and M. Rabin, 1999. “Choice Bracketing,” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 19:1-3; 171-197.
Reed, A. J., K. Hanson, H. Elitzak, and G. Schluter, 1997. “Changing Consumer Food
Prices: A User’s Guide to ERS Analyses”. USDA Economic Research Service.
Technical Bulletin 1862. June.
Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford, 1996. “Imperfect Competition and the Effects of
Energy Price Increases,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 28 (part 1): 549577.
Shapiro, J., 2005. “Is there a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp
Nutrition Cycle.” Journal of Public Economics 89(2-3): 303-325, February.
Shapiro, M. D., and J. Slemrod, 1995. “Consumer Response to the Timing of Income:
Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding,” American Economic Review,
(March), 274-283.
Shea, J., 1995. “Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis,” The
American Economic Review, 85 (1):186-200.

27

Souleles, N., 1999. “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds.”
American Economic Review 89 (4): 947-958.
Stephens, M., 2003. “’3rd of tha Month’: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
Consumption Between Checks?” American Economic Review 93 (1): 406-422.
Thaler, R.H., 1985. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science, 4,
199-214.
Urbanchuk, J. M., 2007. “The Relative Impact of Corn and Energy Prices in the Grocery
Aisle,” LECG LLC.
John M. Urbanchuk

28

Table I: Average Income and Expenditures by Category, 2002 Consumer Expenditure Survey
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
5th
Income
Income
Income
Income
Income
All
Quintile
Quintile Quintile Quintile
Respondents Quintile
Panel A: West Coast Region, 2002 (average price of regular gasoline: $1.373 )
Total Food
Food Away from Home
Food at Home
Cereals
Dairy
Poultry
Other Meat
Non-alcoholic beverages
Clothing
Leisure and Entertainment
Mortgage or Rent
Gasoline and Motor Oil
Income after taxes
Number of Surveys

16.75%
5.75%
11.00%
0.32%
1.30%
0.38%
1.63%
0.98%
4.45%
1.21%
24.84%
3.37%
$51,143
1,422

8.59%
3.62%
4.96%
0.14%
0.58%
0.17%
0.72%
0.46%
2.74%
0.92%
17.19%
1.69%
$111,786
338

10.94%
4.12%
6.81%
0.17%
0.77%
0.23%
1.01%
0.57%
2.99%
0.80%
16.07%
2.43%
$57,649
293

14.49%
4.97%
9.52%
0.27%
1.07%
0.29%
1.34%
0.79%
3.42%
1.10%
19.96%
3.12%
$35,198
291

19.99%
6.10%
13.89%
0.43%
1.56%
0.47%
2.26%
1.13%
4.55%
0.97%
26.39%
4.21%
$21,558
255

34.3%
11.22%
23.08%
0.69%
2.96%
0.83%
3.29%
2.28%
9.67%
2.50%
50.06%
6.21%
$9,431
245

15.07%
5.27%
9.80%
0.28%
1.07%
0.34%
1.40%
0.80%
3.74%
0.95%
18.91%
3.43%
$35,146
105

21.98%
6.65%
15.32%
0.49%
1.49%
0.57%
2.56%
1.43%
3.78%
0.64%
32.77%
4.85%
$21,776
79

40.95%
14.39%
26.56%
0.70%
3.46%
0.98%
3.76%
2.48%
12.64%
2.09%
47.96%
6.90%
$9,751
92

Panel B: California, 2002 (average price of regular gasoline: $1.514)
Total Food
Food Away from Home
Food at Home
Cereals
Dairy
Poultry
Other Meat
Non-alcoholic beverages
Clothing
Leisure and Entertainment
Mortgage or Rent
Gasoline and Motor Oil
Income after taxes
Number of Surveys

18.63%
6.86%
11.77%
0.32%
1.37%
0.42%
1.75%
1.06%
5.16%
5.16%
26.58%
3.74%
$56,327
506

8.79%
4.02%
4.77%
0.12%
0.56%
0.16%
0.74%
0.44%
2.76%
0.87%
20.08%
1.80%
$122,397
137

12.19%
5.55%
6.65%
0.15%
0.74%
0.23%
0.98%
0.55%
4.08%
0.77%
18.40%
2.86%
$58,335
93

Source: Detailed Diary Survey Files from the 2002 Consumer Expenditure Survey.

29

Table II: Regression of Gasoline Prices on Gasoline Expenditures
Dependent Variable:
(1)
(2)
ln(Total Weekly Gasoline Expenditures)
All Households
Urban Households
ln(Gasoline Price)
Number of Vehicles
Number of Vehicles Squared
After-Tax Income (in thousands $)
After-Tax Income Squared
Age
Age Squared
Family Size
Family Size Squared
Female
Employed
Whether Children Present
Population Size of PSUa
Whether on Welfare
Nonwhite
College
Income Quartile Dummies
Monthly Dummies
Yearly Dummies
Time Trend
N
R Squared

1.027***
(0.097)
0.109***
(0.009)
-0.002***
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.0000**
(0.000)
0.015***
(0.002)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.101***
(0.016)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.067***
(0.014)
0.023
(0.015)
-0.012
(0.023)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.097
(0.055)
0.027
(0.028)
-0.015
(0.015)
Y
Y
Y
Y

1.045***
(0.099)
0.110***
(0.010)
-0.002***
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.0000**
(0.000)
0.016***
(0.003)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.103***
(0.016)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.070***
(0.015)
0.016
(0.016)
-0.025
(0.024)
-0.023***
(0.006)
-0.088
(0.056)
0.021
(0.028)
-0.010
(0.015)
Y
Y
Y
Y

10,354
0.147

9,760
0.155

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).
a
PSU are initials for Primary Sampling Unit in the Consumer Expenditure Survey.

30

Table III: Regression of Food Expenditures on Gasoline Prices
Dependent Variable:
ln(Food Away from Home)
ln(Food from Grocery Store)
All
Urban
All
Urban
Households
Households Households
Households
ln(Gasoline Price)
Number of Vehicles
Num. of Vehicles Squared
After-Tax Income
(in thousands of $)
After-Tax Income Squared
Age
Age Squared
Family Size
Family Size Squared
Female
Employed
Whether Children Present
Population Size of PSUa
Whether on Welfare
Nonwhite
College
Income Quartile Dummies
Monthly Dummies
Yearly Dummies
Time Trend
N
R Squared

-0.562**
(0.175)
0.119***
(0.018)
-0.006***
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.0000*
(0.000)
0.015**
(0.005)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.201***
(0.029)
-0.017***
(0.003)
-0.056*
(0.025)
0.000
(0.027)
-0.143***
(0.040)
-0.085***
(0.009)
-0.116
(0.080)
0.025
(0.052)
0.104***
(0.027)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.449*
(0.176)
0.117***
(0.019)
-0.006***
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.0000*
(0.000)
0.013**
(0.005)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.191***
(0.030)
-0.015***
(0.003)
-0.060*
(0.026)
0.004
(0.029)
-0.143***
(0.042)
-0.088***
(0.010)
-0.088
(0.080)
0.012
(0.052)
0.105***
(0.027)
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.146
(0.090)
0.039***
(0.007)
0.000**
(0.000)
0.002***
0.001
-0.0000**
(0.000)
0.027***
(0.002)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.387***
(0.018)
-0.026***
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.013)
-0.055***
(0.014)
-0.030
(0.020)
-0.029***
(0.005)
-0.091*
(0.042)
-0.057*
(0.030)
0.037**
(0.014)
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.189*
(0.089)
0.038***
(0.008)
0.000**
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.0000**
(0.000)
0.027***
(0.003)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.374***
(0.018)
-0.025***
(0.002)
-0.006
(0.013)
-0.055***
(0.014)
-0.021
(0.020)
-0.031***
(0.005)
-0.104*
(0.042)
-0.063*
(0.028)
0.031*
(0.014)
Y
Y
Y
Y

8,612
0.126

8,152
0.126

9,392
0.332

8,863
0.336

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).
a
PSU are initials for Primary Sampling Unit in the Consumer Expenditure Survey.

31

Table IV: Summary Statistics for Survey Responses
Variable
N Responses Mean
Store 1: Low Income
Income (in thousands)
324
52.92
Female
344
0.63
Number of Commuting Adults
345
1.65
Number of Children
343
0.68
Household Size
339
3.16
Completed College
351
0.31
Average Commute Time
328
27.33
Ave. Monthly Gas Expend.
342
160.41
Response to Question 1
340
4.13

St.Dev.

Min

Max

37.02
0.48
1.21
1.12
1.91
0.46
15.00
100.37
2.14

2.5
0
0
0
0
0
8
30
1

130
1
12
7
18
1
50
350
7

Store 2: Middle Income
Income (in thousands)
Female
Number of Commuting Adults
Number of Children
Household Size
Completed College
Average Commute Time
Ave. Monthly Gas Expend
Response to Question 1

602
668
657
647
631
696
652
662
656

52.62
0.62
1.89
0.84
3.52
0.31
29.49
164.40
4.07

37.31
0.48
1.17
1.05
1.77
0.46
15.53
102.67
2.05

2.5
0
0
0
0
0
8
30
1

130
1
6
7
14
1
50
350
7

Store 3: High Income
Income (in thousands)
Female
Number of Commuting Adults
Number of Children
Household Size
Completed College
Average Commute Time
Ave. Monthly Gas Expend
Response to Question 1

122
130
133
128
130
136
120
129
128

79.45
0.62
1.71
0.71
3.02
0.57
28.28
170.50
3.82

36.52
0.49
1.61
1.23
1.61
0.50
15.58
105.55
2.15

2.5
0
0
0
1
0
8
30
1

130
1
12
10
12
1
50
350
7

Source: Store exit survey conducted Nov 8, 9 and 10, 2006.

32

Table V: Analysis of Survey Responses to Question 1
Dependent Variable: Indicator if Agree that Gas Prices Impact Grocery Purchases
Model 1
Model 2
Variable
Coefficient Std.Err. P Value Coefficient Std.Err. P Value
-1.500**
0.333
0.000
-1.814**
0.369
0.000
Constant
-0.040*
0.017
0.015
---Income
---0.023
0.035
0.509
Income spline <=50k
----0.114*
0.056
0.040
Income spline > 50k
0.058
0.060
0.328
0.061
0.060
0.305
Monthly Gasoline Expend.
-0.040
0.042
0.340
-0.032
0.042
0.446
Household Size
0.099**
0.035
0.005
0.096**
0.035
0.007
Reads Nutrition Labels
0.167**
0.034
0.000
0.164**
0.034
0.000
Price Shops Across Stores
0.185
0.144
0.199
0.181
0.145
0.210
Female
N = 948
Log Likelihood: -615.00

N = 946
Log Likelihood: -612.89

Notes: * Denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, ** denotes statistical significance at 1% level or higher.

Table VI: Survey Responses on How Grocery Expenditures are Adjusted
% Rank
% Rank
Mean
it Highest
it Lowest
% Agree
Question 2.1:
6.22
86%
23%
88%
Buy Sale Items
Question 2.2:
5.17
45%
30%
60%
Buy Store Brand
Question 2.3:
3.84
22%
64%
34%
Buy Less Packaged Goods
Question 2.4:
4.29
28%
55%
42%
Buy Less Meat

% Disagree
5%
17%
38%
31%

Source: Store exit survey conducted Nov 8, 9 and 10, 2006.

33

Table VII: Summary Statistics for Store-Level Customer Demographics
Variable
N
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min
Median Household Income
180
$74,078
$30,359
$16,000
(Estimated 2006)
Median Household Income
180
$64,789
$15,324
$30,258
(Census block group 2000)
180
2.759
0.325
2.057
Ave. Household Size
180
$1,072
$205
$653
Median Gross Rent
180
$300,058
$115,387 $122,894
Median House Value
180
0.664
0.137
0.253
Percent White
180
0.054
0.068
0.010
Percent Black
180
0.211
0.115
0.066
Percent Hispanic
180
0.092
0.041
0.026
Percent Below Poverty
180
0.117
0.037
0.055
Percent 65 years plus
180
30.135
3.682
22.475
Commute Time
180
1.847
0.199
1.148
Vehicles per Household

Max
$200,000
$121,442
3.916
$1,691
$766,920
0.861
0.466
0.606
0.278
0.423
42.565
2.253

*Source: Retailer provided information on loyalty card customers’ locations and demographic information. Median
Household Income for 2006 is calculated by taking the median of the estimated 2006 households’ income for card
customers at each store. All other demographics were created by merging data from the 2000 Census at the block group
level to each customer’s block group, and then aggregating to the store level.

Table VIII: Relationship Between ln(Percent Sold on Sale) for Cereal and ln(Gasoline Prices)
Income
Income
Income
Income
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
All
0.190**
0.269**
0.170**
0.179**
0.154**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.012)
(0.029)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.025)
2.915**
3.109**
2.757**
2.692**
3.083**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.045)
(0.103)
(0.082)
(0.083)
(0.091)
-2.365**
-2.657**
-2.134**
-2.099**
-2.536**
Num. Items on Sale Squared
(0.063)
(0.142)
(0.114)
(0.119)
(0.132)
Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store fixed effects
Mean Percent Sold on Sale
N Stores
N Obs

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.645
180
27540

0.661
42
6426

0.660
48
7344

0.643
45
6885

0.616
45
6885

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, ** denotes statistical
significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive process. Source: Store level
scanner data-set.

34

Table IX: Relationship Between ln(Quantity Weighted Price) for Cereal and ln(Gasoline Prices)
Income
Income
Income
Income
All
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
-0.049**
-0.066**
-0.036**
-0.058**
-0.038**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.007)
(0.016)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.013)
-0.497**
-0.403**
-0.464**
-0.516**
-0.578**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.026)
(0.060)
(0.053)
(0.051)
(0.049)
0.321**
0.186*
0.275**
0.341**
0.448**
Num. Items on Sale Squared
(0.037)
(0.083)
(0.073)
(0.073)
(0.071)
Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store fixed effects
Mean Qt. Weighted Price
N Stores
N Obs

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

3.099
180
27540

3.026
42
6426

3.055
48
7344

3.114
45
6885

3.199
45
6885

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, ** denotes statistical
significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive process. Source: Store level scanner
data-set.

35

Table X: Effect of Gasoline Prices on Price Index of Family Cereal
Dependent Variable:
Index of Discounted
Index of Shelf Prices
Prices
Ln(Gasoline price)
Num. Items on Sale
Num. Items on Sale
Squared

N Obs
Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store fixed effects
N Stores

0.002
-0.007
0.221
(0.015)**
-0.223
(0.021)**

0.049
(0.009)**
-0.82
(0.026)**
0.609
(0.036)**

27,540

27,540

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or
higher, ** denotes statistical significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a firstorder auto-regressive process. Source: Store level scanner data-set.

36

Table XI: Regression Results for Family Cereal Category Controlling for Price Index
Dependent Variable:
Ln (Percent Sold
Ln(Quantity-Weighted
on Sale)
Price Paid)
Ln(Gasoline price)
Ln(Net Price Index)
Num. Items on Sale

Num. Items on Sale Squared

N Obs
Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store fixed effects
N Stores

0.206
(0.012)**
-0.468
(0.010)**
2.527
(0.043)**
-2.06
(0.060)**

-0.064
(0.006)**
0.42
(0.005)**
-0.172
(0.024)**
0.059
-0.033

27,540

27,540

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, ** denotes
statistical significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive process. Source:
Store level scanner data-set.

37

Table XII: Regression Results for Family Yogurt Category
Income
Income
All
Group 1
Group 2
Dependent Var: ln(Percent sold on sale)
0.252**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.040)
8.924**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.049)
Num. Items on Sale
-7.198**
Squared
(0.054)
0.503
Mean Percent Sold on Sale
27540
N Obs

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Income
Group 4

0.359**
(0.085)
8.769**
(0.102)

0.234**
(0.076)
8.916**
(0.095)

0.283**
(0.079)
8.747**
(0.095)

0.164*
(0.078)
9.289**
(0.097)

-7.112**
(0.112)
0.526
6426

-7.192**
(0.104)
0.509
7344

-7.094**
(0.106)
0.505
6885

-7.416**
(0.109)
0.472
6885

-0.085**
(0.019)
-0.815**
(0.022)

-0.051**
(0.020)
-0.849**
(0.024)

-0.075**
(0.020)**
-0.905**
(0.025)**

0.135**
(0.025)
0.720
7344

0.094**
(0.027)
0.740
6885

0.125**
(0.028)
0.760
6885

Y
Y
Y
Y
48

Y
Y
Y
Y
45

Y
Y
Y
Y
45

Dependent Var: ln(Quantity weighted price paid)
-0.072** -0.084**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.010)
(0.021)
-0.857** -0.837**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.012)
(0.025)
Num. Items on Sale
0.144** 0.184**
Squared
(0.013)
(0.028)
0.730
0.710
Mean Qt. Weighted Price
27540
6426
N Obs
Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store fixed effects
N Stores

Income
Group 3

Y
Y
Y
Y
42

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, **
denotes statistical significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive
process. Source: Store level scanner data-set.

38

Table XIII: Regression Results for Chicken Category
Income
Income
All
Group 1
Group 2

Income
Group 3

Income
Group 4

Dependent Var: ln(Percent sold on sale)
0.491**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.055)
3.247**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.062)
-2.257**
Num. Items Sale Squared
(0.080)
0.603
Mean Percent Sold on Sale
27322
N Obs

0.548**
(0.129)
3.523**
(0.141)
-2.402**
(0.176)
0.632
6372

0.522**
(0.110)
3.001**
(0.123)
-2.011**
(0.161)
0.610
7281

0.475**
(0.111)
3.424**
(0.128)
-2.481**
(0.164)
0.59
6836

0.445**
(0.091)
3.123**
(0.106)
-2.239**
(0.138)
0.580
6833

Dependent Var: ln(Quantity weighted price paid)
-0.103**
-0.075
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.022)
-0.046
-0.438** -0.543**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.025)
(0.052)
0.098**
0.113
Num. Items Sale Squared
(0.032)
-0.066
2.368
2.050
Mean Qt. Weighted Price
27539
6426
N Obs

-0.095*
(0.044)
-0.423**
(0.051)
0.061
-0.067
2.319
7344

-0.153**
(0.044)
-0.501**
(0.051)
0.161*
(0.066)
2.388
6884

-0.089*
(0.041)
-0.315**
(0.047)
0.100
(0.061)
2.697
6885

Y
Y
Y
Y
48

Y
Y
Y
Y
45

Y
Y
Y
Y
45

Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store Fixed effects
N Stores

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Y
Y
Y
Y
42

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, **
denotes statistical significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive
process. Source: Store level scanner data-set.

39

Table XIV: Regression Results for Fresh Orange Juice Category
Income
Income
Income
All
Group 1
Group 2 Group 3

Income
Group 4

Dependent Var: ln(Percent sold on sale)
0.103**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.007)
1.227**
Num. Sale Items
(0.027)
-0.747**
Num. Sale Items Squared
(0.027)
0.829
Mean Percent Sold on Sale
27540
N Obs

0.075**
(0.016)
1.206**
(0.057)
-0.737**
(0.058)
0.835
6426

0.103**
(0.013)
1.262**
(0.050)
-0.777**
(0.051)
0.830
7344

0.103**
(0.014)
1.181**
(0.054)
-0.697**
(0.055)
0.834
6885

0.131**
(0.014)
1.235**
(0.054)
-0.755**
(0.056)
0.818
6885

Dependent Var: ln(Quantity weighted price paid)
-0.109** -0.101**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.008)
(0.018)
-0.206** -0.166*
Num. Sale Items
(0.032)
(0.067)
0.227** 0.230**
Num. Sale Items Squared
(0.033)
(0.068)
3.102
3.032
Mean Qt. Weighted Price
27540
6426
N Obs

-0.116**
(0.016)
-0.244**
(0.061)
0.276**
(0.062)
3.079
7344

-0.106**
(0.016)
-0.123
-0.063
0.117
-0.065
3.124
6885

-0.110**
(0.016)
-0.289**
(0.067)
0.284**
(0.069)
3.166
6885

Y
Y
Y
Y
48

Y
Y
Y
Y
45

Y
Y
Y
Y
45

Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store Fixed effects
N Stores

Y
Y
Y
Y
180

Y
Y
Y
Y
42

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, **
denotes statistical significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive
process. Source: Store level scanner data-set.

40

Table XV: Effect of Gasoline Prices on Total Volume Sold and Total Revenues
Cereal
Yogurt
Chicken
Orange Juice
Dependent Var: ln(Total quantity sold)*
0.374**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.033)
1.507**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.066)
Num. Items on Sale
-1.327**
Squared
(0.092)
Dependent Var: ln(Total net revenues)
0.299**
Ln(Gasoline price)
(0.028)
0.910**
Num. Items on Sale
(0.049)
Num. Items on Sale
-0.870**
Squared
(0.068)
Other Controls:
Regional time trends
Regional month effects
Holidays
Store fixed effects
N Stores
N Obs

Y
Y
Y
Y
180
27540

0.819**
(0.035)
1.638**
(0.033)

0.842**
(0.039)
0.463**
(0.053)

0.435**
(0.033)
0.269**
(0.065)

-0.370**
(0.036)

-0.239**
(0.069)

-0.471**
(0.066)

0.584**
(0.033)
0.801**
(0.025)

0.896**
(0.037)
0.028
(0.036)

0.117**
(0.029)
0.321**
(0.046)

-0.258**
(0.027)

-0.280**
(0.047)

-0.443**
(0.047)

Y
Y
Y
Y
180
27540

Y
Y
Y
Y
180
27539

Y
Y
Y
Y
180
27540

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, * denotes statistical significance at the 5% level or higher, ** denotes
statistical significance at 1% level or higher. Residuals allowed to follow a first-order auto-regressive process.
Source: Store level scanner data-set. Note that for Total Revenues, sample size drops to 27539 for the Chicken
category only. *Total quantity sold is in appropriate units for each category (e.g. pounds for chicken, and six
ounce cups for yogurt).

41

1/
3/
2
4/ 000
3/
20
7/ 0 0
3/
10 200
/3 0
/2
1/ 000
3/
2
4/ 00
3/ 1
20
7/ 0 1
3/
10 200
/3 1
/2
1/ 001
3/
2
4/ 002
3/
20
7/ 0 2
3/
10 200
/3 2
/2
1/ 002
3/
2
4/ 00
3/ 3
2
7/ 003
3/
10 200
/3 3
/2
1/ 003
3/
2
4/ 004
3/
2
7/ 004
3/
2
10 00
/3 4
/2
1/ 004
3/
2
4/ 00
3/ 5
2
7/ 005
3/
2
10 00
/3 5
/2
1/ 005
3/
2
4/ 00
3/ 6
2
7/ 006
3/
2
10 00
/3 6
/2
00
6

Dollars per Gallon

Figure I: Weekly Gasoline and Crude Oil Prices for 2001- 2006

Gasoline and Crude Oil Prices, 2000-2006

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

West Coast (No CA) Regular All Formulations
CA Regular Reformulated

U.S. Regular All Formulations
Crude Oil

42

0

50

100

.1
-.1

0
Log Gas Price Residuals

Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals
.1

-.2

.05

-.2

.1

-.1

0
Log Gas Price Residuals

Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals
.12
.14
.16

.1

.18

.15

Figure II: Smoothed Regression Line of Regression Residuals for
Percent of Cereal Sold On Sale and Retail Gasoline Prices

0

150

50

100

150

Week

Week

Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals

Log Gas Price Residuals

Log Gas Price Residuals

0

50

100

150

Week
Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals

Log Gas Price Residuals

.1

-.04

-.1

0
Log Gas Price Residuals

Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals
-.08
-.06

-.2

-.12

-.2

-.1

-.1

-.1

0
Log Gas Price Residuals

Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals
-.05
0

.1

.05

Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals

0

50

100

150

Week
Log % Purchased On Sale Residuals

Log Gas Price Residuals

43

