                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE TRANSMISSION OF DOMESTIC SHOCKS IN THE OPEN ECONOMY

                                        Christopher J. Erceg
                                         Christopher Gust
                                        David López-Salido

                                       Working Paper 13613
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13613


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We thank Malin Adolfson (our discussant), Jordi Galí, Mark Gertler, Steve Kamin, Donald Kohn,
Andrew Levin, and John Taylor for helpful comments and suggestions, and seminar participants at
the Federal Reserve Board, and at the June 2007 NBER Conference "International Dimensions of
Monetary Policy." We also thank Hilary Croke for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System.

© 2007 by Christopher J. Erceg, Christopher Gust, and David López-Salido. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Transmission of Domestic Shocks in the Open Economy
Christopher J. Erceg, Christopher Gust, and David López-Salido
NBER Working Paper No. 13613
November 2007
JEL No. E52,F41,F47

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper uses an open economy DSGE model to explore how trade openness affects the transmission
of domestic shocks. For some calibrations, closed and open economies appear dramatically different,
reminiscent of the implications of Mundell-Fleming style models. However, we argue such stark differences
hinge on calibrations that impose an implausibly high trade price elasticity and Frisch elasticity of
labor supply. Overall, our results suggest that the main effects of openness are on the composition
of expenditure, and on the wedge between consumer and domestic prices, rather than on the response
of aggregate output and domestic prices.


Christopher J. Erceg                                David López-Salido
The Federal Reserve Board                           Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 20                                        Mail Stop 71
20th and C Street, N.W.                             20th and C Streets, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551                              Washington, DC 20551
christopher.erceg@frb.gov                           David.J.Lopez-Salido@frb.gov

Christopher Gust
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 42B
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
christopher.j.gust@frb.gov
1     Introduction
With the rapid expansion in world trade during the past two decades, policymakers have
become increasingly interested in the consequences of greater trade openness for macroe-
conomic behavior. Considerable attention has focused on how external shocks may play a
more prominent role in driving domestic fluctuations as trade linkages grow, and as devel-
oping countries such as China exert a progressively larger influence on global energy and
commodity prices. Our paper examines a different aspect of globalization that has received
less scrutiny in the recent literature. In particular, we investigate whether changes in trade
openness are likely to have a substantial impact on the transmission of domestic shocks.
    Economists have long recognized that openness could potentially affect the responses of
real activity to domestic shocks, including to monetary and fiscal policy. The Mundell (1962)
and Fleming (1962) framework showed that fiscal shocks could have dramatically different
effects depending on whether an economy was open or closed: in contrast to the stimulative
effect of a government spending rise on output in a closed economy, the same shock had no
effect on output in an open economy, as real exchange rate appreciation crowded out real
net exports.
    A longstanding literature has also assessed the implications of openness for the effects
of domestic shocks on inflation. Perhaps most obviously, economists drew attention to the
potential divergence between domestic prices and consumer prices in an open economy, re-
flecting the sensitivity of the latter to import prices. But important contributions in the
1970s and early 1980s also analyzed how the behavior of domestic price-setting could be
affected by openness. Influential work by Dornbusch (1983) linked the desired markup in a
monopolistic competition framework to the real exchange rate, and showed how the markup
could be expected to decline in response to real exchange rate appreciation (reflecting in-
creased competitive pressure from abroad). In an NBER conference volume nearly a quarter
century ago, Dornbusch and Fischer (1984) used this framework to argue that changes in the
slope of the Phillips Curve due to increased trade openness were likely to have substantial


                                              1
implications for the transmission of monetary and fiscal policy. Specifically, these authors
argued that monetary shocks were likely to cause domestic prices to respond more quickly
due to an effective steepening of the Phillips Curve.
       In this paper, we use a two country DSGE modeling framework to revisit the question of
how changes in trade openness affect the economy’s responses to monetary and fiscal shocks,
as well as to a representative supply shock.1 Our analysis is heavily influenced by several
important papers that compare the characteristics of optimal policy rules in closed and
open economies by Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (2001), Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (2002), and
Galı́ and Monacelli (2005).2 However, the main objective of these papers was to highlight
conditions under which the policy problem in closed and open economies was formally similar:
under such conditions, policy prescriptions from the closed economy carried over to the open
economy with suitable changes in parameters. Our paper differs substantially insofar as
its objective is to provide a quantitative assessment of the differences in the transmission
channel as the trade openness of the economy varies.
       We focus much of our analysis on a simple “workhorse” open economy model that ex-
tends Galı́ and Monacelli (2005) by incorporating nominal wage rigidities and additional
shocks. Although our model allows for spillover effects between the two countries, it can be
approximated by a system of dynamic equations that parallels the closed economy model of
Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000) in the special case in which the home country’s share
of world output becomes arbitrarily small. As in the Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000)
model, the presence of nominal wage rigidities confronts the policymaker with a tradeoff
between stabilizing inflation and the output (or employment) gap. The parsimonious struc-
ture of our open economy model makes it easy to identify the economic channels through
which openness affects aggregate demand and supply, and hence the tradeoffs confronting
   1
     Our approach follows the seminal work of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) and a large subsequent literature
that incorporates nominal rigidities into microfounded open-economy DSGE models. See Lane (2001) for a
survey.
   2
     There is a burgeoning literature examining optimal monetary policy in an open-economy setting. Some
notable examples include Benigno and Benigno (2003), Corsetti and Pesenti (2005), and Devereux and Engel
(2003).


                                                    2
policymakers. But while distinguishing these channels is useful for heuristic purposes, the
differences between the closed and open economies can be attributed to effects on a single
composite parameter that affects the behavioral equations in the same way as the intertem-
poral elasticity of substitution parameter (σ) in a closed economy model: i.e., by affecting
the interest elasticity of aggregate demand, and the wealth effect on labor supply.3 Given
that this parameter can be expressed as a weighted average of the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution and the trade price elasticity, where the weight on the latter varies directly
with openness, it is straightforward to assess how changes in openness affect equilibrium
responses under a wide range of calibrations.
       Our analysis shows that, in principle, there could be very pronounced divergence in the
effects of the domestic shocks on output and domestic inflation as trade openness increases.
In particular, with both a very high trade price elasticity and Frisch elasticity of labor
supply, the enhanced ability to smooth consumption in the open economy markedly alters
the wealth effect of shocks on labor supply, and the slope of the household’s MRS schedule
(tending to flatten it). These changes can have substantial effects on aggregate supply, and
through their effect on marginal costs, on domestic inflation and output. Moreover, on
the aggregate demand side, higher openness increases the effective interest-elasticity of the
economy, provided that the trade price elasticity is higher than the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution in consumption. In the extreme case in which the trade price elasticity becomes
infinitely high, our workhorse model in fact implies that government spending shocks have
no effect on output.
       However, under more empirically plausible values of the trade price elasticity, the struc-
tural relations determining domestic inflation are not very sensitive to the parameters de-
termining openness. The interest-sensitivity of aggregate demand, or “slope” of the New
Keynesian IS curve, exhibits somewhat more variation with openness, reflecting that the
trade price elasticity (of 1-1/2) is much higher than the intertemporal elasticity of substitu-
   3
    This extends the results of Galı́ and Monacelli (2005), who also showed that the effects of openness can
be summarized in a single composite parameter.



                                                     3
tion of consumption under our benchmark calibration (so that putting a larger weight on the
former, as occurs with greater openness, increases the interest-sensitivity of the economy).
Overall, although openness does exert some effect on the responses of domestic inflation,
output, and real interest rates to the inflation target change, government spending, and
technology shocks we consider, the size of the changes seems quite modest given the wide
range of variation in the trade share examined (from 0 to 35 percent). The main implica-
tions of openness are apparent in the composition of the expenditure response, with exports
playing a larger role in a highly open economy, and in the wedge between consumer and
domestic prices.
   We then proceed to consider several variants of our workhorse model. First, we compare
incomplete markets with the complete markets setting, and again conclude that openness
exerts fairly small effects unless the trade price elasticity and Frisch elasticity of labor supply
are quite high. Second, we consider endogenous capital accumulation, and find that the dif-
ferences between closed and open economies are even smaller than in our workhorse model,
reflecting in part that endogenous capital boosts the interest-rate elasticity of domestic de-
mand. Third, we consider a specification in which imports are used as intermediate goods;
for reasonable calibrations of the import share, it seems to have small effects on our results.
Fourth, we examine the implications of a framework that allows for both local currency pric-
ing (as in Betts and Devereux (1996) and Devereux and Engel (2002)) and variable desired
markups in the spirit of Dornbusch. We find that these mechanisms can amplify differences
in the response of domestic inflation as the degree of openness varies. For example, domestic
inflation falls by less in response to a positive technology shock in a highly open economy,
reflecting that the associated exchange rate depreciation reduces the price competitiveness
of imports (which encourages domestic producers to boost their markups). However, large
differences in trade openness appear required for these effects to show through quantitatively.
   A natural question is whether the alternative specifications suggested above would affect
our conclusions if they were incorporated into our model jointly rather than in isolation.
We address this question by examining the responses of the SIGMA model. SIGMA is a

                                                4
multicountry DSGE model used at the Federal Reserve Board for policy simulations, and
is well-suited to address this question insofar as it includes many of the key features of the
workhorse model and the variants, as well as various real rigidities designed to improve its
empirical performance (e.g., adjustment costs on imports). We consider the responses of the
SIGMA model to the same underlying shocks – including to the inflation target, government
spending, and technology – and essentially corroborate our main finding that the responses
of domestic inflation and output are not particularly sensitive to openness.
    This paper is organized as follows. We begin by presenting the simulations of the SIGMA
model in Section 2. This approach proves helpful both as a way of highlighting our main
results, and for pointing out some restrictive features of the heuristic models discussed in the
subsequent sections against the backdrop of this more general model (e.g., the implications
of abstracting from capital accumulation in the workhorse model). Section 3 describes the
workhorse model, and then assesses how openness affects the equilibrium under both flexible
and sticky prices. Section 4 considers several modifications of the workhorse model. Section
5 concludes.


2     Theoretical and Empirical Motivation
In this section, we use a two country version of the SIGMA model to illustrate how trade
openness affects the propagation of three different domestic shocks, including a reduction in
the central bank’s target inflation rate, a rise in government spending, and a highly persistent
rise in technology. In the case of the shock to the inflation target, we compare the model’s
implications to historical episodes of disinflation that occurred in the United States, Canada,
and the United Kingdom during the early 1980s and early 1990s. Readers who wish to skip
ahead to Sections 3 and 4 – in which we fully describe a much simpler workhorse DSGE
model and some variants to investigate the same questions – may do so without loss of
continuity.




                                               5
2.1     SIGMA Simulations

SIGMA incorporates an array of nominal and real rigidities to help the model yield plau-
sible implications across a broad spectrum of domestic and international shocks.4 On the
aggregate demand side, it allows for habit persistence in consumption, costs of changing the
level of investment, and costs of adjusting trade flows.5 Final consumption and investment
goods are produced using both domestically-produced goods and imports. International fi-
nancial markets are incomplete, so that households are restricted to borrowing or lending
internationally through the medium of a non-state contingent bond. On the supply side,
prices are set in staggered Calvo-style contracts in both the home and foreign market, with
exporters setting their price in local currency terms, as in Betts and Devereux (1996) and
Devereux and Engel (2002). SIGMA embeds demand curves with non-constant elasticities
(NCES) that induce ‘strategic complementarity’ in price setting (as in Kimball (1995)). In
the spirit of Dornbusch (1983), this feature implies that the desired markup varies in re-
sponse to real exchange rate fluctuations, creating an incentive for firms to charge different
prices in home and foreign markets even under fully flexible prices. As shown by Bergin and
Feenstra (2001), Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson (2006), and Gust and Sheets (2006), it can
account for low exchange rate passthrough to import prices. Wages are also set in staggered
Calvo-style contracts.6
    Monetary policy is assumed to follow a Taylor rule in which the nominal interest rate
responds to the deviation of domestic inflation from the central bank’s inflation target and
to the output gap. Government purchases are exogenous, have no direct effect on the utility
of households, and are financed by lump-sum taxes.
   4
     An inclusive description of SIGMA is provided by Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust (2006) for the case in which
product demand is characterized by a Dixit-Stiglitz CES aggregator, implying a constant desired markup.
Gust and Sheets (2006) extend the model to allow for variable desired markups, as in the version used in
this paper, though they abstract from capital accumulation and examine a smaller array of shocks.
   5
     Our specification of habit persistence in consumption and adjustment costs on investment follows Smets
and Wouters (2003).
   6
     Following Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), SIGMA incorporates dynamic indexation of both
price and wage contracts, though the latter are indexed to past aggregate wage inflation.




                                                     6
      Figure 1 shows the effects of a one percentage point permanent reduction in the home
country’s inflation target under three different calibrations of trade openness. The solid line
shows the effects under our benchmark calibration based on U.S. data, so that the ratio of
imports to GDP is 12 percent. The dashed line shows an alternative in which we lower the
import share to 1 percent (labeled “nearly closed”), while the dotted line shows a second
alternative in which the import share is 35 percent (“high openness”).7 The horizontal axis
shows quarters that have elapsed following the shock.
      The effects of the reduction in the inflation target are qualitatively similar regardless
of the degree of openness. The reduction in the inflation target requires policymakers to
increase interest rates, causing output to contract and the real exchange rate (not shown)
to appreciate. Private absorption falls in response to the higher interest rates, and exports
also decline due to the induced appreciation of the real exchange rate. Both domestic and
consumer price inflation fall, and roughly converge to their new target level after two years.
      Perhaps somewhat remarkably, the responses of key macro aggregates – including output,
domestic price inflation, and the real interest rate – show little quantitative variation with
different degrees of openness. The sacrifice ratio – which we measure as the sum of (annu-
alized) output gaps in the twenty quarters following the start of the disinflation, divided by
the change in the inflation rate of one percentage point – is about 1.1 under each calibration.
Aside from the slightly larger initial output decline under the high openness calibration, the
main differences in the responses are compositional. For the highly open economy, more
of the output contraction is attributable to a fall in real net exports; in addition, given
the larger share of imported goods in the consumption basket, there is a greater disparity
between the response of consumer price inflation and domestic price inflation.
      The similarity in the responses of output, domestic price inflation, and the real interest
rate is mainly attributable to two factors. First, the interest-sensitivity of aggregate demand
only rises slightly as trade openness increases. Although our benchmark calibration imposes
  7
     In these experiments, we vary openness by changing the share parameter in the NCES aggregators used
to produce consumption and investment from the home and foreign goods.



                                                   7
a rather high long-run trade price elasticity of 1-1/2, providing a strong channel (through
the uncovered interest parity condition) for real interest rates to influence exports, private
absorption has a comparable interest-sensitivity due to the high responsiveness of investment.
This can be garnered from the bottom panels of the figure: exports only contract a bit more
sharply than private absorption in response to higher real interest rates. This helps to explain
why output only shows a slightly larger contraction under a 35 percent trade share than in
the case in which the trade share is only 1 percent of GDP. 8 The second factor is that desired
price markups and real marginal costs do not change significantly with greater openness, so
that domestic price inflation responds very similarly across the different calibrations. Overall,
these results do not indicate a significant quantitative “steepening” of the Phillips Curve due
to greater openness in response to this particular shock.9
       Interestingly, historical episodes of disinflation in the United States, Canada, and the
United Kingdom seem reasonably supportive of the model’s implications. Figure 2 shows
the evolution of inflation (measured as the annual changes in the GDP deflator) and the
output gap (as measured by the OECD) for the United States, Canada, and the United
Kingdom for two different periods of disinflation (the early 1980s and early 1990s). As
seen in the left column of Figure 2, inflation in both the United States and Canada fell
from roughly 10 percent to 4 percent during the disinflations that occurred during the early
1980s, while the output gap expanded (in absolute value) by roughly 6-7 percent in each
country. The sacrifice ratio in the United Kingdom was somewhat lower during that episode,
as inflation fell by considerably more, while the output gap expanded by a similar amount.
   8
      Given the presence of adjustment costs on the expenditure components, the interest-sensitivity depends
on how persistent an effect the shock has on the real interest rate. For shocks that exert more persistent effects
on real interest rates, exports show a relatively higher interest-sensitivity than private domestic demand, and
the aggregate interest-sensitivity of the economy rises more substantially with openness. For example, the
interest-sensitivity rises more with greater openness under an alternative model calibration that increases
the duration of wage and price contracts (since the real interest rate response in that case is more persistent).
Similarly, the government spending shock below has a more persistent impact on the real interest rate, with
the implication that the economy becomes more interest-sensitive with greater openness.
    9
      The limited variation in the desired markup reflects that the real interest rate shows a fairly transient
rise, and hence the real exchange rate does not appreciate much. Under an alternative model calibration
implying a more persistent rise in real interest rates – derived by assuming longer contract durations – desired
markups and hence inflation show more variation with openness.


                                                        8
In the 1990s, the three experiences also were reasonably similar, with Canada perhaps having
a somewhat higher sacrifice ratio than the United States, and the United Kingdom a slightly
lower sacrifice ratio. Thus, while the evidence is somewhat noisy, the sacrifice ratio does not
appear to vary with openness in a systematic way.10
       Figure 3 shows the effects of an increase in government spending.11 From a qualitative
perspective, the government spending hike has similar effects on key macroeconomic variables
across the alternative calibrations. The expansion in aggregate demand initially raises output
and real interest rates. Higher real interest rates and an induced appreciation of the real
exchange rate eventually cause output to revert towards baseline due to a crowding out of
private domestic demand and real net exports. Domestic inflation rises because of a positive
output gap, and because the expansion in the level of output puts additional upward pressure
on marginal cost; the latter effect reflects the interplay of diminishing returns and nominal
wage rigidity, so that the real wage remains above the level that would prevail under flexible
wage adjustment.12
       Comparing the alternative calibrations, it is evident that higher openness mitigates the
rise in output, short-term real interest rates, and inflation. Quite intuitively, a highly open
economy can rely on a decline in real net exports to alleviate pressure on domestic resources:
under our benchmark calibration, this effect is large enough to imply that the fiscal shock
imparts less stimulus to domestic output, and boosts interest rates by less. Nevertheless, the
differences in the output responses are not especially pronounced given the wide variation in
trade shares examined, and even differences in the response of short-term interest rates are
small after a few years (i.e., given the expectations theory holds in our log-linearized model,
  10
     Ball (1994) reached similar conclusions based on sacrifice ratios for a much larger set of episodes. Our
approach differs insofar as we compare sacrifice ratios across countries over similar time periods (rather
than pooling all episodes together) as a rough means of controlling for different levels of monetary policy
credibility.
  11
     Government spending is modelled as an AR(1) process with an autocorrelation coefficient equal to 0.97.
  12
     Thus, even if the monetary rule were aggressive enough to close the output gap, the gap between the
real wage and flexible price real wage would put upward pressure on marginal cost and inflation. We provide
an extensive discussion of the implications of the “real wage gap” for marginal cost and inflation in Section
3.7.



                                                     9
longer-term real interest rates show much less divergence). Thus, the more salient differences
across calibrations are in the composition of the expenditure response. In a relatively closed
economy, falling private absorption (especially investment) bears the burden of adjustment,
while a decline in real net exports is the catalyst for adjustment in a highly open economy.
       The responses of domestic price inflation exhibit fairly substantial variation with trade
openness, with the peak inflation response only about half as large in the highly open econ-
omy as in the nearly closed economy. Under a Taylor rule, the output gap (not shown) is
smaller in the highly open economy, reflecting the higher interest elasticity of aggregate de-
mand. Moreover, the smaller expansion in the level of output also puts less upward pressure
on marginal costs (the latter is relevant because wages are sticky). Finally, given that the
fall in import prices has a larger effect on consumer prices when trade openness is high,
the responses of consumer price inflation show even more divergence than those of domestic
inflation.
       Figure 4 shows a persistent increase in the level of technology.13 The effects are qual-
itatively similar across the three calibrations. In each case, output has a hump-shaped
response peaking around five or six quarters after the shock, both domestic and consumer
price inflation fall on impact, and the real exchange rate depreciates.
       The fall in domestic price inflation occurs because wages adjust slowly to their higher
post-shock level. Openness tends to mute the decline in domestic price inflation through two
channels. First, it reduces the magnitude of the rise in the real wage. This is because the real
exchange rate depreciation retards the expansion in consumption as the economy becomes
more open, so that the wealth effect on labor supply is smaller. Second, the depreciation
of the real exchange rate and consequent rise in import prices induce domestic producers to
raise their markup, as they feel less competition from foreign producers. In a more open
economy, the pricing decisions of foreign exporters becomes relatively more important to the
price decisions of domestic firms; thus, the rise in import prices plays a more noticeable role
in moderating the fall in domestic prices.
  13
       The technology shock is an AR(1) process with an autocorrelation coefficient equal to 0.97.


                                                      10
    Finally, there are pronounced differences in the composition of the output response as
openness increases, with real exports playing a more prominent role, as well as in the degree
of divergence between consumer and domestic price inflation. Notably, given that exchange
rate depreciation pushes up import prices, consumer prices show much less of a decline in
the highly open economy.


3     The Workhorse Model
Our workhorse model builds heavily on the small open economy model of Galı́ and Monacelli
(2005), which we extend to a two country setting. Because these countries may differ in
population size, but are otherwise isomorphic, our exposition focuses on the “home” country.
Each country in effect produces a single domestic output good, though we adopt a standard
monopolistically competitive framework to rationalize stickiness in the aggregate price level.
Households consume both the domestically-produced good and an imported good. Household
preferences are assumed to be of the constant elasticity form, which allows us to analyze the
implications of home bias, and a price elasticity of import demand different from unity.
Finally, we generalize the Galı́ and Monacelli (2005) model by incorporating nominal wage
rigidities.

3.1     Households and Wage Setting

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive households indexed by h ∈ [0, 1], each
of which supplies a differentiated labor service to an intermediate goods-producing sector
(the only producers demanding labor services in our framework). It is convenient to assume
that a representative labor aggregator (or “employment agency”) combines households’ labor
hours in the same proportions as firms would choose. Thus, the aggregator’s demand for
each household’s labor is equal to the sum of firms’ demands. The aggregate labor index Lt
has the Dixit-Stiglitz form:
                                      ·Z       1                           ¸1+θw
                                                                 1
                               Lt =                (ζNt (h))   1+θw   dh           ,       (1)
                                           0


                                                        11
where θw > 0 and Nt (h) is hours worked by each member of household h. The parameter ζ
is the size of a household of type h. It determines the size of the home country’s population,
and effectively the share of world output produced by the home country in the steady state.
The aggregator minimizes the cost of producing a given amount of the aggregate labor index,
taking each household’s wage rate Wt (h) as given, and then sells units of the labor index to
the production sector at their unit cost Wt :
                                      ·Z 1           ¸−θw
                                                 −1
                                Wt =       Wt (h) dh
                                                 θ w      .                                          (2)
                                                      0

It is natural to interpret Wt as the aggregate wage index. The aggregator’s demand for the
labor services of a typical member of household h is given by
                                                      ·         ¸− 1+θ w
                                                       Wt (h)       θw
                                              Nt (h) =                     Lt /ζ.                    (3)
                                                        Wt

   The utility functional of household h is
                                   ∞
                                   X           σ          σ−1   χ0
                              Et         βj       Ct+j (h) σ −     Nt+j (h)1+χ ,                     (4)
                                   j=0
                                              σ−1              1+χ

where Ct (h) and Nt (h) denote each household’s current consumption and hours of labor,
respectively (which are assumed to be identical across the household’s individual members).
The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption, σ, satisfies σ > 0, and we assume
that 0 < β < 1, χ > 0, and χ0 > 0.
   Household h faces a flow budget constraint in period t which states that combined ex-
penditure on goods and on the net accumulation of financial assets must equal its disposable
income:
                Z
 PCt Ct (h) +           ξt,t+1 Bt+1 (h) = Bt (h) + (1 + τw )Wt (h) Nt (h) + RKt K + Γt (h) − Tt (h) . (5)
                    s

(where variables have been expressed in per capita terms). We assume that household h can
trade a complete set of contingent claims, with ξt,t+1 denoting the price of an asset that will
pay one unit of domestic currency in a particular state of nature at date t+1, and Bt+1 (h) the
quantity of claims purchased (for notational simplicity, we have suppressed all of the state

                                                          12
indices.) Each household purchases the consumption good at a price PCt , and earns (per
capita) labor income of (1 + τW )Wt (h) Nt (h), where τW is an employment subsidy (designed
to allow the flexible price equilibrium to be efficient). Each household also has a fixed stock
of capital (K) which it leases to firms at the rental rate RKt . It receives an aliquot share
Γt (h) of the profits of all firms, and pays lump sum taxes, Tt (h) to the government. In every
period t, household h maximizes the utility functional (4) with respect to its consumption
and holdings of contingent claims subject to its budget constraint (5), taking bond prices,
the rental price of capital, and the price of the consumption bundle as given.
   We assume that household wages are determined by Calvo-style staggered contracts sub-
ject to wage indexation. In particular, with probability 1 − ξw , each household is allowed to
reoptimize its wage contract. If a household is not allowed to optimize its wage rate, it re-
sets its wage according to Wt (h) = ωt−1 Wt−1 (h), where ωt = Wt /Wt−1 . Household h chooses
the value of Wt (h) to maximize its utility functional (4), yielding the following first-order
condition:
                  ∞
                  X                 (1 + τw ) Λt+j
             Et         β j ξwj {                   Vwt+j Wt (h) − χ0t+j Nt+j (h)χ }Nt+j (h) = 0,           (6)
                  j=0
                                    (1 + θw ) PCt+j
                                                                                            Qj
where Λt is the marginal value of a unit of consumption, and Vwt+j =                         h=1   ωt+h−1 . The
employment subsidy τW is chosen to exactly offset the monopolistic distortion θW , so that
the household’s marginal rate of substitution would equal the consumption real wage in the
absence of nominal wage rigidities.

3.2    Firms and Price Setting

   Production of Domestic Intermediate Goods. There is a continuum of differenti-
ated intermediate goods (indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]) in the home country, each of which is produced
by a single monopolistically competitive firm. These differentiated goods are combined into
a composite home good, Yt , according to
                                                   ·Z       1                     ¸1+θp
                                                                           1
                                            Yt =                Yt (i)   1+θp
                                                                                di      ,                   (7)
                                                        0


                                                                   13
by a representative firm, or “domestic goods aggregator,” that is a perfect competitor in
both output and input markets. The aggregator’s demand for good i is given by:
                                                 µ             ¶− (1+θ p)
                                                     PDt (i)        θp
                                      Yt (i) =                              Yt ,               (8)
                                                      PDt

where PDt (i) is the price of good i and PDt is an aggregate price index given by PDt =
hR             −1
                    i−θp
    1
   0
      P Dt (i) θp
                  di     .
   Intermediate good i is produced by a monopolistically competitive firm, whose output
Yt (i) is produced according to a Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                      Yt (i) = Kt (i)α (Zt Lt (i))1−α ,                        (9)

where α > 0 and Zt denotes a stationary, country-specific shock to the level of technology.
Intermediate goods producers face perfectly competitive factor markets for hiring capital
and labor. Thus, each firm chooses Kt (i) and Lt (i), taking as given both the rental price
of capital RKt and the aggregate wage index Wt . Within a country, both capital and labor
are completely mobile; thus, the standard static first-order conditions for cost minimization
imply that all firms have identical marginal cost per unit of output:
                                       µ       ¶1−α µ      ¶α
                                          Wt          RKt
                               M Ct =                                                         (10)
                                         1−α           α

   Similar to household wages, the domestic-currency prices of firms are determined accord-
ing to Calvo-style staggered contracts subject to indexation. In particular, firm i faces a
constant probability, 1 − ξp , of being able to re-optimize its price, PDt (i). If firm i can not
re-optimize its price in period t, the firm resets its price according to PDt (i) = πt−1 PDt−1 (i)
where πt = PDt /PDt−1 . When firm i can re-optimize in period t, the firm maximizes
                     ∞
                     X
                Et         ξpj ψt,t+j [(1 + τp )VDt+j PDt (i) Yt+j (i) − M Ct+j Yt+j (i)] ,   (11)
                     j=0


taking ψt,t+j , M Ct , τp , VDt , and its demand schedule as given. Here, ψt,t+j is the stochastic
                                                Q
discount factor, VDt+j is defined as VDt+j = jh=1 πt+h−1 , and τp is a production subsidy that

                                                        14
is calibrated to make the flexible price equilibrium efficient.14 The first-order condition for
setting PDt (i) is:
                       ∞
                       X                  µ                                  ¶
                                              (1 + τp )VDt+j PDt (i)
                  Et         ψt,t+j ξpj                              − M Ct+j Yt+j (i) = 0.             (12)
                       j=0
                                                    (1 + θp )

       Production of Consumption Goods. Final consumption goods are produced by a
perfectly competitive “consumption good distributor.” The representative distributor com-
bines purchases of the domestically-produced composite good, CDt (obtained from the do-
mestic goods distributor), with an imported good, MCt , to produce private consumption,
Ct , according to a CES production function:

                                     µ                          1        ρc       1
                                                                                       ¶1+ρc
                                                       ρc
                                                              1+ρc      1+ρc    1+ρc
                             Ct =         (1 − ωc )   1+ρc   CDt     + ωc      MCt             ,        (13)

       We assume that the form of this CES aggregator mirrors the preferences of households
over consumption of domestically-produced goods and imports. Accordingly, the quasi-share
parameter ωc in equation (13) may be interpreted as determining household preferences for
foreign relative to domestic goods. In the steady state, ωc is the share of imports in the
household’s consumption bundle, so that the import share of the economy is determined as
the product of ωc and the (private) consumption share of GDP.
       The distributor sells its final consumption good to households at price PCt and also
purchases the home and foreign composite goods at their respective prices, PDt and PM t .
We assume that producers of the composite domestic and foreign goods practice producer
                                          ∗
currency pricing. Accordingly, PM t = et PDt , where et is the exchange rate expressed as units
                                                                            ∗
of domestic currency required to purchase one unit of foreign currency and PDt is the price
of the foreign composite good in the foreign currency (we use an asterisk to denote foreign
variables). Profit maximization implies that the demand schedules for the imported and
  14
     As discussed earlier in the household problem, we defined ξt,t+j to be the price in period t of a claim
that pays one dollar if the specified state occurs in period t + j. Thus, the corresponding element of ψt,t+j
equals ξt,t+j divided by the probability that the specified state will occur.



                                                               15
domestically-produced aggregate goods are given by:
                       µ          ¶ −(1+ρc)                                   µ         ¶ −(1+ρc)
                           PM t       ρc                                          PDt       ρc
            MCt = ωc                          Ct   and     CDt = (1 − ωc )                          Ct .   (14)
                           PCt                                                    PCt

The zero profit condition in the distribution sector implies:
                                 µ             1          1
                                                             ¶1+ρc
                                             1+ρc       1+ρc
                           PCt = (1 − ωc )PDt + ωc PM t            .                                       (15)

According to equation (15), in an open economy, the consumer price level depends on both
domestic and foreign prices, while if an economy is closed to trade (i.e., ωc = 0), consumer
prices depend only on domestic prices.

3.3    Monetary and Fiscal Policy

We assume that the central bank follows an interest rate reaction function:

                                    it = γπ (πt − πtT ) + γy (yt − ytpot ),                                (16)

where the variables have been specified as the logarithmic deviation from its steady state
value. The nominal interest rate responds to the deviation of domestic price inflation from
the central bank’s exogenous inflation target, πtT , and the deviation of output from potential
output (y pot ), where potential output is defined as the economy’s level of output in the
absence of sticky wages and prices.
   As noted above, openness can give rise to important differences between the domestic
price level and the consumer price level. We specify a rule that responds to domestic price
inflation rather than consumer price inflation in order to minimize differences between an
open and closed economy that would simply be attributable to the monetary rule, rather
than to differences in the underlying structure of the economy.
   The government purchases some of the domestically produced good. Government pur-
chases, Gt , are assumed to follow an exogenous, stochastic process. The government’s budget
is balanced every period so that lump sum taxes equal government spending plus the subsidy
to firms and households.

                                                      16
3.4      Market Clearing

The home economy’s aggregate resource constraint can be written as:

                                                               ζ∗ ∗
                                                Yt = CDt + Gt + MCt ,                                           (17)
                                                               ζ
                                                                  ζ∗
where the inclusion of the relative population size                ζ
                                                                       reflects that all variables are expressed
                          ∗
in per capita terms, and MCt denotes the purchases of the domestically-produced good
by foreign final consumption producers. Market clearing in the labor and capital markets
implies:                            Z                                    Z
                                            1                                    1
                               K=               Kt (i) di   and   Lt =               Lt (i) di.                 (18)
                                        0                                    0

Finally, we assume that the structure of the foreign economy is isomorphic to that of the
home country.

3.5      Benchmark Calibration

Three key parameters that play a crucial role in influencing our results are the price elasticity
                    1+ρc
for trade, ηc =      ρc
                         ,   the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, σ, and the labor supply
elasticity, χ. While we choose benchmark values of these parameters to be consistent with
our interpretation of the evidence, it is important to note that there is wide range of values
for these parameters used in the literature and thus we also consider alternative calibrations.
                                                                                                  1+ρc
      For the trade price elasticity, we assume that ρc = 2 which implies ηc =                     ρc
                                                                                                         = 1.5. This
estimate is towards the higher end of estimates derived using macroeconomic data, which are
typically below unity in the short run and near unity in the long run (e.g., Hooper, Johnson,
and Marquez (2000)). Nevertheless, estimates of this elasticity following a tariff change are
typically much higher, and we consider higher values in alternative calibrations.15
      We choose the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to be an intermediate value between
estimates derived from two separate literatures. In the micro literature, estimates of the
coefficient of relative risk aversion, which correspond to the inverse of the intertemporal
 15
      For a discussion of the macro estimates and estimates after trade liberalizations, see Ruhl (2005).


                                                            17
elasticity of substitution suggest values in the range of 0.2-0.7.16 In contrast, the business
cycle literature frequently uses log utility over consumption (i.e., σ = 1) to be consistent with
balanced growth. We set σ = 0.5 as a compromise between these two different perspectives.
       The parameter χ corresponds to the inverse of the (Frisch) wage elasticity of labor supply.
A vast amount of evidence from micro-data suggests labor supply elasticities in the range of
0.05-0.3, though the real business cycle literature tends to use much higher values.17 We set
χ = 5 for the benchmark calibration, which is at the upper end of estimates from the micro
data.
       We choose the remaining parameters of the model as follows. Given that the model is
calibrated at a quarterly frequency, our choice of β = 0.9925 implies an annualized real
interest rate of 3 percent. The government spending share of output is set to 18 percent, so
gy = 0.18. We set the elasticity of capital in production function, α = 0.35 and choose χ0 so
that hours worked are normalized to unity in steady state. For the price and wage markup
parameters, we choose θp = θw = 0.2, and set the corresponding subsidies to equivalent
values, τp = τw = 0.2. We choose ξp and ξw to be consistent with four quarter contracts
(subject to full indexation). Finally, we set the relative population size of the home economy
( ζζ∗ ) to 1/3. This value implies that the home economy corresponds to 25 percent of world
output, which is roughly consistent with the U.S. share of world output.

3.6       The Flexible Price and Wage Equilibrium

It is useful to begin our analysis by investigating the behavior of a log-linearized version
of the workhorse model under the assumption that wages and prices are fully flexible. For
heuristic reasons, we conduct this analysis under the assumption that home country is a small
enough fraction of world output that any spillovers to the foreign country (in particular, to
  16
     See, for example, Attanasio and Weber (1995), Attanasio and Weber (1997), or Barsky, Juster, Kimball,
and Shapiro (1997).
  17
     MacCurdy (1986) obtained a point estimate of 0.15 for the Frisch elasticity of labor supply for men,
a finding largely confirmed in the literature (e.g., Altonji (1986), Card (1994), and more recently Pencavel
(2002)). For an alternative view, see Mulligan (1998). Finally, there is more uncertainty regarding the labor
supply elasticity for females. For this group, Pencavel (1998) obtained a point estimate of 0.21.


                                                     18
interest rates and domestic demand) can be ignored. Insofar as we have verified by model
simulations that spillovers from domestic shocks to the foreign sector are small even when
the home country constitutes 25 percent of world output (as in our benchmark calibration),
examining the model’s implications under the assumption of a very small world output
share yields considerable insight. Thus, our analysis here closely parallels that of Galı́ and
Monacelli (2005), aside from modest differences arising from our inclusion of a government
spending shock, and allowing for diminishing returns to labor. However, while their paper
focused on the formal similarity between open and closed economy models, our goal is to
explore the quantitative differences that arise as an economy becomes more open, and how
these differences depend on underlying structural parameters such as trade price elasticities.
   We begin by deriving a relationship between output and the domestic real interest rate,
which Galı́ and Monacelli (2005) and Clarida, Galı́, and Gertler (2002) have characterized
as an open economy IS curve. Substituting the (log-linearized) production function for final
consumption goods (13) into the resource constraint (17), the latter may be expressed:

                             yt = (1 − gy )(ct + ωc (m∗ct − mct )) + gy gt                (19)

where small letters denote the deviations of the logarithms of variables from their corre-
sponding level, and gy is the government share of output. The risk-sharing condition under
complete markets can be used to relate private consumption to foreign consumption c∗t and
to the terms of trade τt :
                                 ct = c∗t + σ(1 − ωc )τt = c∗t + ²c τt                    (20)

where the parameter ²c = σ(1 − ωc ) denotes the sensitivity of private consumption to the
terms of trade. Using the export and import demand functions, the difference between real
exports and imports m∗ct − mct may be expressed:

                 m∗ct − mct = (c∗t − ct ) + (1 + (1 − ωc ))ηc τt = (c∗t − ct ) + ²nx τt   (21)

Thus, real net exports depend on an activity term (rising as foreign consumption expands
relative to domestic consumption), and on the terms of trade. Because a one percent deteri-

                                                  19
oration of the terms of trade raises exports by an amount equal to the export price elasticity
of demand ηc , while causing real imports to contract by (1 − ωc )ηc , the overall relative price
sensitivity of net exports is captured by the composite parameter ²nx = (1 + (1 − ωc ))ηc .
   Substituting these expressions into the resource constraint (19) yields:

                      yt = (1 − gy )((1 − ωc )²c + ωc ²nx )τt + gy gt + (1 − gy )c∗t                 (22)

or simply:
                               yt = (1 − gy )σ open τt + gy gt + (1 − gy )c∗t                        (23)

   The parameter σ open = ((1 − ωc )²c + ωc ²nx ) may be interpreted as either the sensitivity
of private aggregate demand to the terms of trade, or the (absolute value of) the sensitivity
of private aggregate demand to the long-term real rate of interest. The latter follows from
the UIP condition:
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                     τt = Et τt+1 +   rt∗   − rt = Et     ∗
                                                        (rt+j              ∗
                                                              − rt+j ) = (rLt − rLt )                (24)
                                                      j=0

where the long-term real interest rate rLt is an infinite sum of expected short-term real
interest rates (rt+j ). Alternatively, equation (23) can be expressed in terms of the current
short-term real interest rate to yield an “open economy IS curve” of the form:

      yt = Et yt+1 − (1 − gy )σ open (rt − rt∗ ) + gy (gt − Et gt+1 ) + (1 − gy )(c∗t − Et c∗t+1 )   (25)

   Based on the foregoing analysis, the interest-sensitivity of private demand σ open can be
regarded as a weighted average of the interest-sensitivity of consumption ²c , and of real net
exports ²nx , with the interest-sensitivity of the latter arising from the UIP relation, and
depending on the trade price elasticity. With some algebraic manipulation, σ open can be
expressed alternatively as a simple weighted average of the underlying structural parameters
σ (the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption) and ηc (the price elasticity of
both exports and imports):

                               σ open = (1 − ωc )2 σ + (1 − (1 − ωc )2 )ηc                           (26)

                                                      20
The quadratic weight (1 − ωc )2 on σ reflects both that consumption gets an effective weight
of (1 − ωc ) in private demand (as seen from equation 22), and that the elasticity of private
consumption with respect to the domestic real interest rate (²c = σ(1 − ωc )) declines linearly
as the share of foreign goods rises in the domestic consumption bundle.
       Equation (26) provides confirmation of the intuitively plausible argument that the
interest-sensitivity of the economy should rise with openness if the trade price elasticity is
high relative to the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption; and conversely,
if the trade price elasticity is relatively low.18 Formally, the derivative of σ open with respect
to ωc equals 2(1−ωc )(ηc −σ), and hence rises if ηc > σ. Thus, even if consumption responded
very little to the domestic real interest rate – implying a low interest-elasticity of output in
a closed economy – output could still be highly interest-sensitive in an open economy if the
interest rate changes generated large movements in real exports and imports (through their
influence on the the terms of trade).
       From a quantitative perspective, the quadratic weights in (26) imply that openness can
have very substantial implications for the interest-sensitivity of the economy if there is a
significant divergence between the intertemporal elasticity σ and the trade price elasticity
ηc . This is apparent from Table 1, which shows how the interest-elasticity of aggregate
demand σ open varies with openness for alternative values of σ and ηc . For example, using
a trade share of ωc = .35, the weight on σ in determining the interest-elasticity of private
demand is only 0.42(= (1 − .35)2 ). In this case, an open economy with σ = 0.5 and ηc = 1.5
– as in our benchmark calibration – implies σ open = 1.1, or more than double the interest-
sensitivity of its closed economy counterpart. With an even higher trade price elasticity of
6, σ open rises to 3.6, or more than seven times its closed-economy counterpart. However,
changes in the effective interest-sensitivity of aggregate output due to openness are almost
  18
    In closely related work, Woodford (2007) examines how the monetary transmission mechanism changes
with the degree of trade openness in a sticky price model. His model specification imposes a trade price
elasticity of unity, and he calibrates the intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ = 6 to proxy for the high
interest rate sensitivity of investment. Accordingly, in his calibration, an increase in openness lowers the
interest rate sensitivity of the economy.



                                                      21
certainly much smaller than suggested by this latter computation, and probably significantly
smaller than implied by our workhorse model which ignores capital. As we show below, to
the extent that the disparity between the effective interest-sensitivity of domestic demand
and that of real trade narrows in a model with capital accumulation, the interest-sensitivity
of the economy shows less variation with openness.
   We next turn to the determinants of employment, output, and the real wage (which we
will refer to as potential employment, potential output, and the potential real wage in the
model with sticky prices). If prices are flexible, firms behave identically in setting prices
and hiring factor inputs, so that there is effectively a single representative firm. The labor
demand schedule is derived directly from the representative firm’s optimality condition for
choosing its price, which equates the marginal product of labor to the product real wage
(n.b., the product real wage is expressed in units of the domestically produced good). Thus,
the (inverse) labor demand schedule may be expressed:

                                ζtd = mplt = (1 − α)zt − αLt ,                             (27)

so that the “demand real wage” ζtd varies inversely with hours worked. Clearly, both the
slope of this schedule and the manner in which it is affected by shocks is identical to a closed
economy.
   The labor supply schedule is derived from the household’s optimality condition equating
its marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption to the consumption real
wage. It is convenient to express labor supply in terms of the product real wage, so that:
                                                     1
                                ζts = mrst = χLt +     ct + ωc τt                          (28)
                                                     σ
where mrst should be interpreted as the marginal cost of working in terms of the domestically
produced good. The terms of trade enters as an additional shift variable. A depreciation
of the terms of trade shifts the labor supply schedule inward, because a given product real
wage translates into a smaller consumption real wage.
   For heuristic purposes, it is useful to derive a labor supply schedule that is expressed
exclusively in terms of labor (or output) and endogenous shocks, as is familiar from the

                                              22
closed economy analogue, i.e.,

                                            1 1
                     ζts,closed = χLt +              ((1 − α)(Lt + zt ) − gy gct )          (29)
                                            σ 1 − gy

   This is easily accomplished by using equation (23) to solve for the terms of trade in
terms of output, and then the risk-sharing condition (20) to solve for consumption in terms
of output. Finally, using the production function to solve for output in terms of labor, the
labor supply function may be expressed:

                             1        1                                     1   1
             ζts = χLt +                   ((1 − α)(Lt + zt ) − gy gct ) + [ − open ]c∗Dt   (30)
                           σ open   1 − gy                                  σ σ

It is clear from comparing equation (30) with its closed economy analogue (29) that openness
can only alter the impact of domestic shocks on the labor market through the parameter
σ open . This parameter can be interpreted as determining the wealth effect on labor supply
in an open economy, influencing both the slope of the labor supply schedule, and how it
is affected by shocks. Given the dependence of the “primitive” labor supply schedule (28)
on both consumption and the terms of trade, the wealth effect in (30) captures the effects
of movements in both variables. From our earlier derivation of the open-economy IS curve,
σ open rises relative to the intertemporal elasticity σ if the trade price elasticity ηc exceeds
σ. Intuitively, a relatively high degree of substitutibility between home and foreign goods
should enhance opportunities for international risk-sharing, serving to weaken the relation-
ship between consumption and output, and hence the wealth effect on labor supply.
   Figure 5 illustrates how openness affects labor market equilibrium in response to a tech-
nology shock through changing both the slope of the labor supply schedule, and the extent to
which it shifts in response to the shock. The left panel shows the response in a closed econ-
omy, while the right panel shows the response in an open economy. The technology shock
shifts the labor demand schedule up by one percent in both the closed and open economy
(recalling that this schedule is the same in each). In the closed economy, the wealth effect
on labor supply is determined by the parameter σ (in equation (29)), which is assumed to be
less than unity. Accordingly, the wealth effect on labor supply dominates the substitution

                                                    23
effect. In the new equilibrium at point B, hours worked decline, and the real wage rises.
Turning to the open economy case, the structural parameters are assumed to imply a value
of σ open in equation (30) that significantly exceeds unity (as would occur with a high value
of the trade price elasticity, and high degree of openness). In this case, the open economy
MRS schedule shifts inward by much less (i.e., from A to E) than its closed economy coun-
terpart (from A to D in the left panel). In addition to reducing the shift in the schedule,
the smaller wealth effect implies a flatter MRS schedule. Accordingly, with the substitution
effect dominating the wealth effect, labor hours expand, and the real wage rises by less than
in the closed economy.
   From a quantitative perspective, openness can have sizeable macroeconomic consequences
under calibrations of structural parameters that imply a large wedge between σ open and σ,
                                                            1
and that embed a high Frisch elasticity of labor supply     χ
                                                              .   The Frisch elasticity is relevant
                                                                          1−α
because it determines the sensitivity of the MRS slope (of χ +         (1−gy )σ open
                                                                                     ).   As the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply and the trade price elasticity become very large, the labor supply
schedule flattens, and also becomes unresponsive to the technology and government spending
shocks. Under these limiting conditions, the productivity shock exerts a large effect on
output with no impact on the real wage. The government spending shock has no effect on
output, employment, or wages, which is reminiscient of the dramatically different effects
of fiscal expansion on output in a closed versus open economy that obtain in a traditional
Mundell-Fleming style model.
   However, although increased openness can have large effects in principle, it has much
less dramatic implications for flexible-price employment, output, and the real wage under
plausible calibrations. This is apparent from Tables 1 and 2, which show how the responses
of these key variables in the flexible price equilibrium vary with openness under a wide
range of values of the trade price elasticity and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
consumption (the superscript “pot” on each variable is used to denote “potential” responses,
meaning the responses under flexible prices and wages). Table 1 shows responses under a
Frisch elasticity of 0.2, as in our benchmark calibration, while Table 2 considers a higher

                                               24
elasticity of unity. Importantly, for trade price elasticities in the empirically-reasonable
neighborhood of 1 to 1.5, and a Frisch elasticity of unity or below, differences between the
closed and open economy responses to a technology shock are quite small, and only modestly
larger in the case of a government spending shock.

3.7     Sticky Prices and Wages

We next turn to analyzing the model’s behavior in the presence of nominal wage and price
rigidities. We continue to maintain the assumption that the relative share of the home
economy in world output is arbitrarily small. In this case, the log-linearized behavioral
equations can be expressed in a simple form that is essentially identical to that derived in
the closed economy model of Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000), aside from allowing for
the indexation of wages and prices:


                           xt = xt+1|t − σ open (1 − gy )(it − πt+1|t − rtpot )                     (31)



                                 ∆πt = β∆πt+1|t + κp (ζt − M P Lt )                                 (32)



                                 ∆ωt = β∆ωt+1|t + κw (M RSt − ζt )                                  (33)


                                                                     λmpl
                           M P Lt = ζtpot − λM P L xLt = ζtpot −           xt                       (34)
                                                                   (1 − α)

                                                                    λmrs
                           M RSt = ζtpot + λmrs xLt = ζtpot +              xt                       (35)
                                                                   (1 − α)


                                         ζt = ζt−1 + ωt − πt                                        (36)

where xt is the output gap (i.e., yt −ytpot ), xLt is the employment gap (i.e., lt −ltpot ), rtpot is the
“potential” (or “natural”) rate of interest, ζtpot the potential real wage, and the composite


                                                   25
                                    (1−ξp )(1−βξp )            (1−ξw )(1−βξw )                       1−α
parameters are defined by κp =             ξp
                                                    ,   κw =    ξw (1+χ 1+θ w) ,   λmrs = χ +   σ open (1−gy )
                                                                                                               ,   and
                                                                         θw

λmpl = α. The potential level of a variable is defined as the value it would assume if prices
and wages were fully flexible. The model is completed with the inclusion of the monetary
rule given in equation (16).
   Equation (31) parsimoniously expresses the open economy IS curve in terms of output and
real interest rate gaps. Thus, the output gap depends inversely on the deviation of the real
interest rate (it − πt+1|t ) from its potential rate rtpot . The price-setting equation (32) specifies
the change in domestic price inflation to depend on the future expected change in inflation
and real marginal cost, where the latter is the difference between the real wage and marginal
product of labor. The wage-setting equation (33) specifies the change in wage inflation to
depend on the future expected change in wage inflation and the difference between the MRS
and real wage (both in product terms). The equations determining the MPL (34) and MRS
(35) can be specified to depend only on the real wage under flexible prices ζtpot , and the
employment gap (or equivalently, the output gap, since the latter is proportional). Finally,
equation (36) is an identity for the evolution of the product real wage.
   The log-linearized representation given by equations (31) - (36) is insightful in helping to
assess how openness affects the transmission of domestic shocks under a given policy rule, and
also the policymaker’s tradeoff frontier under certain commonly specified loss functions. In
particular, equations (31) - (36) identify several channels through which openness can affect
the economy. It is evident from (31) that openness can influence aggregate demand through
affecting both the potential real interest rate rtpot , and the sensitivity of the output gap to
a given-sized real interest rate change (this sensitivity is determined by σ open (1 − gy )). The
interest-sensitivity of aggregate demand increases with openness if the trade price elasticity
exceeds the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption; conversely, the interest-
sensitivity decreases if the trade price elasticity is relatively low.
   It is apparent that openness influences aggregate supply directly through affecting the
sensitivity of the household’s MRS to the employment gap, i.e., the parameter λmrs in
equation (35). The effects of this slope change on price-setting are most pronounced in the

                                                        26
special case of fully flexible wages. In this case, equation (35) implies that the real wage
can be expressed directly in terms of the potential real wage and employment gap, i.e.,
ζt = ζtpot + λmrs xLt . Substituting for the real wage into the price-setting equation (32), and
for the MPL using (34), yields an “open economy New Keynesian Phillips Curve” similar to
that derived by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (aside from allowing for indexation):

                            ∆πt = β∆πt+1|t + κp ((λmpl + λmrs )xLt )                           (37)

Given that λmpl is determined by the capital share – a small number equal to 0.35 under
our benchmark calibration – the slope of the Phillips Curve hinges crucially on λmrs . Under
the conditions discussed previously in which openness markedly affects λmrs , it also exerts
substantial effects on the Phillips Curve slope. For instance, if openness significantly reduces
λmrs – as occurs under a high Frisch elasticity and relatively high trade price elasticity –
marginal cost and hence price inflation are much less responsive to the output gap in a
highly open economy. In the presence of nominal wage rigidities, however, the close linkage
between the real wage and employment gap is severed, with the implication that the MRS
slope has much less of a direct impact on the transmission of shocks to marginal costs and
price inflation. Even so, changes in the MRS slope due to openness can have an important
impact on the behavior of wage inflation.
   Openness also influences aggregate supply through altering the response of the potential
real wage ζtpot : from equations (32) - (35), it is evident that ζtpot affects both price- and wage-
setting behavior. Because openness affects ζtpot through altering the MRS slope λmrs as well
as the wealth effect of shocks on labor supply (as discussed above, following equation 30), this
provides a second, albeit indirect, channel through which the MRS slope affects aggregate
supply. Importantly, changes in ζtpot due to openness can in principle have substantial
consequences for price-setting. To see this, it is useful to substitute equation (34) into (32)
to obtain:
                           ∆πt = β∆πt+1|t + κp (ζt − ζtpot + λmpl xLt )                        (38)

Thus, in the presence of sticky nominal wages, price inflation depends on the wage gap

                                                27
ζt − ζtpot in addition to the employment gap xLt . Even a policy that closed the employment
(or output) gap would imply pressure on inflation if real wages did not immediately adjust
to their potential level, implying a policymaker tradeoff between stabilizing inflation and
the employment gap. As might be expected, the size of the real wage gap matters for
this tradeoff, and for the transmission of shocks to inflation. Because the actual real wage
adjusts sluggishly, the behavior of the wage gap depends critically on the potential real wage,
which varies with openness. Accordingly, to the extent that openness reduces variation in the
potential real wage – as under our benchmark calibration – greater openness can be expected
to reduce the real wage gap associated with a zero employment gap, allowing policymakers
to come closer to stabilizing both employment and inflation. But recalling Tables 1 and
2, openness does not exert large quantitative effects on ζtpot under reasonable calibrations:
even with the high Frisch elasticity of unity, increased openness only has a modest effect in
dampening the response of ζtpot to real shocks.
   Notwithstanding that it is helpful for economic interpretation to think of openness as
operating through several channels that affect aggregate supply and demand, it is bears
emphasizing that the composite parameter σ open provides a summary statistic for how the
model economy is affected by openness. As an implication, differences between closed and
open economy responses – including of nominal variables such as inflation – can only be
substantial under conditions that induce a significant disparity between σ open and the in-
tertemporal substitution elasticity σ. Moreover, while such a wedge is clearly a sufficient
condition for the IS curve (31) to be affected by openness, the effects of openness on the AS
block still tend to be quite small under plausible calibrations of the Frisch elasticity of labor
supply.
   These considerations are useful in interpreting how impulse responses to the same three
shocks considered above in our SIGMA simulations depend on the openness of the economy.
Figure 6 compares responses to a 1 percentage point decline in the inflation target under
three calibrations of openness, ranging from a trade share of 1 percent of GDP under the
“nearly closed” calibration, to 12 percent under our benchmark, to 35 percent under ‘high

                                               28
openness.”19 It is evident that output contracts by a somewhat larger amount in the highly
open economy. The larger output contraction occurs because the target reduction causes a
rise in real interest rates, and the interest-sensitivity of output rises with greater openness
in our benchmark calibration (quantitatively, the interest-sensitivity σ open (1 − gy ) rises from
0.5*(1-.18) = 0.41 under the “nearly closed” calibration to 0.90 in the high openness case).
Price inflation also falls a bit more as openness increases, reflecting the larger output con-
traction; however, the low sensitivity of marginal cost to the employment gap (i.e., λmpl in
equation (34) is only 0.35) accounts for the small quantitative differences in the responses.20
Overall, given the wide differences in the trade shares, the responses of aggregate output, in-
flation, and the real interest rate seem quite unresponsive to openness. The main differences
are that exports account for a larger share of the output contraction as openness increases
(i.e., exports/GDP fall by more), and that consumer price inflation falls more abruptly in
the highly open economy (as the real exchange rate appreciation exerts a larger effect given
the greater share of imported goods in the household consumption bundle).
       Figure 7 compares the effects of a rise in government spending across the three calibra-
tions. The responses of output and inflation diverge noticeably with openness, with output
and inflation rising much less under the high openness calibration. Because the Taylor rule
keeps output close to potential (y pot ), the differences in the output responses mainly reflect
that the wealth effect on labor supply is smaller in a relatively open economy (as noted in
our discussion of the flexible price equilibrium). Given sluggish wage adjustment, the smaller
output expansion in turn reduces pressure on marginal cost in the more open economy. In
terms of our discussion of (38), the real wage gap ζt − ζtpot is smaller and less persistent in
a relatively open economy (as ζ pot falls by less), and hence generates weaker pressure on
  19
     The simulations are derived in the two country version of the model in which the home country constitutes
25 percent of world output. However, it makes little difference to our results if the relative size of the home
country were set close to zero (even in the high openness case, we found that the sensitivity of the simulation
results to the relative size of the home economy is quite small.)
  20
     Moreover, as suggested by our discussion above, differences in the MRS slope due to openness have little
influence on the real wage response. Thus, with the potential real wage unaffected by the shock, the real
wage gap in equation (38) behaves similarly irrespective of openness, so that marginal cost depends mainly
on the response of the employment (or output) gap.


                                                      29
inflation. Finally, the higher interest-elasticity of aggregate demand translates into less real
interest rate adjustment in the highly open economy.
   Figure 8 compares the effects of a highly persistent rise in technology. The response of
output is somewhat larger in the highly open calibration, while the response of the real wage
is smaller. To understand this, recall from our discussion of the flexible price equilibrium
that greater openness (assuming ηc > σ as under our benchmark calibration) tends to damp
the wealth effect of the shock on labor supply. This boosts potential output – and thus
accounts for some of the larger output increase in the figure in the high openness case –
while reducing the rise in the flexible price real wage. The smaller real wage gap (in absolute
value) helps account for some of the less pronounced decline in inflation. In addition, as we
discuss in Section 3.8, some of the disparity in the output and inflation responses reflects
that the Taylor rule in effect fails to account for the higher interest-sensitivity of the economy
as openness increases; thus, an alternative policy that kept output at potential would imply
a smaller disparity in the output and inflation responses than depicted in the figure.
   But notwithstanding some differences, the salient feature of the foregoing results is that
even substantial variation in openness seems to have fairly small effects on the responses,
except in the case of the government spending shock. Moreover, the SIGMA simulations
discussed in Section 2 indicate that some of the disparities in the responses to the fiscal
shock would narrow with the inclusion of endogenous capital, and adjustment costs on the
expenditure components; notably, endogenous capital would reduce the pronounced disparity
between the interest elasticity of private absorption and of trade flows under our benchmark
calibration, so that the interest elasticity of demand would rise by less as openness increased.
   We conclude this section by illustrating a case in which openness exerts fairly dramatic
effects on the impulse responses of the model. In particular, Figure 9 shows responses
to the technology shock under an alternative calibration that imposes a very high trade
price elasticity of 6, and a Frisch elasticity of labor supply of unity. As seen in Table 2,
the parameter σ open rises from 0.5 under the “nearly closed” calibration to 3.6 in the high
openness case, consistent with roughly a halving of the slope of the MRS schedule (from

                                               30
3.5 to 1.8). Given that the wealth effect on labor supply diminishes rapidly with greater
openness under this calibration, output exhibits a much more pronounced rise in the highly
open economy. The smaller rise in the real wage in the highly open economy implies a
much smaller real wage gap (in absolute value), and accounts for why inflation falls only
about half as much on impact as in the closed economy. Accordingly, as suggested by the
figure, a policymaker concerned about the variability of domestic price inflation and the
output gap would face a markedly improved tradeoff locus in the open economy. However,
we emphasize that this large divergence hinges on a high Frisch elasticity of labor supply,
and a fairly extreme assumption about the trade price elasticity.

3.8       Variance Tradeoff Frontiers

A limitation of our preceding analysis that characterized policy as following a simple (Taylor-
style) interest rate reaction function is that it is difficult to disentangle what components of
the transmission channel change with trade openness. In particular, it is hard to ascertain
whether differences are attributable to disparities in the “IS” block of the model, i.e., in the
interest-sensitivity of the economy, or in the equations governing aggregate supply.
       Toward this end, it is useful to follow Taylor (1979) in characterizing the variance tradeoff
frontier of the home economy. Accordingly, we assume that the monetary policy of the home
country is determined by an optimal targeting rule that minimizes the following quadratic
discounted loss function:

                                            ∞
                                            X
                                       Et         β j (πt+j
                                                        2
                                                            + λx x2t+j ),                               (39)
                                            j=0

where λx is the relative weight on the output gap. The policymaker is assumed to minimize
the loss function subject to the log-linearized behavioral equations of the model, while taking
as given that monetary policy in the foreign economy continues to follow a Taylor rule.21
  21
     The variance tradeoff frontier is not very sensitive to the relative size of the home country. Hence,
although we derive our results assuming that the home country constitutes 25 percent of world output, the
tradeoff frontiers are not markedly different in the case in which the home country share of world output
is close to zero. In the latter case, the policymaker tradeoff frontier can be derived by minimizing the loss


                                                       31
This case parallels related analysis in a closed economy setting (as in Clarida, Galı́, and
Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2003)) insofar as the optimal policy does not depend on the
model’s IS curve (at least given our assumption that the policymaker’s loss function does
not penalize interest rate variability).
    The left panel of Figure 10 shows a policy tradeoff frontier between inflation and output
gap variability for the case of a technology shock. The tradeoff frontier is obtained by
minimizing the policymaker’s loss function (39) over all possible values of λx subject to
the log-linearized behavioral equations.22 For visual clarity, the tradeoff frontiers are shown
only for the alternative calibrations of a highly open economy (in which the trade share
is 35 percent), and the nearly closed case (with a trade share of 1 percent). Under either
calibration, the standard deviation of inflation declines to zero as the policymaker’s weight
on the output gap λx declines to zero, while the standard deviation of the output gap declines
to zero as λx approaches infinity.
    As is familiar from closed-economy analysis, the presence of wage rigidities gives rise to a
tradeoff between stabilizing the output gap and inflation. However, the striking feature of the
figure is that the tradeoff frontiers are virtually identical, notwithstanding very pronounced
differences in trade openness. This similarity reflects that the only channels through which
trade openness can influence the tradeoff frontier is by affecting the slope of the MRS schedule
(recalling the MPL is invariant), or by affecting the potential real wage ζtpot ; as noted above,
while openness affects the slope of the IS curve and potential real interest rate rtpot , this is
inconsequential for a policymaker loss function such as (39) that does not explicitly depend
on the interest rate. Thus, insofar as it is clear from Table 1 that the potential real wage
and slope of the MRS show little variation with openness under our benchmark calibration,
it is unsurprising that the policy frontiers are nearly identical.
    Although the policy tradeoff frontiers are nearly identical, the right panel – which plots
function subject to the behavioral equations (31)- (36) that apply in the small open economy variant of our
model.
  22
     Note that the vertical axis shows the standard deviation of inflation, and the horizontal axis the standard
deviation of the output gap.


                                                      32
how interest rate volatility varies with λx – shows that implementation of the policy implies
considerably less real interest variation in the more open economy.23 This simply reflects
that openness markedly raises the interest sensitivity of the economy, even if not the slope of
the MRS schedule and ζtpot (as seen from Table 1, σ open rises from 0.5 in the closed economy
case to 1.1 when the trade share is 35 percent). Thus, some of the relatively small differences
in the transmission of the technology shock shown in Figure 8 are in fact attributable to
the aggregate demand block of the model. For example, the optimal rule that puts a high
enough weight on output gap stabilization to keep output at potential (i.e., a very large λx )
implies output and inflation responses that are even closer than those depicted in Figure 8
(as easily verified by plotting impulse responses for this calibration of the optimal rule).
       Figure 11 considers how the highly open and closed economy policy frontiers shift given
changes in key structural parameters that affect the slope of the MRS schedule. The upper
panel shows that even adopting an extremely high value of the trade price elasticity ηc of
3, and a fairly high Frisch elasticity of labor supply of 0.5 (i.e., χ = 2), is not sufficient
to induce much of a disparity between the tradeoff frontiers. Not surprisingly, the high
trade price elasticity does drive a large wedge in the variability of the interest rate response
associated with any given policy rule, i.e., value of λx .
       The policy frontiers may show considerable more variation with openness, but only under
rather extreme calibrations. Thus, the middle panel shows that the open economy tradeoff
frontier would move further inside the (nearly) closed economy frontier in the case in which
both the trade price elasticity and Frisch elasticity of labor supply are extremely high (ηc = 6,
and the value of χ of .05 implies a Frisch elasticity of 20). In this case, the wealth effect
dominates the behavior of the MRS slope, so that the latter flattens considerably with
openness. Provided that the MPL slopes downward enough, the response of the potential
real wage is damped considerably as openness increases; and because real wages are sticky,
this improves the tradeoff locus open to policymakers in the highly open economy. However,
  23
    Note that Figures 10 and 11 depict the relative weight on the output gap using an exponential scale, so
that e.g., the tick label -5 corresponds to a weight of unity on inflation, and exp(-5) on the output gap.



                                                    33
the manner in which the tradeoff frontier varies with openness in an environment with an
extremely flat MRS tends to be quite sensitive to the slope of the MPL schedule (unlike
under our benchmark, in which the frontier is much less sensitive to the slope of the MPL).
As illustrated by the last panel, the open economy tradeoff frontier actually lies well outside
the closed economy frontier if the MPL slope is reduced to 0.05 in absolute value.


4        Alternative Model Specifications
Our workhorse model made a number of simplifying assumptions to keep the analysis
tractable. We now investigate the robustness of these conclusions to several extensions of
the model, including incomplete asset markets, endogenous capital accumulation, imported
intermediate goods, and local currency pricing.

4.1        Incomplete International Financial Markets

Our baseline model assumes that asset markets are complete both domestically and inter-
nationally. However, as this is an extreme assumption, we now consider an alternative in
which households only have access to a non-state contingent international bond.
       Under this alternative, the household’s budget constraint can be expressed as:
                          R                     e P∗ B            (h)
             PCt Ct (h) + s ξDt,t+1 BDt+1 (h) + t φFF tt (bFF t+1     = Wt (h) Nt (h) + RKt K+
                                                              t+1 )                                      (40)
                                Γt (h) − Tt (h) + BDt (h) + et BF t (h).
where BF t+1 (h) denotes the household’s purchases of the foreign bond, PF∗ t is the price of
the foreign bond (in foreign currency), and BDt+1 (h) denotes state-contingent bonds traded
amongst domestic households. We follow Turnovsky (1985) and assume there is an interme-
diation cost, φF (bF t+1 ), paid by domestic households for purchases of the international bond
to ensure that net foreign assets are stationary.24 This intermediation cost depends on the
ratio of economy wide holdings of net foreign assets to nominal output (bF t+1 ):
                                           µ                         ¶
                                                 et PF∗ t BF t+1 (h)
                         φF (bF t+1 ) = exp −υF                                                          (41)
                                                       PDt Yt
  24
     This intermediation cost is asymmetric, as foreign households do not face this cost; rather, they collect
profits on the monopoly rents associated with the intermediation costs.

                                                     34
and rises when the home country is a net debtor. We set υF to be very small (υF = 0.001),
which effectively implies that uncovered interest rate parity holds in our model.
    Given this alternative financial structure, the risk sharing condition (i.e., equation (20))
no longer holds and the domestic economy’s level of net foreign assets influences model
dynamics. To understand how, we begin by considering the demand side of the model. As
in Section 3, it remains possible to derive a (log-linearized) open-economy IS curve of the
form:
                      yt = Et yt+1 − (1 − gy )σ open {rt − rt∗ } + ²bF bF t+1 + uISt ,                (42)

where ²bF = (1 − gy )(σ(1 − ωc ) − σ open )υF , and uISt = gy (gt − Et gt+1 ) + (1 − gy )(c∗t − Et c∗t+1 ).
This expression for the IS curve is the same as in the workhorse model (expression (25))
except that it involves the home country’s net foreign asset position due to the presence of
the intermediation cost. Since we set υF to be very small, ²bF is very small, and the IS curve
is virtually unchanged vis-á-vis the workhorse model.
    Under incomplete markets, however, the IS curve does not provide a complete descrip-
tion of aggregate demand. Intuitively, the IS curve determines how aggregate demand grows
through time, but the current level is only pinned down by the intertemporal budget con-
straints of households, which at a national level constrains the evolution of net foreign assets.
Accordingly, the aggregate demand block also includes a (log-linearized) law of motion spec-
ifying how net foreign assets bF t+1 evolve given the home country’s net savings nst :

                                                 1          1
                                      bF t+1 =     bF t +        nst ,                                (43)
                                                 β        1 − gy

where nst is the country’s total income less household and government expenditures (i.e.,
nst = [yt − (1 − gy )ct − gy gct − (1 − gy )ωc τt ]). Because consumption depends only on output
and the terms of trade (given the resource constraint and equation for real net exports), net
savings can also be expressed simply in terms of output and the terms of trade. Finally,
the terms of trade are determined by a modified uncovered interest parity (UIP) condition,
which is the same as in the workhorse model except that it reflects the presence of the


                                                     35
intermediation cost:
                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                   X
              τt = Et τt+1 +   rt∗   − rt − υF bF t+1 =     ∗
                                                          (rLt   − rLt ) − υF Et         bF t+j+1 ,   (44)
                                                                                   j=0

where rLt corresponds to the domestic long-term real interest rate (see equation (24)).
   Turning to aggregate supply, the MPL schedule remains unchanged under incomplete
markets, as discussed in Section 3. However, the MRS schedule is influenced by the country’s
ability to borrow and lend, so that changes in the home country’s net foreign asset position
influence aggregate supply. In particular, the marginal rate of substitution (in product terms)
can be written as:

                        1 1                                      1 1             1
        mrst = χLt +             ((1 − α)(Lt + zt ) − gy gct ) −          nst − ( − 1)τt .            (45)
                        σ 1 − gy                                 σ 1 − gy        σ

This expression for the marginal rate of substitution is similar to the one for the closed
economy (i.e., equation (29)), except for the inclusion of the last two terms involving net
savings and the terms of trade. Clearly, for the special case of σ = 1, the terms of trade drops
from the above equation, so that the only difference between the closed and open economy
expression for the marginal rate of substitution involves the term in net savings. An increase
in net savings, all else equal, lowers the marginal rate of substitution, which under flexible
prices and wages, lowers the product real wage. By contrast, this effect is absent in a closed
economy, since nst = 0.
   The above discussion suggests that the effects of domestic shocks may diverge consid-
erably between a closed and open economy if the IS curve slope is sensitive to the degree
of trade openness (for the same reasons discussed in Section 3), or if the shocks exert large
effects on net savings. To investigate the quantitative effects of openness under our bench-
mark calibration, the right column of Figure 12 shows the responses of output, domestic
inflation, and consumption to a persistent rise in technology (the AR(1) coefficient equals
0.97) for different degrees of trade openness under incomplete markets; for point of reference,
corresponding results under complete markets are shown in the left column. Clearly, under
either financial structure, technology shocks have somewhat larger effects on output, and

                                                    36
smaller effects on inflation, as the openness of the economy increases. This reflects that
openness damps the expansion in consumption under either financial market structure: un-
der complete markets, because of insurance arrangements, while under incomplete markets
it reflects an increase in desired saving because current income exceeds permanent income.
As observed in Section 3, the smaller implied wealth effect on labor supply translates into a
larger output response, and mitigates the decline in inflation. Nevertheless, the differences in
the responses of output and inflation appear fairly small given the large changes in openness
examined. The modest size of the disparities reflects that home and foreign goods are not
substitutable enough in our benchmark calibration to have large effects on the MRS schedule
(i.e., net savings does not change enough to exert much of an effect on the MRS schedule
given by equation (45)).
   To demonstrate that there can potentially be large differences between an open and
closed economy under incomplete markets, Figure 13 shows the effects of a more transitory
technology shock (the AR(1) coefficient equals 0.8) on output under three alternative cali-
brations of the trade price elasticity and the Frisch labor supply elasticity. We consider a
transitory shock rather than a permanent shock, because, regardless of the degree of open-
ness, consumption will rise immediately to its new higher level in response to a permanent
shock without any change in aggregate savings.
   The top panel shows the effect on output under a trade price elasticity of 6 (keeping the
Frisch elasticity at its benchmark value of 0.2, so χ = 5). The combination of the more
transient shock and greater substitutability between home and foreign goods generates a
larger increase in net savings in the domestic economy, and hence larger output differences
than under the benchmark calibration. As shown in the middle and lower panels, these
differences in the output responses become even larger as the labor supply curve becomes
more elastic (i.e., a lower value of χ) and as the trade price elasticity increases. However,
it bears reiterating that rather extreme calibrations of the trade price elasticity (and a high
Frisch elasticity) seem required for the responses to show large divergence based on openness.



                                              37
4.2    Endogenous Investment

We next investigate the robustness of our results to including endogenous investment into
the workhorse model of Section 3. In the modified framework, households augment their
stock of capital according to:

                                 Kt+1 (h) = (1 − δ)Kt (h) + It (h),                       (46)

where It (h) and Kt (h) denote household investment and the beginning of period t stock of
capital, respectively. The household budget constraint is also modified to reflect investment
purchases:
                                      R
             PCt Ct (h) + PCt It (h) + s ξt,t+1 Bt+1 (h) = Wt (h) Nt (h) + RKt Kt (h)+
                                                                                          (47)
                               Γt (h) − Tt (h) + Bt (h) − PDt φIt (h).

In equation (47), φIt denotes an adjustment cost given by:

                                             φI (It (h) − It−1 (h))2
                                 φIt (h) =                           .                    (48)
                                             2        It−1 (h)
Following Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), it is costly to change the level of invest-
ment from the previous period. Investment goods are produced using the same technology
as final consumption goods (see equation (13)), and hence require both the domestically-
produced composite good as well as imports. The import share of investment goods and
elasticity of substitution between domestic goods and imports in the production function for
investment is assumed to be the same as for consumption.
   The inclusion of endogenous investment tends to markedly boost the interest-sensitivity
of domestic demand under plausible calibrations. Accordingly, as suggested by the SIGMA
simulations in Section 2, the interest-sensitivity should be expected to rise less steeply with
openness compared with the workhorse model; in fact, the aggregate interest-sensitivity of
the economy can even decline with greater openness if investment is sufficiently interest-
sensitive.
   To illustrate these points, the upper panel of Figure 14 reexamines the reduction in the
inflation target shock in the augmented model with investment. The calibration in the top

                                                  38
panel sets the adjustment cost on investment parameter φI = 0.2, which effectively serves to
equalize the interest elasticity of domestic demand and of real net exports (notwithstanding
that the interest elasticity of consumption is unchanged from our benchmark calibration).
In contrast to the model with fixed capital (see Figure 6), which implied a modestly larger
output contraction in the highly open economy relative to the closed economy, the response
of both output and inflation is nearly invariant to trade openness . The virtually identical
output responses reflect that the effective interest sensitivity of domestic demand is very close
to that of real net exports, so that putting a higher weight on the latter as trade openness
rises has little effect on the overall interest sensitivity of the economy. The similar output
responses across the calibrations translate into commensurate effects on marginal cost and
inflation.
   The two lower panels consider alternative calibrations which show that the general con-
ditions highlighted in Section 3 as potentially giving rise to large differences between closed
and open economies continue to remain operative under endogenous capital accumulation.
Thus, the middle panel considers the case in which the trade price elasticity is set to 6,
rather than 1.5 as in our benchmark. In this case, the interest-sensitivity of real net exports
is much higher than that of domestic demand, so that the aggregate interest-sensitivity of the
economy rises with openness, and output shows a larger contraction as openness increases.
The final panel keeps the trade price elasticity at its benchmark value of 1.5, but increases
the effective interest-sensitivity of domestic demand relative to the first panel by reducing
the adjustment cost parameter φI to 0.01. In this case, output contracts by somewhat more
in the closed than in the open economy.

4.3     Imported Materials

Our workhorse model treats imports as finished goods. However, many imported goods
are used as intermediate inputs in production, and their use in production may alter the
transmission of domestic shocks.
   To investigate this possibility, we follow McCallum and Nelson (1999) and modify the

                                               39
production process of intermediate goods producers discussed in Section 3 so that gross
output of intermediate good i, Yt (i), is produced according to the CES gross production
function:
                       µ                ρL                                             ρL
                                                                                                               ¶1+ρL
                                                                              1                           1
                                                     α            1−α                 1+ρL
            Yt (i) =       (1 − ωL )   1+ρL
                                              (Kt (i) (Zt Lt (i))       )   1+ρL
                                                                                   + ωL      MY t (i)   1+ρL
                                                                                                                       .   (49)

In the above, value-added for good i is produced via a Cobb-Douglas production function and
combined with firm i’s purchases of the foreign aggregate good used as intermediate inputs,
MY t (i) to produce the gross output of good i. Also, the parameter ωL determines the share
                                                                               1+ρL
of imported materials in gross production, and ηL =                             ρL
                                                                                      is the elasticity of substitution
between value-added and imported materials. We assume that capital, labor, and imported
materials are perfectly mobile across firms within a country so that all firms have identical
marginal costs per unit of gross output (M Ct ):
                                 µ                         ¶−ρL
                                               − ρ1  − ρ1
                        M Ct = (1 − ωL )M CV t + ωL PM t
                                                  L      L
                                                                ,                                                          (50)

where M CV t is marginal cost per unit of value-added defined earlier as equation (10).
   The inclusion of intermediate inputs in the model changes the home economy’s resource
constraint so that:
                                                                 ζ∗   ∗
                                        Yt = CDt + Gt +             (MCt + MY∗ t ) ,                                       (51)
                                                                 ζ
where MY∗ t denote exports of the domestic good used as an intermediate inputs. Market
clearing in the factor market for intermediate inputs is given by:
                                            Z 1
                                     MY t =     MY t (i)di.                                                                (52)
                                                             0

   Relative to the workhorse model, allowing for fluctuations in imported materials provides
another channel through which openness affects the MPL schedule. In particular, a terms
of trade appreciation increases labor demand by an amount that depends crucially on the
value of ωL .
   An additional channel through which imported materials affects the domestic economy is
by altering the sensitivity of demand to interest rates. As discussed in the Appendix, under

                                                             40
the assumption of flexible wages and α = 0 so that value added is linear in labor, the IS
curve is given by:
                                                        open
                               yt = Et yt+1 − (1 − gy )σM    {rt − rt∗ } + uISt ,                       (53)

where uISt is a term reflecting the government spending shock and foreign shocks. This
expression confirms that it remains possible to follow the basic logic of Section 3 to derive a
                          open
new composite parameter, σM    , which has the interpretation of the elasticity of aggregate
                                                open
demand to real interest rates. This elasticity σM    can be related to the one obtained in the
                                       open                       ηL
workhorse model, σ open , as follows: σM    = σ open (1−ωL )+ωL (1−g y)
                                                                        . Accordingly, the interest
rate sensitivity of demand can be regarded as a weighted average of the interest-sensitivity
of consumption, real net exports of final goods, and real net exports of intermediate inputs.
   Because the elasticity of substitution between value added and materials is fairly low,
the inclusion of imported materials can reduce the difference in interest-rate elasticities of
demand between an open and closed economy. For example, consider a share of imported
materials in gross production of 5 percent (ωL = 0.05), and elasticity of substitution between
value added and materials of 1/3, as in McCallum and Nelson (1999). With these values
along with our benchmark values for σ = 0.5, ωc = 0.12, ηc = 1.5, and gy = 0.18, then
 open
σM    = 0.70 instead of σ open = 0.72.
   The presence of imported materials also affects the pricing decisions of intermediate
producers by altering their marginal costs. In particular, producers set gross output prices
in a staggered fashion rather than value-added prices, and the first order condition for the
price of good i is:
                      ∞
                      X                  µ                                   ¶
                                             (1 + τp )VDt+j PDt (i)
                Et          ψt,t+j ξpj                              − M CGt+j Yt+j (i) = 0,             (54)
                      j=0
                                                   (1 + θp )
                                                                                              Qj
where PDt (i) now has an interpretation as a gross output price and VDt+j =                    h=1   πt+h−1 .
Equation (54) can be log-linearized and rewritten as:

                 πt − πt−1 = β(πt+1|t − πt ) + κp [(1 − ωL ) (ζt − mplt ) + ωL τt ] .                   (55)



                                                          41
where mplt = (1 − α)zt − αLt , corresponds to the marginal product of labor — in terms
of value added — described in Section 3. In the previous expression we have written the
marginal cost in terms of the value-added output to make clear that with imported materials,
gross output price inflation depends on fluctuations in the terms of trade.
       Relative to the workhorse model, allowing for fluctuations in imported materials has two
effects on the price equation. First, the presence of materials inputs contribute to reducing
the pass-through from marginal cost to prices, thus resulting in smaller price adjustments
in response to higher nominal aggregate demand. Second, since a more open economy may
be associated with a high fraction of imported materials in gross output production (i.e, a
larger ωL ), fluctuations in the terms of trade may have a greater influence on gross output
price inflation than in a closed economy.
       To investigate the quantitative importance of imported materials, Figure 15 shows the
                                                                                                             1
effects of a technology shock for different degrees of openness. In each case, we set ηL =                   3

and calibrated ωc and ωL so that material imports account for roughly 25 percent of total
imports in each economy.25 As in the workhorse model, the highly open economy experiences
a larger increase in output and smaller decline in inflation. The inclusion of intermediate
inputs tends to dampen the fall in inflation in response to the technology shock, reflecting
that the fall in unit labor costs is offset to a greater degree by higher import prices. However,
the differences between the highly open economy and the closed economy do not appear large,
so that the inclusion of intermediate goods only modestly amplifies the differences evident
in the workhorse model.

4.4       Pricing To Market

Our workhorse model assumed that the law of one price holds for each intermediate good.
However, there is considerable empirical evidence suggesting that the law of one price does
  25
     In the model with material imports, we vary both ωc and ωL to alter the ratio of imports to GDP in
each scenario. As a result, the more open economy is characterized by larger values of both ωc and ωL ;
however, the fraction of material imports to overall imports is held fixed at 25 percent in all cases. Finally,
the simulations shown in Figure 15 restrict α = 0, but otherwise adopt the values used in our benchmark
calibration.

                                                      42
not hold. A related literature emphasizes that U.S. import prices at the point of entry
respond less than one for one with a change in the exchange rate (i.e., exchange rate pass-
through to U.S. import prices is incomplete).26 We now consider an alternative version of
our model which can account for these findings.
       In this alternative version, intermediate goods firms set different prices at home and
abroad or ‘price to market’. This pricing to market behavior arises for two reasons. First,
we assume, as in Betts and Devereux (1996), intermediate goods’ prices are sticky in local cur-
rency terms. We also work with aggregators for intermediate goods that have non-constant
elasticities of demand as in Kimball (1995), implying that a firm may face different demand
elasticities at home and abroad.27
       To incorporate these features, we modify the problem of the consumption goods distrib-
utor who purchases all of the intermediate goods both at home and abroad to produce a
final good that can be used either for private consumption, Ct , or government consumption,
Gt . Using the demand aggregator discussed in Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson (2006), the final
consumption good distributor’s demand for imported and domestic good i is given by:
                        "       µ         ¶ 1 µ      ¶ ρ       #
                           1      PM t (i) 1−γ PM t γ−ρ     ν
           MCt (i) = ωc                                  −       (Ct + Gt ),        (56)
                          1−ν      PM t         PF t       1−ν
                                   "      µ                1 µ
                                                        ¶ 1−γ           ¶ γ−ρ
                                                                           ρ          #
                                   1          PDt (i)            PDt               ν
              CDt (i) = (1 − ωc )                                               −       (Ct + Gt ).     (57)
                                  1−ν          PDt               PF t             1−ν
As in Dotsey and King (2005), when ν 6= 0, these demand curves have a linear term which
implies that the elasticity of demand of producer i depends on its price PDt (i) relative to
an index of the prices of its competitors (see below). When ν = 0, the demand elasticity
                       1
is constant and       1−γ
                            has the interpretation as the elasticity of substitution between home
                1−γ
brands (i.e.,    γ
                      is equivalent to θP in the workhorse model). PM t and PDt are price indices
  26
     For a survey of this literature, see Goldberg and Knetter (1997), and for more recent empirical evidence
for the United States, see Marazzi, Sheets, and Vigfusson (2005).
  27
      See Bergin and Feenstra (2001) for a discussion of how the interaction of demand curves with non-
constant elasticities with sticky prices can be helpful in accounting for exchange rate dynamics.




                                                        43
of domestic and imported goods given by:
                      µZ       1                        ¶ γ−1
                                                           γ
                                                                                    µZ       1                         ¶ γ−1
                                                                                                                          γ
                                              γ                                                              γ
            PDt =                  PDt (i)   γ−1   di            and     PM t =                  PM t (i)   γ−1   di           ,       (58)
                           0                                                             0

while PF t is a price index consisting of all the prices of a firm’s competitors:
                                                h           γ        γ i
                                                                         γ−ρ
                                                                          γ
                                                           γ−ρ      γ−ρ
                                        PF t   = (1 − ωc )PDt + ωc PM t      .                                                         (59)

   Intermediate goods producers sell their products to the consumption goods distributors
and can charge different prices at home and abroad. These prices are determined according
to Calvo-style contracts subject to indexation. The first order condition associated with the
optimal setting of the domestic price of intermediate good i (i.e., PDt (i)) is given by:
              ∞
              X                    ·     µ                                      ¶            ¸
                                                           M Ct+j
         Et         ψt,t+j ξpj         1− 1−                                        ²Dt+j (i) VDt+j CDt+j = 0,                         (60)
              j=0
                                                    (1 + τP )VDt+j PDt (i)

where the elasticity of demand for good i in the domestic market is:
                                    "      µ        ¶ 1 µ      ¶ ρ #−1
                                 1           PDt (i) 1−γ PDt ρ−γ
                      ²Dt (i) =      1−ν                                                                                               (61)
                                1−γ           PDt         PF t

With ν > 0, as in Kimball (1995), ²Dt (i) may be an increasing function of a firm’s price
relative to its competitors, and a firm will not want its desired price (i.e., its optimal price
in the absence of price rigidities) to deviate too far from its competitors.
   Equation (60) can be log-linearized and expressed as:

                           ¡           ¢
              πt − πt−1 = β πt+1|t − πt + κp Θ [ζt − mplt + νµωC ηc (pM t − pDt )] ,                                                   (62)

              1                                                                                                                    1
where µ =   ²D −1
                    denotes the steady state (net) markup over marginal cost, ²D =                                             (1−γ)(1−ν)
                                                                                                                                            is
                                                                    ρ
the steady state value of ²Dt (i), and ηc =                     (ρ−γ)(1−ν)
                                                                             denotes the aggregate elasticity between
                                                                                                1
home and foreign goods in steady state. The parameter Θ =                                    1+ν(1+µ)
                                                                                                            < 1 reflects the degree
of ‘strategic’ complementarity in price-setting (e.g., Woodford (2003)). That is, with ν = 0,
a firm’s demand elasticity is constant, and this expression is the same as in the workhorse
model. With ν > 0, there are variations in desired markups associated with changes in a

                                                                   44
firm’s price relative to its competitors. In this case, inflation is less sensitive to marginal
cost, and in the open economy more sensitive to foreign prices. Furthermore, the importance
of foreign prices in affecting domestic inflation depends directly on the degree of openness,
ωC .
   According to equation (62), foreign competition can influence domestic inflation through
changes in desired markups. This expression is reminiscent of Dornbusch and Fischer (1984),
who described how foreign competition could influence the desired markups of domestic
firms and effectively change the slope of the Phillips curve. In particular, they argued that
monetary shocks were likely to cause domestic prices in an open economy to respond more
quickly, which they interpreted as a steepening of the slope of the Phillips Curve. From a
qualitative perspective, monetary policy shocks can also steepen the Phillips curve in our
model with variable markups. In particular, a monetary contraction occurring in response
to a decrease in the central bank’s inflation target lowers marginal cost and generates a real
appreciation of the domestic currency. This appreciation lowers import prices relative to
domestic prices, and domestic producers respond by reducing their desired markups. As a
result, domestic price inflation can appear more sensitive to the fall in demand associated
with the monetary contraction.
   However, we emphasize that the source of the shock in our framework has crucial bearing
for the question of whether inflation becomes more or less sensitive to aggregate demand.
For example, in response to a government spending shock, inflation can appear less sensitive
to demand. Higher government spending puts upward pressure on marginal cost but the real
exchange rate appreciates. This appreciation reduces relative import prices, forcing domestic
producers to lower their desired markups. This reduction in desired markups has the effect
of making domestic price inflation less sensitive to the increase in aggregate demand.
   A domestic firm also sets a sticky price in the local currency of the foreign economy.
These prices are also determined according to Calvo-style contracts indexed to lagged foreign
import price inflation, with the log-linearized first order condition associated with domestic



                                              45
producer i0 s choice of a price to set in the foreign market given by:
                                    ³                 ´
                  ∗       ∗            ∗           ∗
                πM  t − π M t−1 = β  π M t+1|t − π M t + κp Θ [(ζt − mplt − qDt ) −
                                                                                             (63)
                                    νµ(1 − ωC )ηc (p∗M t − p∗Dt )] ,
                                               ∗


where qDt = p∗Dt +et −p∗Dt is the real exchange rate in terms of domestic prices. This equation
implies that foreign import prices (i.e., domestic export prices in units of the foreign currency)
do not respond fully to changes in domestic marginal cost, or to changes in real exchange
rates. In turn, the response of real trade flows is also muted. In contrast, in the workhorse
model, changes in exchange rates have a relatively large effect on import prices and thus on
real trade flows.
   Figure 16 shows the effects of a technology shock for different degrees of openness in
both the workhorse model with a constant elasticity of demand and the model with variable
markups and pricing to market. For the model with variable markups, we set ν = 3, ρ
such that the aggregate elasticity ηc equals its benchmark value of 1.5, and γ so that the
steady state markup is 20 percent. Under our benchmark calibration, the variation in desired
markups mutes the responsiveness of import and export prices to exchange rate changes and
reduces the interest sensitivity of real trade flows. Comparing the top panels, there is a
smaller difference in the response of output across the three calibrations in the pricing to
market model, reflecting the lower sensitivity of aggregate demand to changes in interest
rates. The response of output is also more persistent in the model, reflecting the higher
degree of strategic complementarities associated with the variable desired markups.
   The higher degree of strategic complementarity also implies less pass-through from
marginal cost to domestic prices. Hence, there is a smaller response of inflation in the
variable desired markups model than the workhorse model, regardless of the degree of open-
ness. In addition, there are relatively large differences in the response of domestic inflation
across the three calibrations in the variable markups model. Given that import prices rise,
domestic firms have an incentive to raise their markups in response to weaker competition
from imports, thus mitigating the fall in domestic price inflation. This effect is clearly more
important in a highly open economy than in a relatively closed economy.

                                                46
5    Conclusion
In this paper, we used an open economy DSGE model to explore how trade openness affects
the transmission of domestic shocks. Our results indicate that increased trade openness
and international linkages are likely to have fairly modest implications for real activity and
inflation, though more pronounced effects on the composition of expenditure and the wedge
between consumer and domestic prices. Accordingly, to the extent that openness changes
the behavior of the domestic economy, it seems plausible that the main effects would occur
through an increased role of foreign shocks.




                                               47
References
 Altonji, J. G. (1986). Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro
    Data. Journal of Political Economy 94, 176–215.
 Attanasio, O. and G. Weber (1995). Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertem-
    poral Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Journal of
    Political Economy 103, 1121–1157.
 Attanasio, O. and G. Weber (1997). Humps and Bumps in Lifetime Consumption. Journal
    of Business and Economics Statistics 17, 22–35.
 Ball, L. (1994). What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio? In N. G. Mankiw (Ed.), Monetary
    Policy, pp. 155–182. University of Chicago Press.
 Barsky, R., F. Juster, M. Kimball, and M. Shapiro (1997). Preferences Parameters and
    Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement
    Study. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 537–579.
 Benigno, G. and P. Benigno (2003). Price Stability in Open Economies. Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 70, 743–764.
 Bergin, P. R. and R. C. Feenstra (2001). Pricing-to-Market, Staggered Contracts, and
    Real Exchange Rate Persistence. Journal of International Economics 54, 333–59.
 Betts, C. and M. B. Devereux (1996). The Exchange Rate in a Model of Pricing-to-Market.
    European Economic Review 40, 1007–21.
 Card, D. (1994). Intertemporal Labor Supply: An Assessment. In C. Sims (Ed.), Frontiers
    of Econometrics.
 Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005). Nominal Rigidities and the
    Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1),
    1–45.
 Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (1999). The Science of Monetary Policy. Journal of
    Economic Literature 37, 1661–1707.
 Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (2001). Optimal Monetary Policy in Open vs Closed
    Economies. American Economic Review 91, 253–257.
 Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (2002). A Simple Framework for International Mon-
    etary Policy Analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 879–904.
 Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti (2005). International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary Policy.
    Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 281–305.
 Devereux, M. B. and C. Engel (2002). Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate
    Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect. Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 913–
    40.
 Devereux, M. B. and C. Engel (2003). Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited:
    Price Setting and Exchange Rate Flexibility. Review of Economic Studies 70, 765–783.

                                          48
Dornbusch, R. (1983). Flexible Exchange Rates and Interdependence. IMF Staff Pa-
   pers 30, 3–30.
Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer (1984). The Open Economy: Implications for Monetary and
   Fiscal Policy. In R. J. Gordon (Ed.), The American Business Cycle: Continuity and
   Change, pp. 459–516. The University of Chicago Press.
Dotsey, M. and R. G. King (2005). Implications of State-Dependent Pricing for Dynamic
   Macroeconomic Models. Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 213–42.
Erceg, C., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust (2006). SIGMA: A New Open Economy Model for
   Policy Analysis. Journal of International Central Banking 2 (1), 1–50.
Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000). Optimal Monetary Policy with
   Staggered Wage and Price Contracts. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 281–313.
Fleming, M. J. (1962). Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Floating Exchange
   Rates. IMF Staff Papers 9 (3), 369–379.
Galı́, J. and T. Monacelli (2005). Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small
   Open Economy. Review of Economic Studies 72, 707–734.
Goldberg, P. K. and M. M. Knetter (1997). Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
   Have We Learned? Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1243–72.
Gust, C., S. Leduc, and R. J. Vigfusson (2006). Trade Integration, Competition, and
  the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through. International Finance Discussion Papers,
  Number 864, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Gust, C. and N. Sheets (2006). The Adjustment of Global External Imbalances: Does
  Partial Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices Matter? Federal Reserve Board,
  International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 850.
Hooper, P., K. Johnson, and J. Marquez (2000). Trade Elasticities for the G-7 Countries.
  Princeton Studies in International Economics.
Kimball, M. S. (1995). The Quantitative Analytics of the Neomonetarist Model. Journal
   of Money, Credit, and Banking 27, 1241–77.
Lane, P. R. (2001). The New Open Economy Macroeconomics: A Survey. Journal of
   International Economics 54, 235–66.
MacCurdy, T. (1986). An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting. Journal
  of Political Economy 89, 1059–1085.
Marazzi, M., N. Sheets, and R. Vigfusson (2005). Exchange Rate Pass-Through to U.S.
  Import Prices: Some New Evidence. Federal Reserve Board, International Finance
  Discussion Papers, No. 833.
McCallum, B. T. and E. Nelson (1999). Nominal Income Targeting in an Open-Economy
  Optimizing Model. Journal of Monetary Economics 43 (3), 553–579.



                                          49
Mulligan, C. B. (1998). Substitution Over Time: Another Look at Life-Cycle Labor Sup-
  ply. In B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg (Eds.), NBER Macroannual, Volume 13.
Mundell, R. A. (1962). The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for Internal
  and External Stability. IMF Staff Papers 9 (1), 70–79.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1995). Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux. Journal of Political
  Economy 103, 624–60.
Pencavel, J. (1998). The Market Work Behavior and Wages of Women, 1975-94. Journal
   of Human Resources 33, 771–804.
Pencavel, J. (2002). A Cohort Analysis of the Association Between Work and Wages
   Among Men. The Journal of Human Resources 37 (2), 251–274.
Ruhl, K. (2005). The Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics. University of Texas at
  Austin, mimeo.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2003). An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
  Model of the Euro Area. Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (5), 1124–
  1175.
Taylor, J. B. (1979). Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational
   Expectations. Econometrica 47 (5), 1267–1286.
Turnovsky, S. J. (1985). Domestic and Foreign Disturbances in an Optimizing Model
   of Exchange-Rate Determination. Journal of International Money and Finance 4 (1),
   151–71.
Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Woodford, M. (2007). Globalization and Monetary Control. NBER Working Paper Num-
  ber 13329.




                                          50
                                              Appendix
    This appendix describes how the presence of imported materials affect the overall elas-
ticity of demand with respect to the real interest rate.
    Proceeding as in Section 3, simple algebraic manipulations allow us to obtain a rela-
tionship among domestic output, the terms of trade, and domestic and foreign shocks. A
log-linear approximation to the aggregate resource constraint can be written as follows:

              yDt = (1 − ωL )(1 − gy ){(1 − ωc )cDt + ωc m∗Ct } + ωL m∗Y t + (1 − ωL )gy gt
   Following the steps used in Section 3, the term in brackets {(1 − ωc )cDt + ωc m∗Ct } can be
written in terms of foreign consumption and terms of trade (i.e. (σ open τt −c∗Dt )(1−gy )(1−ωL )).
The task then is to find an expression that relates m∗Y t to foreign variables and the terms of
trade. Import demand of materials in the foreign economy is given by:28

                             m∗Y t = yDt
                                      ∗
                                         + (1 − ωL∗ )(1 − ωc∗ )ηL [ξt∗ − zt∗ + τt ].
   Assuming that wages are flexible, we can use the MRS in the foreign economy to express
the foreign product real wage real wage in terms of foreign variables and the terms of trade.
Thus, domestic demand can be written in a more compact way as follows:


                  yDt = (σ open τt − c∗Dt )(1 − gy )(1 − ωL ) + ωL (1 − ωL∗ )(1 − ωc∗ )ηL τt
                                           +(1 − ωL )gy gt + ωL ft∗ ,

where ft∗ represents a combination of foreign variables. Relative to the benchmark model,
the previous expression makes clear that fluctuations in imported materials introduce an
additional effect of the terms of trade on domestic output, whose intensity depends upon
the share of imported materials on gross production (ωL ), the share of imports of the foreign
economy (ωc∗ ) and the elasticity of substitution of materials (ηL ) and value added in gross
production. The previous expression can be rearranged as follows:
                            open
                    yDt = (σM    τt − (1 − ωL )c∗Dt )(1 − gy ) + (1 − ωL )gy gt + ωL ft∗ ,
       open
where σM    is given by:

                             open                           (1 − ωL∗ )(1 − ωc∗ )ηL
                            σM    = σ open (1 − ωL ) + ωL                          .
                                                                 (1 − gy )
Assuming that the home economy is sufficiently small, we can rewrite this expression as:
                                   open                               ηL
                                  σM    = σ open (1 − ωL ) + ωL              .
                                                                   (1 − gy )
If ωL = 0, this expression is the same as the one for the workhorse model.
  28
       For convenience, we assume that the value added function is linear in labor (α = 0).

                                                       51
     Table 1: Slope of Reduced Form MRS Schedule for Alternative Calibrations
                           Benchmark Frisch Elasticity (χ−1 = 0.2)

                                                               Flexible Price Responses to:
            Parameters                           Technology Shock               Government Spending Shock
ωc    σ     ηc    σ open    MRS Slope     cpot
                                           t          ytpot    Lpot
                                                                t       ζtpot    cpot
                                                                                  t     ytpot    ζtpot
 0   0.25   1     0.25          12        0.6         0.49     -0.25    0.74    -0.82   0.33     -0.18
     0.5    1      0.5          9.7      0.72         0.59    -0.098    0.68    -0.98    0.2     -0.11
      1     1       1           8.7      0.79         0.65      0       0.65     -1.1   0.11    -0.058
0.12 0.25   1     0.42          10       0.36         0.56     -0.13    0.7     -0.49   0.22     -0.12
     0.25   1.5   0.53          9.6       0.3         0.59    -0.088    0.68    -0.41   0.19     -0.1
     0.25   6      1.5          8.4      0.12         0.67    0.038     0.64    -0.16   0.074    -0.04
     0.5    1     0.61          9.3      0.53         0.61    -0.064    0.67    -0.73   0.17    -0.089
     0.5    1.5   0.72          9.1      0.46         0.62    -0.039    0.66    -0.63   0.14    -0.077
     0.5    6      1.7          8.3      0.21         0.68    0.048     0.63    -0.29   0.066   -0.035
      1     1       1           8.7       0.7         0.65      0       0.65    -0.96   0.11    -0.058
      1     1.5    1.1          8.6      0.63         0.66    0.011     0.65    -0.87   0.098   -0.053
      1     6      2.1          8.2      0.35         0.69    0.061     0.63    -0.48   0.054   -0.029
0.35 0.25   1     0.68          9.2      0.18         0.62    -0.049    0.67    -0.24   0.15    -0.082
     0.25   1.5   0.96          8.7      0.13         0.65    -0.0047   0.65    -0.18   0.11    -0.061
     0.25   6      3.3           8       0.039        0.7     0.082     0.62    -0.053 0.035    -0.019
     0.5    1     0.79           9       0.32         0.63    -0.028    0.66    -0.43   0.13    -0.072
     0.5    1.5    1.1          8.6      0.24         0.65    0.0074    0.65    -0.33    0.1    -0.055
     0.5    6      3.6           8       0.075        0.7     0.084     0.62     -0.1   0.033   -0.018
      1     1       1           8.7      0.51         0.65      0       0.65     -0.7   0.11    -0.058
      1     1.5    1.3          8.5      0.41         0.67    0.025     0.64    -0.56   0.086   -0.046
      1     6      3.8           8       0.14         0.71    0.087     0.62     -0.2   0.031   -0.017



                                                 52
     Table 2: Slope of Reduced Form MRS Schedule for Alternative Calibrations
                            Higher Frisch Elasticity (χ−1 = 1)

                                                            Flexible Price Responses to:
            Parameters                         Technology Shock              Government Spending Shock
ωc    σ     ηc    σ open   MRS Slope    cpot
                                         t          ytpot    Lpot
                                                              t      ζtpot    cpot
                                                                               t      ytpot    ζtpot
 0   0.25   1     0.25        5.5       0.4         0.33    -0.49    0.82    -0.42    0.66    -0.35
     0.5    1      0.5        3.5       0.6         0.49    -0.25    0.74    -0.62    0.49    -0.26
      1     1       1         2.5       0.79        0.65      0      0.65    -0.82    0.33    -0.17
0.12 0.25   1     0.42        3.9       0.29        0.45    -0.31    0.76     -0.3    0.53    -0.29
     0.25   1.5   0.53        3.4       0.25        0.5     -0.22    0.73    -0.26    0.48    -0.26
     0.25   6      1.5        2.2       0.13        0.73    0.12     0.61    -0.13    0.24    -0.13
     0.5    1     0.61        3.2       0.47        0.54    -0.17    0.71    -0.49    0.44    -0.24
     0.5    1.5   0.72        2.9       0.43        0.58    -0.11    0.69    -0.44    0.4     -0.21
     0.5    6      1.7        2.1       0.23        0.75    0.16     0.59    -0.24    0.22    -0.12
      1     1       1         2.5       0.7         0.65      0      0.65    -0.72    0.33    -0.17
      1     1.5    1.1        2.4       0.65        0.67    0.034    0.64    -0.67    0.3     -0.16
      1     6      2.1         2        0.39        0.78    0.21     0.58    -0.41    0.19     -0.1
0.35 0.25   1     0.68         3        0.16        0.56    -0.13    0.7     -0.17    0.42    -0.22
     0.25   1.5   0.96        2.6       0.13        0.64    -0.014   0.65    -0.13    0.33    -0.18
     0.25   6      3.3        1.8      0.046        0.84    0.29     0.55    -0.048   0.13    -0.068
     0.5    1     0.79        2.8       0.3         0.6     -0.081   0.68    -0.31    0.38     -0.2
     0.5    1.5    1.1        2.5       0.24        0.66    0.022    0.64    -0.25    0.31    -0.17
     0.5    6      3.6        1.8      0.091        0.85     0.3     0.54    -0.094   0.12    -0.064
      1     1       1         2.5       0.51        0.65      0      0.65    -0.53    0.33    -0.17
      1     1.5    1.3        2.3       0.43        0.7     0.078    0.62    -0.44    0.27    -0.15
      1     6      3.8        1.8       0.17        0.86    0.32     0.54    -0.18    0.11    -0.06



                                               53
        Figure 1: Permanent Reduction in the Inflation Target in SIGMA
                        (Deviation from Steady State)
                    Output                                    1 yr. Real Interest Rate
   0                                               0.6

                                                   0.5
 −0.1
                                                   0.4
 −0.2                                              0.3

 −0.3                                              0.2

                                                   0.1
 −0.4
                                                    0

 −0.5                                             −0.1
        0      4     8        12    16                   0      4      8         12   16



            Domestic Price Inflation                         Consumer Price Inflation
   0                                                0
                             Benchmark
                             Nearly closed
 −0.2                        High openness        −0.2


 −0.4                                             −0.4


 −0.6                                             −0.6


 −0.8                                             −0.8


  −1                                               −1
        0      4     8        12    16                   0      4      8         12   16



              Private Absorption                                    Real Exports
 −0.1                                              0.6

−0.15                                              0.4

 −0.2                                              0.2

−0.25                                               0

 −0.3                                             −0.2

−0.35                                             −0.4

 −0.4                                             −0.6

−0.45                                             −0.8
        0      4     8        12    16                   0      4      8         12   16
                   Quarters                                           Quarters


                                             54
                                                Figure 2: Disinflation Episodes in U.S., Canada, and the U.K.
                                                        US                                                                       US
                                      15                                                                             6
                                                                  Output Gap
                                                                  Inflation
                                      10                                                                             4


                                       5                                                                             2


                                       0                                                                             0


                                     −5                                                                             −2


                                     −10                                                                            −4
                                           80      82        84        86                                             88   90   92       94   96
Disinflation Episodes of the 1980s




                                                                               Disinflation Episodes of the 1990s



                                                    Canada                                                                      Canada
                                      15                                                                             6

                                                                                                                     4
                                      10

                                                                                                                     2
                                       5
                                                                                                                     0
                                       0
                                                                                                                    −2

                                     −5
                                                                                                                    −4

                                     −10                                                                            −6
                                           80      82        84        86                                             88   90   92       94   96



                                                        UK                                                                       UK
                                      25                                                                            10

                                      20                                                                             8

                                      15                                                                             6

                                      10                                                                             4

                                       5                                                                             2

                                       0                                                                             0

                                     −5                                                                             −2

                                     −10                                                                            −4
                                           80      82        84        86                                             88   90   92       94   96




                                                                                         55
              Figure 3: Increase in Government Spending in SIGMA
                          (Deviation from Steady State)
                   Output                                      1 yr. Real Interest Rate
 1.2                                               0.3

  1                                               0.25

 0.8                                               0.2

 0.6                                              0.15

 0.4                                               0.1

 0.2                                              0.05

  0                                                 0

−0.2                                             −0.05
       0      4     8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



           Domestic Price Inflation                           Consumer Price Inflation
0.35                                              0.35
                            Benchmark
 0.3                        Nearly closed          0.3
                            High openness
0.25                                              0.25

 0.2                                               0.2

0.15                                              0.15

 0.1                                               0.1

0.05                                              0.05

  0                                                 0
       0      4     8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



            Real Exchange Rate                               Real Export Share of Output
  0                                                 0

−0.2
                                                 −0.05
−0.4

−0.6                                              −0.1

−0.8                                             −0.15
 −1
                                                  −0.2
−1.2

−1.4                                             −0.25
       0      4     8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16
                  Quarters                                            Quarters


                                            56
                    Figure 4: Increase in Technology in SIGMA
                          (Deviation from Steady State)
                   Output                                     1 yr. Real Interest Rate
 0.8                                              0.1

 0.7
                                                   0
 0.6

 0.5
                                                 −0.1
 0.4

 0.3
                                                 −0.2
 0.2

 0.1                                             −0.3
       0      4     8        12    16                   0       4      8        12   16



           Domestic Price Inflation                          Consumer Price Inflation
 0.1                                              0.1


  0                                                0


−0.1                                             −0.1


−0.2                                             −0.2


−0.3                        Benchmark            −0.3
                            Nearly closed
                            High openness
−0.4                                             −0.4
       0      4     8        12    16                   0       4      8        12   16



            Real Exchange Rate                              Real Export Share of Output
 1.2                                             0.35

                                                  0.3
  1
                                                 0.25
 0.8                                              0.2

 0.6                                             0.15

                                                  0.1
 0.4
                                                 0.05

 0.2                                               0
       0      4     8        12    16                   0       4      8        12   16
                  Quarters                                           Quarters


                                            57
                                                   Figure 5: Rise in Technology: Closed vs. Open
                                         Labor Market Equilibrium under Flexible Prices and Wages

                                    Closed Economy                                                                        Open Economy
                    1                                                                               1


              0.9             MPL(L,z**)                                                           0.9         MPL(L,z**)
                                                    D
              0.8                                                                                  0.8
                                              B                                                                                         post shock
                                             post shock
              0.7           MPL(L,z*)                                                              0.7        MPL(L,z*)                       C
Product Real Wage




                                                                               Product Real Wage




                                                                                                                                    E
              0.6                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                             MRS(L,z**)
                                                    A                                                                               A
              0.5                                                                                  0.5
                               MRS(L,z**)

              0.4                                                                                  0.4           MRS(L,z*)


              0.3                                                                                  0.3
                                       MRS(L,z*)
              0.2                                                                                  0.2


              0.1                                                                                  0.1


                    0                                                                               0
                        0        0.2         0.4          0.6   0.8   1                                  0         0.2        0.4       0.6          0.8   1
                                            Labor Hours                                                                      Labor Hours




                                                                          58
             Figure 6: Increase in Inflation Target in Workhorse Model
                           (Deviation from Steady State)
                    Output                                     1 Year Real Interest Rate
   0                                               0.35

−0.05                                               0.3

 −0.1                                              0.25

−0.15                                               0.2

 −0.2                                              0.15

−0.25                                               0.1

 −0.3                                              0.05

−0.35                                                0
        0      4     8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



            Domestic Price Inflation                           Consumer Price Inflation
 −0.2                                              −0.2
                             Benchmark
                             Nearly closed
 −0.4                        High openness         −0.4



 −0.6                                              −0.6



 −0.8                                              −0.8



  −1                                                −1
        0      4     8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



             Private Consumption                              Real Export Share of Output
   0                                                 0


−0.05                                             −0.01


 −0.1                                             −0.02


−0.15                                             −0.03


 −0.2                                             −0.04


−0.25                                             −0.05
        0      4     8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16
                   Quarters                                            Quarters


                                             59
            Figure 7: Increase in Government Spending in Workhorse Model
                             (Deviation from Steady State)
                      Output                                     1 Year Real Interest Rate
  0.3                                                 0.2

 0.25
                                                     0.15
  0.2

 0.15                                                 0.1

  0.1
                                                     0.05
 0.05

   0                                                   0
        0       4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



             Domestic Price Inflation                               Product Real Wage
  0.4                                                  0

                                                    −0.02
  0.3
                                                    −0.04

  0.2                                               −0.06

                                                    −0.08
  0.1
                                                     −0.1

   0                                                −0.12
        0       4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



                    Output Gap                                  Real Export Share of Output
                                                       0
                               Benchmark
  0.2                          Nearly closed
                               High openness         −0.1

 0.15
                                                     −0.2
  0.1
                                                     −0.3
 0.05

                                                     −0.4
   0

−0.05                                                −0.5
        0       4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16
                     Quarters                                            Quarters


                                               60
               Figure 8: Increase in Technology in Workhorse Model
                           (Deviation from Steady State)
                     Output                                     1 Year Real Interest Rate
  0.8                                                 0

                                                   −0.05
  0.6
                                                    −0.1

                                                   −0.15
  0.4
                                                    −0.2

                                                   −0.25
  0.2
                                                    −0.3

   0                                               −0.35
        0      4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



            Domestic Price Inflation                               Product Real Wage
   0                                                 0.8

 −0.1                                                0.7

 −0.2                                                0.6

 −0.3                                                0.5

 −0.4                                                0.4

 −0.5                                                0.3

 −0.6                                                0.2

                                                     0.1
        0      4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



                   Output Gap                                  Real Export Share of Output
 0.15                                               0.14
                              Benchmark
                              Nearly closed         0.12
  0.1                         High openness
                                                     0.1

                                                    0.08
 0.05
                                                    0.06

                                                    0.04
   0
                                                    0.02

−0.05                                                 0
        0      4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16
                    Quarters                                            Quarters


                                              61
               Figure 9: Increase in Technology in Workhorse Model
                   (Alternative Calibration: η = 6 and χ−1 = 1)
                     Output                                     1 Year Real Interest Rate
  1.2                                                 0

   1                                               −0.05

                                                    −0.1
  0.8
                                                   −0.15
  0.6
                                                    −0.2
  0.4
                                                   −0.25
  0.2                                               −0.3

   0                                               −0.35
        0      4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



            Domestic Price Inflation                               Product Real Wage
   0                                                 0.8

 −0.1
                                                     0.6
 −0.2

 −0.3
                                                     0.4
 −0.4

 −0.5
                                                     0.2
 −0.6

                                                      0
        0      4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16



                   Output Gap                                  Real Export Share of Output
  0.2                                               0.25
                              Benchmark
                              Nearly closed
 0.15                         High openness          0.2


  0.1                                               0.15


 0.05                                                0.1


   0                                                0.05


−0.05                                                 0
        0      4      8        12    16                    0       4      8        12   16
                    Quarters                                            Quarters


                                              62
                                          Figure 10: Policy Tradeoff Frontier for Technology Shock

                                                              Benchmark Calibration



                             Inflation−Output Gap Volatility Tradeoff                                                     Implied Volatility of Real Interest Rate
                      1.4                                                                               3.5
                                                        Nearly closed                                                                                Nearly closed
                                                        Highly Open                                                                                  Highly Open


                      1.2                                                                                                 3




                             1                                                                          2.5
Inflation Volatility ( σπ)




                      0.8                                                                                                 2
                                                                                   Real Interest Rate Volatility ( σrr)




                      0.6                                                                               1.5




                      0.4                                                                                                 1




                      0.2                                                                               0.5




                             0                                                                                   0
                                 0       0.5            1               1.5                                      −10               −5         0         5            10
                                     Output Gap Volatility (σg)                                                               relative weight on output (exp(N))




                                                                              63
              Figure 11: Policy Tradeoff Frontier for Technology Shock

                                     Alternative Calibrations


     Alternative 1: Flatter MRS than benchmark (χ = 2, ηc = 3, α = .35)
       Inflation−Output Gap Volatility Tradeoff     Implied Volatility of Real Interest Rate
    1.5                                           3
                             Nearly closed
                             Highly Open        2.5

     1                                                     2

σ                                                   σ1.5
 π                                                    rr

    0.5                                                    1

                                                      0.5

     0                                                     0
          0              0.5          1         1.5        −10         −5          0          5         10
                               σ                                   relative weight on output (exp(N))
                                g




                 Alternative 2: Very Flat MRS (χ = .05, η = 6, α = .35)
                                                                         c
      Inflation−Output Gap Volatility Tradeoff                 Implied Volatility of Real Interest Rate
     1                                                     2

    0.8
                                                      1.5

  0.6
σπ                                                  σrr 1
    0.4

                                                      0.5
    0.2

     0                                                     0
          0        0.2         0.4        0.6   0.8        −10         −5          0          5         10
                               σg                                  relative weight on output (exp(N))




       Alternative 3: Very Flat MRS AND MPL (χ = .05, ηc = 6, α = .05)
                                                               Implied Volatility of Real Interest Rate
    1.5Inflation−Output Gap Volatility Tradeoff            5

                                                           4
     1
                                                           3
σπ                                                  σrr
                                                           2
    0.5
                                                           1

     0                                                     0
          0              2            4         6          −15        −10        −5           0         5
                               σg                                  relative weight on output (exp(N))
                                                64
Figure 12: Persistent Increase in Technology: Complete vs. Incomplete Markets

            Complete Markets                                 Incomplete Markets
                    Output                                            Output
 0.8                                               0.8


 0.7                                               0.7


 0.6                                               0.6


 0.5                                               0.5


 0.4                                               0.4



       0      4      8         12   16                   0      4      8         12   16



           Domestic Price Inflation                          Domestic Price Inflation
   0                                                0

−0.1                                              −0.1

−0.2                                              −0.2

−0.3                                              −0.3

−0.4                                              −0.4

−0.5                                              −0.5
                             Benchmark
−0.6                         Nearly closed        −0.6
                             High openness
−0.7                                              −0.7
       0      4      8         12   16                   0      4      8         12   16



                  Consumption                                       Consumption
 0.8                                               0.9

 0.7                                               0.8

 0.6                                               0.7

 0.5                                               0.6

 0.4                                               0.5

 0.3                                               0.4

 0.2                                               0.3

 0.1                                               0.2
       0      4      8         12   16                   0      4      8         12   16
                    Quarters                                          Quarters

                                             65
Figure 13: The Effect on Output of a More Transitory Increase in Technology
           (Alternative Calibrations of Incomplete Markets Model)
                               η = 6 and χ = 5
1.5




 1




0.5




 0
      0             4             8                12         16



                               η = 6 and χ = 1
1.5




 1




0.5




 0
      0             4             8                12         16



                              η = 12 and χ = 0.1
1.5
                                                              Benchmark
                                                              Nearly closed
                                                              High openness
 1




0.5




 0
      0             4             8                12         16




                                      66
  Figure 14: Reduction in Inflation Target in Endogenous Investment Model

                           Alternative 1: η = 1.5 and φ =0.2
                                           c                  I
               Output                                             Domestic Inflation
  0                                            −0.3

                                               −0.4
−0.1
                                               −0.5

                                               −0.6
−0.2
                                               −0.7

                                               −0.8
−0.3
                                               −0.9

−0.4                                            −1
       0   4     8        12    16                    0           4     8        12    16

                           Alternative 2: η = 6 and φ = 0.2
                                           c              I
               Output                                             Domestic Inflation
  0                                            −0.3

−0.1                                           −0.4

−0.2                                           −0.5

−0.3                                           −0.6

−0.4                                           −0.7

−0.5                                           −0.8
                        Benchmark
−0.6                    Nearly closed          −0.9
                        High openness
−0.7                                            −1
       0   4     8        12    16                    0           4     8        12    16

                          Alternative 3: ηc = 1.5 and φI = 0.01
               Output                                             Domestic Inflation
  0                                            −0.5


−0.2                                           −0.6


−0.4                                           −0.7


−0.6                                           −0.8


−0.8                                           −0.9


 −1                                             −1
       0   4     8        12    16                    0           4     8        12    16
               Quarters                                               Quarters

                                          67
Figure 15: Increase in Technology: Workhorse Model vs. Imported Materials Model


   Benchmark: No Imported Materials                            Imported Materials
                     Output                                           Output
   1.4                                              1.4


   1.2                                              1.2


    1                                                1


   0.8                                              0.8


   0.6                                              0.6


   0.4                                              0.4
         0      4     8        12    16                   0      4     8        12   16



             Domestic Price Inflation                         Domestic Price Inflation
    0                                                0

  −0.2                                             −0.2

  −0.4                                             −0.4

  −0.6                                             −0.6

  −0.8                                             −0.8
                              Benchmark
   −1                         Nearly closed         −1
                              High openness

         0      4     8        12    16                   0      4     8        12   16



              Real Exchange Rate                               Real Exchange Rate
    2                                                2



   1.5                                              1.5



    1                                                1



   0.5                                              0.5



    0                                                0
         0      4     8        12    16                   0      4     8        12   16
                    Quarters                                         Quarters
                                              68
Figure 16: Increase in Technology: Workhorse Model vs. Variable Desired Markups Model


            Benchmark: CES Demand                              Variable Elasticity of Demand
                          Output                                              Output
      0.8                                                0.8



      0.6                                                0.6



      0.4                                                0.4



      0.2                                                0.2



       0                                                  0
            0        4      8        12   16                    0        4      8        12   16



                  Domestic Price Inflation                            Domestic Price Inflation
       0                                                  0

     −0.1                                               −0.1

     −0.2                                               −0.2

     −0.3                                               −0.3

     −0.4                                               −0.4

     −0.5                                               −0.5
                                   Benchmark
     −0.6                          Nearly closed        −0.6
                                   High openness

            0        4      8        12   16                    0        4      8        12   16



                Relative Import Price (Pm/Pd)                       Relative Import Price (Pm/Pd)

      1.2                                                1.2

       1                                                  1

      0.8                                                0.8

      0.6                                                0.6

      0.4                                                0.4

      0.2                                                0.2

       0                                                  0
            0        4      8        12   16                    0        4      8        12   16
                          Quarters                                            Quarters
                                                   69
