                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 RELATIVE GOODS' PRICES, PURE INFLATION, AND THE PHILLIPS CORRELATION

                                            Ricardo Reis
                                           Mark W. Watson

                                         Working Paper 13615
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13615


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We are grateful to several colleagues for their valuable input to this research project. For their support
and hospitality, Reis thanks the Hoover Institution at Stanford University under a Campbell national
fellowship, Columbia University’s Program for Economic Research, the University of Chicago, and
Princeton University where much of the work for this paper was completed. The National Science
Foundation provided support through grants SES-0617811 and SES-0921147. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ricardo Reis and Mark W. Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Relative Goods' Prices, Pure Inflation, and the Phillips Correlation
Ricardo Reis and Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 13615
November 2007, Revised August 2009
JEL No. C32,C43,E31

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper uses a dynamic factor model for the quarterly changes in consumption goods’ prices to
separate them into three independent components: idiosyncratic relative-price changes, a low-dimensional
index of aggregate relative-price changes, and an index of equiproportional changes in all inflation
rates, that we label “pure” inflation. The paper estimates the model on U.S. data since 1959, and it
presents a simple structural model that relates the three components of price changes to fundamental
economic shocks. We use the estimates of the pure inflation and aggregate relative-price components
to answer two questions. First, what share of the variability of inflation is associated with each component,
and how are they related to conventional measures of monetary policy and relative-price shocks? We
find that pure inflation accounts for 15-20% of the variability in inflation while our aggregate relative-price
index accounts most of the rest. Conventional measures of relative prices are strongly but far from
perfectly correlated with our relative-price index; pure inflation is only weakly correlated with money
growth rates, but more strongly correlated with nominal interest rates. Second, what drives the Phillips
correlation between inflation and measures of real activity? We find that the Phillips correlation essentially
disappears once we control for goods’ relative-price changes. This supports modern theories of inflation
dynamics based on price rigidities and many consumption goods.


Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu

Mark W. Watson
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
mwatson@princeton.edu
          One of the goals of macroeconomics is to explain the aggregate sources of changes in

goods’ prices. If there was a single consumption good in the world, as is often assumed in

models, describing the price changes of consumption would be a trivial matter. But, in

reality, there are many goods and prices, and there is an important distinction between price

changes that are equiproportional across all goods (absolute-price changes) and changes in

the cost of some goods relative to others (relative-price changes). The goal of this paper is to

empirically separate these sources of price changes and to investigate their relative size, their

determinants, and their role in the macroeconomic Phillips relation between inflation and

output.

          Our data are the quarterly price changes in each of 187 sectors in the U.S. personal

consumption expenditures (PCE) category of the national income and product accounts from

1959:1 to 2006:2. Denoting the rate of price change for the i’th good between dates t–1 and t

by it, and letting t be the Nx1 vector that collects these goods’ price changes, we model

their co-movement using a linear factor model:



(1)                                        t = ΛFt + ut



          The k factors in the kx1 vector Ft capture common sources of variation in prices.

These might be due to aggregate shocks affecting all sectors, like changes in aggregate

productivity, government spending, or monetary policy, or they might be due to shocks that

affect many but not all sectors, like changes in energy prices, weather events in agriculture,

or exchange rate fluctuations and the price of tradables.        The N×k matrix Λ contains

coefficients (“factor loadings”) that determine how each individual good’s price responds to

these shocks. The Nx1 vector ut is a remainder that captures good-specific relative-price

variability associated with idiosyncratic sectoral events or measurement error.


                                               1
        We see the empirical model in (1) as a useful way to capture the main features of the

covariance matrix of changes in good’s prices. To the extent that the factors in Ft explain a

significant share of the variation in the data, then changes in goods' prices provide

information on the aggregate shocks that macroeconomists care about. We separate this

aggregate component of price changes into an absolute-price component and possibly several

relative-price components. Denoting these by the scalar at and the Rt vector of size k−1

respectively, this decomposition can be written as:



(2)                                           ΛFt = lat + ΓRt



        Absolute price changes affect all prices equiproportionately, so l is an N×1 vector of

ones, while relative price changes affect prices in different proportions according to the

N×(k−1) matrix Γ. The first question this paper asks is whether the common sources of

variation, ΛFt, can be decomposed in this way.

        One issue is that l may not be in the column space of Λ; that is, there may no

absolute-price changes in the data. Given estimates of the factor model, we can investigate

this empirically using statistical tests and measures of fit.               Another issue is that the

decomposition in (2) is not unique; that is, at and Rt are not separately identified. The key

source of the identification problem is easy to see: for any arbitrary (k−1)×1 vector , we

have that lat + ΓRt = l(at + ´Rt) + ( − l´)Rt, so that (at, Rt) cannot be distinguished from

(at + α′Rt, Rt). The intuition is that the absolute change in prices cannot be distinguished

from a change in “average relative prices” α´Rt, but there are many ways to define what this

average means.1


1
  One natural way is to assume that relative price changes must add up to zero across all goods. Reis and
Watson (2007) use this restriction to define a numeraire price index that measures absolute price changes. A
further identification issue in the model is that Rt = AA−1Rt for arbitrary non-singular matrix A. For our
purposes we will not need to separately identify the elements of Rt so this final issue is not important.

                                                     2
         We overcome this identification problem by focusing instead on two independent

components: “pure” inflation υt, and a low-dimensional relative price index ρt defined as:



(3)                                      υt = at − E[at | {R τ }T 1 ]

(4)                                      ρt = E[Ft | {R τ }T 1 ]



         Pure inflation is identified, and it has a simple interpretation: it is the common

component in price changes that has an equiproportional effect on all prices and is

uncorrelated with changes in relative prices at all dates. We label it “pure” because, by

construction, its changes are uncorrelated with relative-price changes at any point in time,

and because it corresponds to the famous thought experiment that economists have used

since David Hume (1752): “imagine that all prices increase in the same proportion, but no

relative price changes.”2 The relative-price index captures all of the aggregate movements in

goods’ price changes that are associated with some change in relative prices at some date. In

an economic model, these components map into different fundamental shocks. For instance,

an exogenous but anticipated increase in the money supply that leads all price-setters to raise

their prices in the same proportion leads to pure inflation, while an unanticipated increase in

money to which some firms respond, but others do not, leads to a change in the relative-price

index.3 In this dichotomy, inflation due to changes in the money supply that are reactions to

relative price changes also lead to changes in the relative-price index, since pure inflation is

uncorrelated with any relative-price change.

         The first contribution of this paper consists in estimating the empirical model in (1)-

(4) providing a decomposition of inflation into three independent components:

2
 The definition of pure inflation also appears in current textbooks (Olivier J. Blanchard, 2003: 33).
3
  In some sticky-price models, like a Calvo model in which the frequency of price adjustments differs across
sectors, an anticipated increase in the money supply would not lead to pure inflation, as the price-setters are, by
assumption, unable to all raise their prices at once.

                                                         3
(5)                                     t = lνt + ρt + ut



       Our estimates show that these three components have differed markedly over the last

40 years, and allow us to address two issues. First, we are able to quantify the share of

inflation’s variability associated with each of the components. We find that for a typical

good, its idiosyncratic relative-price component accounts for roughly 70 percent of its

variability, so that macroeconomic shocks account for almost as much as 1/3 of the

movement in sectoral prices. Within aggregate sources of variation, pure inflation accounts

for about 15-20 percent of the variability in PCE inflation. Researchers must be cautious

when comparing the predictions for inflation from models with a single consumption good to

the data, because most of the variation in standard aggregate inflation indices is associated

with relative-price movements, which these models ignore. Second, we relate our estimates

to other variables. At business-cycle frequencies, pure inflation is barely correlated with

money growth, while it has a correlation of around 0.5 with nominal interest rates. The

relative-price index is weakly related to food and energy prices, but it is strongly related to

the relative price of non-durable and services. However, even considering as many as four

conventional measures of relative-price changes, the two relative-price factors in our baseline

specification appear to be a more comprehensive measure of relative price movements.

       The second contribution of this paper is to re-examine the correlation between

inflation and real activity. Alban W. H. Phillips (1958) famously first estimated it, and a vast

subsequent literature confirmed that it is reasonably large and stable (James H. Stock and

Watson, 1999). This correlation has posed a challenge for macroeconomists because it

signals that the classical dichotomy between real and nominal variables may not hold. The

typical explanation for the Phillips correlation in economic models involves movements in


                                               4
relative prices. For instance, models with sticky wages but flexible goods prices (or vice-

versa), explain it by movements in the relative price of labor. Models of the transaction

benefits of money or of limited participation in asset markets explain the Phillips correlation

by changes in the relative price of consumption today vis-à-vis tomorrow, or asset returns.

Models with international trade and restrictions on the currency denomination of prices

explain it using the relative price of domestic vis-à-vis foreign goods, or exchange rates. We

show that, after controlling for all of these relative prices, the Phillips correlation is still

quantitatively and statistically significant. Then, using our estimates, we control instead for

the relative price of different goods.      This would be suggested by models with many

consumption goods, as is the case in modern sticky-price or sticky-information models. We

find that, controlling for relative goods prices, the Phillips correlation becomes quantitatively

negligible This suggests a more important role for rigidities in goods markets and a less

important role for rigidities in labor or asset markets.

           The paper is organized as follows. Section I outlines the methods that we use to

estimate the factor model and to compute the inflation components and their correlation with

other variables. Section II presents a stylized structural model of inflation dynamics that

generates the decomposition in equation (5) and relates its three components to fundamental

economic shocks. Sections III and IV present estimates of the factor model, the factors, and

their relation to observables. Section V investigates the Phillips correlation, and section VI

discusses the robustness of the conclusions in the previous two sections to different

specifications.   Section VII concludes, summarizing our findings and discussing their

implications.



       Relation to the literature

       There has been much research using statistical models to define and measure inflation


                                                 5
(see the survey by E. Anthony Selvanathan and D. S. Prasada Rao, 1994) but, as far as we are

aware, there have been relatively few attempts at separating absolute from relative-price

changes. An important exception is Michael F. Bryan and Stephen G. Cechetti (1993), who

use a dynamic factor model in a panel of 36 price series to measure what we defined above as

at.   They achieve identification and estimate their model imposing strong and strict

assumptions on the co-movement of relative prices, in particular that relative prices are

independent across goods.          Moreover, while they use their estimates to forecast future

inflation, we use them to separate inflation into components and to assess the Phillips

correlation.4

        In methods, our use of large-scale dynamic factor models draws on the literature on

their estimation by maximum likelihood (e.g., Danny Quah and Thomas J. Sargent, 1993,

and Catherine Doz, Domenico Giannone and Lucrezia Reichlin, 2008) and principal

components (e.g., Jushan Bai and Serena Ng, 2002, Mario Forni, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi

and Reichlin, 2000, and Stock and Watson, 2002). We provide a new set of questions to

apply these methods.

        Using these methods on price data, Riccardo Cristadoro, Forni, Reichlin and

Giovanni Veronesi (2005) estimate a common factor on a panel with price and quantity series

and ask a different question: whether it forecasts inflation well. Marlene Amstad and Simon

M. Potter (2007) address yet another issue, using dynamic factor models to build measures of

the common component in price changes that can be updated daily. Marco Del Negro (2006)

estimates a factor model using sectoral PCE data allowing for a single common component

and relative price factors associated with durable, non-durable, and services goods sectors.

Finally, Filippo Altissimo, Benoit Mojon, and Paolo Zaffaroni (2009) estimate a common

factor model using disaggregated Euro-area CPI indices and use the model to investigate the

4
 Bryan, Cecchetti and Roisin O’Sullivan (2002) use a version of the Bryan-Cecchetti (1993) model to study the
importance of asset prices for an inflation index.

                                                     6
persistence in aggregate Euro-area inflation. The common factor in these papers is not a

measure of pure inflation, since it affects different prices differently.

           Closer to our paper, in the use of dynamic factor models to extract a measure of

inflation that is then used to assess macroeconomic relations suggested by theory, is Jean

Boivin, Marc Giannoni and Ilian Mihov (2009). They extract a macroeconomic shock using

many series that include prices and real quantities, estimate the impulse response of

individual prices to this shock, and then compare their shape to the predictions of different

models of nominal rigidities. In contrast, we use only price data (and no quantity data) to

separate different components of inflation, so that we can later ask how they relate to

quantities. Moreover, we apply our estimates to assess unconditional correlations of real

variables with inflation, whereas they focus on the link conditional on identified monetary

shocks. Finally, we separate relative prices and pure inflation, while their inflation measure

is a mix of the two, so we ask a different set of questions.



              I. Measuring the Components of Inflation and Calculating Macro-

                                        Correlations



       The model in (1)-(4) is meant to capture the key properties of the inflation series as

they pertain to the estimation of their separate components, with an eye on the applications

that we discussed in the introduction. We use a factor model for the covariance between

sectoral inflation rates because past research focusing on the output of different sectors, and

macroeconomic variables more generally, found that this model is able to flexibly and

parsimoniously account for the main features of the economic data (Stock and Watson, 1989,

2005, Forni et al, 2000).




                                                 7
                               A. Estimating the Dynamic Factor Model

        The strategy for estimating the model can be split in two steps. First, we choose the

number of factors (k). Second, we estimate the factors (at, Rt) and the factor loadings (),

and examine the restriction that the factor loading on at is equal to unity. We discuss each of

these in turn.

        Choosing the number of factors, that is the size k of the vector Ft, involves a trade-

off. On the one hand, a higher k implies that a larger share of the variance in the data is

captured by the aggregate components. On the other hand, the extra factors are increasingly

harder to reliably estimate and are less quantitatively significant. Bai and Ng (2002) have

developed estimators for k that are consistent (as min(N,T) → ∞) in models such as this. We

compute the Bai-Ng estimators, which are based on the number of dominant eigenvalues of

the covariance (or correlation) matrix of the data. We complement them by also looking at a

few informative descriptive statistics on the additional explanatory power of the marginal

factor. In particular, we estimate an unrestricted version of (1) that does not impose the

restriction in (2) that the first factor has a unit loading. We start with one factor and

successively increase the number of factors, calculating at each step the incremental share of

the variance of each good’s inflation explained by the extra factor.                  If the increase in

explained variance is large enough across many goods, we infer it is important to include at

least these many factors. These pieces of information lead us to choose a benchmark value

for k. In section VI, we investigate the robustness of the results to different choices of k.

        To estimate the factor model, we follow two approaches.                      The first approach

estimates (1)-(2) by restricted principal components. It consists of solving the least-squares

problem:


                                               N       T
(6)                              min Γ ,( a , R )  wi  ( it  at  γ 'i R t ) 2
                                               i 1   t 1



                                                      8
where i denotes the i’th row of  (from (2)) and wi are weights. We set wi equal to the

inverse of the sample variance of it so that the solution to (6) yields the restricted principal

components associated with the sample correlation matrix of the inflation series (C.

Radhakrishna Rao (1973), section 8g.2). When N and T are large and the error terms uit are

weakly cross-sectionally and serially correlated, the principal components/least squares

estimators of the factors have two important statistical properties that are important for our

analysis (Stock and Watson, 2002, Bai, 2003, Bai and Ng, 2006). First, the estimators are

consistent. Second, the sampling error in the estimated factors is sufficiently small that it can

be ignored when the estimates, say aˆt and Rˆ t , are used in regressions in place of the true

values of at and Rt.

        The second approach makes parametric assumptions on the stochastic properties of

the three latent components (at, Rt, and uit), estimates the parameters of the model by

maximum likelihood, and then computes estimates of the factors using signal extraction

formulae. In particular, we assume that (at, Rt) follow a vector autoregression, while uit

follow independent autoregressive processes, all with Gaussian errors.5                   The resulting

unobserved-components model is:



(7)                                         it = at + γi′Rt + uit

                                                      a 
(8)                                           Φ ( L )  t  = t
                                                       Rt 

(9)                                          βi(L)uit = ci + eit



5
  One concern with assuming Gaussianity is that disaggregated inflation rates are skewed and fat-tailed. In
general, skewness is not a major concern for Gaussian MLEs in models like this (Watson, 1989), but excess
kurtosis is more problematic. To mitigate the problem, we follow Bryan, Cecchetti and Rodney L. Wiggins II
(1997) and pre-treat the data to eliminate large outliers (section III has specifics).

                                                    9
with {eit},{ejt}j≠i,{t} being mutually and serially uncorrelated sequences that are normally

distributed with mean zero and variances var(eit) =  i2 , var(t) = Q. To identify the factors,

we use the normalizations that the columns of Г are mutually orthogonal and add up to zero,

although the estimates of υt and ρt do not depend on this normalization.

        Numerically maximizing the likelihood function is computationally complex because

of the size of the model. For example, our benchmark model includes at and two additional

relative price factors, a VAR(4) for (8), univariate AR(1) models for the {uit}, and N = 187

price series. There are 971 parameters to be estimated.6 Despite its complexity, the linear

latent variable structure of the model makes it amenable to estimation using an EM algorithm

with the “E-step” computed by Kalman smoothing and the “M-step” by linear regression.

The appendix to this paper describes this in more detail.

        While this exact dynamic factor model (7)-(9) is surely misspecified − for instance, it

ignores small amounts of cross-sectional correlation among the uit terms, conditional

heteroskedasticity in the disturbances, and so forth − it does capture the key cross sectional

and serial correlation patterns in the data. Doz, Giannone and Reichlin (2008) study the

properties of factors estimated from an exact factor structure as in (7)-(9) with parameters

estimated by Gaussian MLE, but under the assumption that the data are generated from an

approximate factor model (so that (7)-(9) are misspecified). Their analysis shows that when

N and T are large, the factor estimates from (7)-(9) are consistent despite potential

misspecification in the model.

        We carry out our analysis using the principal components estimates of the factors and

the estimates from (7)-(9). To save space, unless noted otherwise, the results reported in

sections III-V are based on the estimates from the parametric factor model (7)-(9); results

with the principal components estimates of the factors are shown in section VI, which

6
 The number of unknown parameters is 186 + 185 (γi) + 187 (βi) + 187 (ci) + 187 (var(ei)) + 36 () + 3 (var(ε))
= 971, where these values reflect the normalizations used for identification.

                                                      10
focuses on the robustness of the empirical conclusions.

        The model in (1)-(2) imposes the restriction that the loading on the absolute-price

factor must be one for all goods. To investigate how restrictive this is, we calculate the

increase in fit that comes from dropping the restriction, measured as the fraction of (sample)

variance of i explained by the factors. Moreover, we estimate the value of ςi in the N

regressions:



(10)                                   it = ςiat + i′Rt + uit,



using aˆt and Rˆ t in place of at and Rt, as explained above. When ςi = 1, this corresponds to

our restricted model, so we can use the estimates of ςi to judge how adequate is this

restriction.



                        B. Computing the Aggregate Components of Inflation

        To separate the components of inflation and obtain time-series for pure inflation and

the relative-price index (υt, ρt), we need to calculate the expectation of absolute-price changes

conditional on relative-price changes in (3)-(4). This requires a model of the joint dynamics

of at and Rt. We model this as a VAR, as in (8), which is estimated by Gaussian MLE in the

parametric factor model, or by OLS using the principal-component estimators for the factors

as in the two-step approach taken in factor-augmented VARs (Bernanke, Boivin, Eliasz,

2005). Finally, given estimates of (L), we compute the implied projection in (3) and (4) to

obtain pure inflation and the relative-price index. Details are provided in the appendix.



                     C. Computing Macro-Correlations at Different Frequencies

        As described in the introduction, we are interested in the relationship between pure

                                               11
inflation and the relative-price index, υt and ρt, and other macro variables such as the PCE

deflator, food and energy prices, the unemployment rate, or the nominal interest rate. Let xt

denote one of these macro variables of interest and consider the projection of xt onto leads

and lags of υt (or ρt)



(11)                                                xt = δ(L)υt + et.



         The fraction of variability of xt associated with {υt} (or {ρt}) can be computed as the

R2 from this regression. Adding additional control variables, say zt, to the regression makes

it possible to compute the partial R2 of x with respect to leads and lags of υt (or ρt) after

controlling for zt.

         We will compute frequency-domain versions of these variance decompositions and

partial R2’s (squared coherences or partial squared coherences). One of their virtues is that

they allow us to focus on specific frequency bands, like business cycle frequencies. Another

virtue is that they are robust to the filter used to define the variables (e.g., levels or first

differences). In particular we report the squared coherence (the R2 at a given frequency)

between x and υ (or ρ) averaged over various frequency bands. When it is relevant, we also

report partial squared coherences controlling for (leads and lags) of a vector of variables z

(the partial R2 controlling for z at a given frequency), again averaged over various frequency

bands.

         We are also interested in the relationship between Rt and standard measures of

relative prices such the relative price of consumer durables, food, energy, and so forth. Let qt

denote a vector of these variables. We summarize the correlation between R and q using

canonical correlations, again implemented using frequency domain methods. In particular

we report the squared canonical coherences between R and q averaged over various


                                               12
frequency bands.

       These various spectral R2 measures are computed using VAR spectral estimators,

where the VAR is estimated, in the first instance, using xt, aˆt , Rˆ t , and (if appropriate) zt,

and in the second instance using Rˆ t and qt. The standard errors for the spectral measures are

computed using the delta-method and a heteroskedastic-robust estimator for the covariance

matrix of the VAR parameters. Details are provided in the appendix.



                                    II. A Theoretical Framework



       The statistical decomposition in (5) expresses it in terms of three components: vt,

which we have labeled pure inflation, t, which is a function of aggregate relative-price

shocks, and uit, which captures sector-specific relative-price changes or measurement error.

Structural macro models give rise to an analogous representation for inflation, where the

components depend on the various shocks in the macro model. The specifics of the structural

model determine the relative variances of the components and their correlation with non-

price variables such as real output, money, interest rates, and so forth.

       This section presents a simple economic model of inflation that relates key structural

shocks to the statistical constructs v,  and u. The goal is to help guide the reader’s intuition

about the forces underlying the statistical factors that we estimate, so the model is kept as

simple as possible. We believe that its main conclusions are robust to the specific modeling

choices (like the source of nominal rigidities, or the particular functional forms), and that

this model could serve as the starting point for a more structural empirical analysis of

inflation's components in future work.



                                             A. The Model

                                               13
         The general-equilibrium setup follows Blanchard and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (1987) and

Michael Woodford (2003) allowing for many sectors.                                       A representative consumer

maximizes:




  (12)                                                       L 1              
                                            E0    t  ln Ct  t                 
                                                t 0          1                




where δ < 1 is the discount factor and ψ is the elasticity of labor supply. Total labor supplied

is Lt and Ct is a consumption aggregator with elasticity  across N sectors, indexed by i, and

across a continuum of varieties within each sector, indexed by j:



                                                       /(  1)                                              /(  1)
                                    N
                                                                               1                       
(13)                  Ct   N 1/  Cit( 1)/                 , with Cit    Cit ( j )( 1)/ dj                 .
                                   i 1                                       0                       



         At every date, the consumer purchases each good at price Pit(j) for a total spending of

S t   i  Pit ( j )Cit ( j ) dj , earns a wage Wt for labor services, and pays taxes at rate Tt. She has

three other sources income that are lump-sum: profits Dt from firms, transfers Gt from the

fiscal authorities, and money injections Ht from the monetary authority.                                             Finally, the

consumer holds money Mt to save and to purchase consumption goods. The budget and

cash-in-advance constraints are:



 (14)                           St  M t  (1  Tt )Wt Lt  M t 1  Dt  Gt  H t ,

 (15)                                 St  M t 1  H t .




                                                            14
        Firms are monopolistically competitive, each hiring labor Lit(j) to produce output

Yit(j) with productivity Xit(j) subject to decreasing returns to scale at rate η < 1:



 (16)                                            Yit ( j )  X it ( j ) Lit ( j )




        Finally, the two government authorities simply return their funds to consumers, so

that Ht = Mt – Mt-1 and Gt = TtWtLt. Market clearing in the goods and labor market require

Yit(j) = Cit(j) and Lt   i  Lit ( j ) dj respectively.

        In this simple economy, there is uncertainty about taxes Tt, the money supply Mt, and

productivity Xit(j), each of which depends on shocks. Letting small letters denote the natural

logarithm of the corresponding capital letters:



 (17)                     xit ( j )  x  it ( j )  it  i t

 (18)                     mt  mt  t  t   t

 (19)                    ln(1  Tt )  t   t



        The six independent shocks (in Greek letters with time subscripts) are: firm-specific

productivity (), sectoral productivity (χ), aggregate productivity with a sector-specific

impact (ζ), anticipated monetary policy (ω), unanticipated monetary policy (μ) and

anticipated tax changes (τ). In (18) note that                             the monetary policy rule responds

systematically to productivity shocks. For simplicity, we assume that each shock follows an

independent random walk, and that the variety-specific and sector-specific shocks

                                                                                ( j ) dj  0 for all i and N 1  i 1  it  0
                                                                       1
                                                                     
                                                                                                                    N
approximately average to zero in each time period,                         it
                                                                       0



. We further assume that mt grows over time at a rate m that is large enough so that

                                                           15
δEt(Mt/Mt+1) < 1, ensuring that the cash-in-advance constraint always binds.

        We model price rigidity through imperfect information as in Robert E. Lucas Jr.

(1973) and N. Gregory Mankiw and Reis (2002). In particular, we assume that at the

beginning of every period, all firms learn about the past values of the six shocks, as well as

the current values of the anticipated fiscal and monetary shocks. However, only a randomly

drawn fraction i of firms in each sector observe the contemporaneous realization of the other

four shocks before making their pricing decisions. The remaining 1–i fraction of firms learn

these shocks only in the following period, and we denote their expectations with this

incomplete information by Eˆ (.) .       This assumption of imperfect information has a long

tradition in macroeconomics (Woodford, 2003, chapter 3, labels it the “neoclassical” case)

and is in line with the recent work on sticky-information Phillips curves.

           The appendix solves for the equilibrium in this economy, showing that it can be

reduced to the following equations for pit, pt, and yt (ignoring constants):



(20)                  pit  i  pt   ( yt  xt )   t    xit  xt   
                          (1  i ) Eˆ  pt   ( yt  xt )   t    xit  xt   ,

 (21)                                     pt  N 1  i 1 pit ,
                                                          N




 (22)                                       mt  pt  yt ,



where α and  are two positive parameters that depend on the preference and production

parameters, xit   xit ( j ) dj is sectoral productivity and xt = N 1  i 1 xit is average
                                                                                             N




productivity . The first equation is the fundamental pricing equation in new Keynesian

models, relating sectoral prices to marginal costs, which in this model depend on aggregate

output, sectoral productivity, and taxes. The second equation is a log-linear approximation to


                                                       16
the static cost-of-living price index, which we denote by pt. The third equation is the

quantity theory relation that follows from the cash-in-advance constraint.                       This basic

reduced-form structure is shared by many modern models of inflation dynamics.

       A few steps of algebra show that sectoral price changes in this economy follow the

same linear dynamic factor model in (5), t = lνt + Θρt + ut, that we will estimate in the

data. The three components are:



(23)                             
                  t   t         t ,
                                

(24)                                     i       2
                 Θ i ρt  t 1                   t
                                    1  (1   ) 
                                                 (   )   (1   )(1   )(   )  2
                        (   ) t 1  i                                            t
                                                               1  (1   )            
                         (i   ) i  t  (1  i ) t 1  ,

(25)             uit   (i it  (1  i )it 1 ).




where  and  are the sectoral averages of  i and i respectively, Δ = (1–L) is the first-

difference operator, and Θi on the left-hand side of (24) denotes the factor loading for it.

Aggregate output in turn is:



(26)
                    1                                                 1 
              yt                   t        t   t 1                       t
                   1  (1   )                                   1  (1   ) 



                        B. Relation Between the Theory and the Estimates

           We ask, in the model, the same two questions that we will ask in the data: what

part of price changes is due to pure inflation, relative-price aggregate shocks, and


                                                      17
idiosyncratic shocks? And, which shocks account for the Phillips correlation between real

activity and inflation? Answering these questions shock by shock (table 1 summarizes the

results):

        Anticipated money (ω): When money grows by 1 percent and all price-setters know

about it, then all raise their prices by exactly 1 percent once and for all. No relative prices

change and there is pure inflation.      The quantity theory in turn implies that output is

unchanged so there is no Phillips correlation. This is a result of the absence of money

illusion in this model, as rational consumers and firms realize that nothing but units have

changed, so there is no reason to change any real actions.

        Unanticipated money (μ): In this case, only a fraction i of the firms in each sector

change their prices in response to a shock while the others remain inattentive. As a result,

sectoral inflation is different across sectors, depending on the share of attentive firms in each

sector, so there is an aggregate relative-price change. A monetary expansion raises output,

because of the information stickiness of prices, and thus there is a Phillips correlation.

        Aggregate productivity (ζ): This shock has a similar effect as an unanticipated money

shock, both through its direct effect and through the systematic response of monetary policy.

Either because it affects the productivity of different sectors differently, or because of

different information stickiness across sectors, the shock induces a change in relative prices.

Output increases when firms become more productive so there is a Phillips correlation.

        Sectoral productivity (χ): These shocks map directly into the idiosyncratic shocks to

relative prices in our measurement model. Because we assumed that an approximate law of

large numbers holds, they do not affect output, so they do not generate a Phillips correlation.

        Firm-specific productivity (): These shocks are an example of something that the

statistical model will miss. While these shocks induce relative-price changes within each

sector, they wash out at the sectoral level so they do not affect relative sectoral prices.


                                               18
Likewise, while they affect the allocation of production across firms, within each sector, they

aggregate to zero on aggregate, so they neither move aggregate output nor prices. Whether

these shocks are important or not cannot be answered without more disaggregated data.

         Anticipated tax changes (τ): When taxes increase, the representative agent raises her

wage demand. As this affects all firms equally, all raise their price in the same amount.

Therefore, there is pure inflation. However, output falls as the return to work has fallen. The

Phillips correlation results not from a change in the relative price of goods, but rather from a

change in the relative price of labor versus consumption.

         To conclude, our empirical estimates are informative about the role of different

shocks in this economy. Our first empirical contribution, the estimates of the variability of

overall inflation due to pure inflation, aggregate sources of relative prices, and idiosyncratic

shocks, pins down the relative variance of anticipated versus unanticipated shocks and of

aggregate versus sectoral shocks.7 Our second empirical contribution, whether the Phillips

correlation is still present after we control for goods’ relative prices, tells us whether this

famous relation is due to monetary and productivity shocks via goods’ relative prices as

models of monopolistic competition emphasize, or whether it is due instead to shocks to

other relative prices like real wages.



                                        III. The Estimated Factor Model



                                                     A. The Data

         The price data are monthly chained price indices for personal consumption

expenditures by major type of product and expenditure from 1959:1 to 2006:6. Inflation is


7
  Our definition of pure inflation only allows us to gauge the relative variance of the unsystematic parts of
money supply. To identify the policy rule, in this case the coefficient  , requires more structure just as in the
VAR literature on identifying monetary policy shocks. Also, as in that literature, a small role for pure inflation
should not be confused for a small role for monetary policy.

                                                       19
measured in percentage points at an annual rate using the final month of the quarter prices: it

= 400×ln(Pit/Pit−1), where Pit are prices for March, June, September, and December.8 Prices

are for goods at the highest available level of disaggregation that have data for the majority

of dates, which gives 214 series. We then excluded series with unavailable observations (9

series), more than 20 quarters of 0 price changes (4 series), and series j if there was another

series i such that Cor(it, jt) > 0.99 and Cor(it, jt) > .99 (14 series). This left N = 187

price series.     Large outliers were evident in some of the inflation series, and these

observations were replaced with centered 7-quarter local medians. A detailed description of

the data and transformations are given in the appendix.

          As the economic model from section II makes clear, the level of aggregation across

goods and time affects the interpretation of the estimated model. For example, as stressed in

section II, the sectoral data provide no information about the relative prices of goods within a

sector.    The hope, therefore, is that the sectoral information is rich enough to capture

important aggregate shocks. Furthermore, as with all models of information flows and

discrete actions, the definition of the appropriate time period is important. The use of

quarterly data means, for example, that equiproportional changes in all sectoral price indexes

within the quarter are included in at, even if these changes occur at different times throughout

the quarter. Said differently, the relative price factors, Rt, capture only those relative prices

changes that persist for at least one quarter. Because most macroeconomic analyses focusing

on aggregate shocks use quarterly data, we are not departing from tradition.

          One feature of these data is the constant introduction of new goods within each sector

(Christian Broda and David Weinstein, 2007). Insofar as our statistical factor model of

sectoral price changes remains a good description of their co-movement during the sample

period, this should not affect our results. Another common concern with price data is the

8
 We considered using monthly, rather than quarterly, price changes, but found that the extra idiosyncratic error
in monthly price changes outweighed the benefit of more observations.

                                                      20
need to re-weight prices to track expenditure shares and measure their effects on welfare.

Our model in (1)-(5) does not require any expenditure shares, since the objective of

measuring pure inflation is not to measure the cost of living, but rather to separate absolute

from relative price changes.



                              B. The Number of Factors and the Estimated Parameters

           Panel (a) of figure 1 shows the largest twenty eigenvalues of the sample correlation

matrix of the inflation data. It is clear that there is one large eigenvalue, but it is much less

clear how many additional factors are necessary.                         The Bai-Ng estimates confirm this

uncertainty: their ICP1, ICP2 and ICP3 estimates are 2 factors, 1 factor, and 11 factors

respectively. Panel (b) of figure 1 summarizes instead the fraction of variance explained by

unrestricted factor models with 1 through 4 factors for each of the 187 inflation series.9 To

make the figure easier to read, the series have been ordered by the fraction of variance

explained by the 1-factor model. The uncertainty in the appropriate number of factors is

evident here as well: the second factor improves the fit for several series, but it is unclear

whether a third, fourth or fifth factor is necessary. In our benchmark model we will use 3

factors (at and two relative price factors in Rt). We summarize the key results for other

choices in section VI.10

           We use the parametric factor estimates from (5)-(7) in our benchmark calculations;

results using the principal components estimators are similar and are summarized in Section

VI. The VAR for the factors in the benchmark specification uses 4 lags, guided by a few


9
    These measures were computed as Ri2  1  [var(ui ) / s2i ] , where var(ui ) is the estimated variance of ui implied
by the estimated model and s2i is the sample variance of i.
10
  There is also uncertainty about the number of dynamic factors, which corresponds to the rank of the
covariance matrix of  in (8). The estimator developed in Bai and Ng (2007) indicates that the number of
dynamic factors is the same as the number of static factors, while the estimators discussed in Dante Amengual
and Watson (2007) and Hallin and Roman Liska (2007) suggest one dynamic factor. In our parametric model
we will not constrain the rank of the covariance matrix of .

                                                            21
diagnostic tests (not reported). It is well-known that inflation series are quite persistent and it

is difficult to reject the null hypothesis that they have a unit root in the autoregressive

representation (Pivetta and Reis, 2007). When we estimate the VAR in (6), we find that

there are several large roots in (L) and one that is very close to unity. In our benchmark

model, we impose two unit roots in (L); that is, at and one of the relative price factors are

treated as I(1) processes. Results in which these unit roots are not imposed turn out to be

very similar, and again, we summarize results for these models in section VI. Finally, we use

only one lag in the univariate autoregressions of uit, as suggested by diagnostic tests. The

estimated AR(1) coefficients for uit are typically small, suggesting I(0) variation in the

idiosyncratic relative inflation rates.

        Values for the estimated parameters for the benchmark model are given in the

appendix.



                                          C. The Unit Coefficient on at

            Panel (a) of figure 2 summarizes the fit of unrestricted factor models that do not

impose the unit restriction on the loading of the absolute-price factor. It shows that the

increase in fit, measured by R2 is less than 3 percent for 80 percent of the series. The median

increase is less than 1 percent. The unrestricted model appears to fit appreciably better only

for a small number of price series: for 10 series the increase in R2 exceeds 10 percent. Panel

(b) of figure 2 shows the ordered values of the estimates of ςi from (10), that is the least-

squares coefficient from regressing it on aˆt controlling for Rˆ t . Most of the estimates are

close to 1. Panel (c) shows the ordered values of the (4-lag Newey-West) t-statistic testing

that ςi =1. There are far more rejections of the restriction than would be expected by

sampling error, with over 30 percent of the t-statistics above the standard 5 percent critical

values and over 20 percent above the 1 percent critical values. These results suggest that, as

                                                   22
a formal matter, the unit factor loading restriction in (2) appears to be rejected by the data.

That said, the results in panels (a) and (b) suggest that little is lost by imposing this

restriction.



                                IV. Decomposing Sectoral Inflation



        Figure 3 shows the historical decomposition of headline PCE inflation (top panel) and

a representative sector, “major household appliances” (bottom panel). By construction, the

pure-inflation (v) component is identical in the two plots (note the difference in the scales),

while the idiosyncratic (u) component differ across goods, and the aggregate relative prices

components () differs in its impact (). Because υt = at − E[at | {R τ }T 1 ], we have plotted

the data from 1965-1999 to eliminate uncertainty associated with pre-sample and post-

sample values of Rt.

        Pure inflation is somewhat smoother than the other series and less volatile. The

standard deviation of υt is 0.3 percent, while the standard deviation of PCE inflation

changes is 1.7 percent. Sectoral inflation is more volatile: the standard deviation for changes

in “Major Household Appliances” is 4.1 percent, and the median across all 187 sectors is 5.9

percent. Evidently, aggregate relative price changes () explain much of the low-frequency

variability in headline PCE. For example, much of the increases in inflation in the early

1970s and the declines in inflation in the 1990s were associated with changes in the relative

price factor. That said, pure inflation (v) did account for over 2 percent of the increase in

inflation from 1970-1980 and over 2 percent of the subsequent decline from 1980-1983.



                               A. The Relative Size of the Components

        Table 2 shows the fraction of the variability of overall inflation associated with each

                                               23
of its components, either averaged over all frequencies or just over business-cycle

frequencies. The first row of the table uses the PCE deflator as the measure of overall

inflation and shows that, at business-cycle frequencies, 15 percent of the movements in the

series are accounted for by pure inflation, 76 percent is accounted for by the relative-price

index, and the remainder is accounted for by the idiosyncratic sectoral shocks. The second

and third row look at two other commonly used measures of overall inflation, the GDP

deflator and the Consumer Price Index, and show similar results.            The 2-dimensional

relative-price index captures most of the variance in aggregate measures of inflation, while

pure inflation plays a smaller but not negligible role. Including all frequencies, the role of

pure inflation rises (with the exception of the CPI) while the relative-price index is

significantly less prevalent.

       These results have implications for macroeconomic models. For example, in terms of

the model of section II, this 5-to-1 ratio in the relative variances of the relative-price index

and pure inflation would say that a weighted average of the variance of anticipated shocks is

significantly less volatile than an average of the unanticipated shocks. More generally, it is

customary to compare the predictions of models with a single good for inflation with, for

example, the data on the PCE deflator. The results in table 2 show that it is dangerous to do

so since as much as 85 percent of the movements in the PCE deflator are driven by changes

in the relatives prices of different goods. For some questions, it might be better to compare

the predictions of these models with our estimated series for pure inflation.

       Two common approaches to strip relative-price movements from inflation are to

exclude the prices of food and energy or to look at the median inflation across the different

sectors. The next two rows in table 2 shows that these rough attempts at controlling for

relative-price changes go in the right direction but remain quite far from excluding all

relative-price changes. Core inflation is less closely tied to the relative-price index and more


                                              24
related to pure inflation, but the squared coherences are still only slightly different, 69

percent and 21 percent respectively. For median CPI inflation, the idiosyncratic component

is higher, but the two aggregate components are also only slightly lower.

        The last section of table 2 summarizes the distribution of variance decompositions for

the 187 sectoral inflation rates. Looking at the 25th and 75th quartile, the relative-price index

accounts for between 15 percent and 42 percent of the overall variability of sectoral inflation

rates, and pure inflation between 2 percent and 8 percent. As expected, the idiosyncratic

relative-price shocks account for a much bigger share of sectoral price movements than they

do for aggregate inflation measures. More remarkable, at the median, almost 1/3 of relative-

price movements at the sectoral level are accounted for by the aggregate measures of pure

inflation and the 2-dimensional relative-price index. Using sectoral price data, these findings

confirm a result found for different macroeconomic datasets, countries, and time periods: a

few aggregate factors (in our case three) can account for a large share of the variability in the

economy (Stock and Watson, 1989, 2005, Forni et al, 2000).




                          B. Components of Inflation and other Observables

        Table 3 compares the 2-dimensional index of relative prices with several

conventional measures of relative-price changes. In the first row is the change in the price of

durables relative to the headline PCE. The squared canonical coherence of this measure of

relative prices with the relative price factors is high, around 0.5, but this single indicator falls

short of capturing all of the variability in relative prices. The next two rows look at the

relative prices of non-durables and services. The link between these and the two relative-

price factors is higher, but they are still quite far from being a comprehensive indicator for

relative-price changes. The next two rows show the relative price of food and energy,


                                                25
popular measures of relative-price shocks in the macro literature. These are still statistically

significant, but they perform significantly worse. In spite of the attention devoted to the

price of energy, Table 3 suggests that it can account for only roughly one third of the

relative-price shocks hitting the U.S. economy at business cycle frequencies.

       Figure 4 illustrates these results by showing the projection of the change in the

relative prices of services and energy onto 2 leads and lags of Rˆ t , the estimated vector of

relative price factors. For services, the regression’s adjusted R2 is 0.56, but for energy it falls

to 0.22. Both series can deviate quite significantly from the relative-price index, but energy

prices provide a particularly poor fit to the aggregate movements in relative prices.

       Table 3 indicates that combining food and energy captures a larger share of the

movements in relative prices, but still only comparable to the share accounted for by

services. Finally, the resulting 4-dimensional index of relative prices (durables, nondurables,

food and energy) can only account for at most 87 percent of the variability of relative prices

captured by the two relative-price factors. These results suggest that, given its parsimony

and comprehensiveness, the two relative-price factors estimated from the statistical model

provide a useful summary of relative-price shocks in the U.S. economy.

       The bottom panel of Table 3 investigates the correlation of pure inflation with

measures of monetary policy and the term spread. Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz

(1963) famously observed that in the long run, money growth and inflation are tightly linked.

Equally famously, Irving Fisher (1930) and many that followed showed that there is an

almost as strong link between nominal interest rates and inflation in the long run. At

business-cycle frequencies though, these correlations are much weaker. The correlation

between money growth and inflation is unstable and typically low (Stock and Watson, 1999),

while the correlation between inflation and nominal interest rates is typically higher, but well

below its level at lower-frequencies (Frederic S. Mishkin, 1992). Panel b of Table 3 shows


                                                26
the average squared coherence of pure inflation and measures of money growth (M0, M1,

and M2) and different short-term nominal interest rates (the federal funds rate and the 3-

month Treasury bill rate). The correlation between money growth and pure inflation is very

close to zero for all measures. The correlation between nominal interest rates and pure

inflation is significantly higher and statistically significant at conventional significance

levels, especially at business-cycle frequencies.          These correlations are much like

correlations found by other researchers using overall measures of inflation. The final row of

Table 3 shows the correlation of pure inflation with the term spread (the difference between

to yield on 10-year Treasury bonds and 3-month Treasury bills), where the results look much

like the results for short-term rates.

        In terms of the model of section II, these estimates again provide useful information

on the relative size of different shocks. Identifying some sectors in the model with services,

non-durables, food or energy, the results in panel (a) of table 3 provide information on the

relative size of the sectoral-specific productivity shocks. In turn, the results in panel (b) of

the table indicate the relative weight of anticipated monetary shocks vis-à-vis unanticipated

monetary shocks and fiscal shocks.



                                         V. The Phillips Correlation



        One of the most famous correlations in macroeconomics, due to Phillips (1958),

relates changes in prices with measures of real activity. The first panel of table 4 displays the

Phillips correlation using our measures of squared coherence. At business-cycle frequencies,

measuring inflation with the PCE deflator and real activity with GDP, the average squared

coherence (R2) is 0.28, corresponding to a “correlation” of roughly 0.5.           The Phillips

correlations for industrial production, consumption, employment or the unemployment rate


                                                  27
are all similarly large.

        The second and third panels in table 4 show that the usual controls for relative prices

reduce the strength of this correlation. Controlling for intertemporal relative prices (using

short-term interest rates and stock returns), for the relative price of labor and consumption

(using real wages), or for the relative price of domestic and foreign goods (using the real

exchange rate) cuts the Phillips correlations in approximately half. Still, these correlations

remain quantitatively large and statistically significant.

        The fourth and fifth panels in table 4 include instead two of the conventional

measures of relative prices that we discussed in the previous section. Controlling for food

and energy relative prices, the Phillips curve relation falls significantly, but the squared

coherences remain sizeable and at least 0.10 for two of the five real series. Including all four

relative-price indicators drives down the Phillips relation to between 0.03 and 0.08 (although

with four relative price series included in the VAR used to estimate the coherences, one

might conjecture that some of this decline is associated with over-fitting).

        The last panel of table 4 introduces as controls instead the two relative price factors

from the estimated model. Strikingly, controlling for ρt, the Phillips correlation disappears

over business cycle frequencies. The largest squared coherence point estimate between PCE

inflation and measures or real activity, controlling for our relative-price index, is 0.03 and the

point estimates are statistically insignificant at the 10 percent level for all measures of real

activity.   Apparently, the empirical regularity that Phillips first brought attention to is

essentially entirely explained by the two relative-price factors.

        Table 5 provides a different perspective by decomposing the Phillips relation into the

inflation components that we have separated. The first panel shows that removing the

idiosyncratic sources of inflation variation makes the Phillips relation much stronger than it

was with headline PCE inflation. At business-cycle frequencies, the squared coherence


                                                28
between the aggregate components of inflation and measures of real activity is as high as 70

percent, and it is highly statistically significant at conventional significance levels. The

second panel controls for the relative-price index, so it shows the squared coherence between

pure inflation and measures of real activity. Again, controlling for relative prices essentially

eliminates the Phillips correlation, with the squared coherences falling by a factor of roughly

one-seventh. According to the model in section II, the little that remains of the relation

between pure inflation and real activity could be due to omitted relative prices like wages.

Panels (c) and (d) control for real wages, asset prices and exchange rates, which cuts the

squared coherences a little further.

        The results in these tables suggest that a large part of the Phillips correlation, that has

puzzled macroeconomists for half a century, is explained by changes in good’s relative

prices. Changes in the unit of account, as captured by pure inflation, do not seem to affect

real variables, consistent with anticipated money shocks accounting for most of pure

inflation. However, note that a few of the estimates in table 5 are statistically significant,

even if small, even after controlling for other relative prices. This suggests that some money

illusion may be present, although it seems to explain very little of the variability of real

activity.



                                  VI. The Robustness of the Results



        Table 6 investigates the robustness of the key empirical conclusions to four aspects of

the model specification: (i) the number of estimated factors, (ii) the method for estimating the

factors (signal extraction using the parametric factor model (5)-(7) versus principal

components on (4)), (iii) the imposition of unit roots in the factor VAR for the parametric

model, and (iv) the number of lags and imposition of unit roots in the VAR spectral estimator


                                                29
used to compute the various coherence estimates. The table focuses on seven key results

described below.

       The first row of the table shows results for the benchmark model, where the first

column provides details of the factor estimates and where “(1,1,0)” denotes a parametric k=3

factor model where the first and second factor are I(1) processes and the third is I(0). The

next column, labeled “VAR”, summarizes the specification of the VAR used to compute the

spectral estimates, which for the benchmark model involves 4 lags of (at, Rt) with at and the

first element of Rt entered as first differences (D,4).

       Results shown in the column labeled (1) are for the fraction of the business cycle

variability of headline PCE inflation explained by the relative price factors () and pure

inflation (v); for the benchmark model these are taken from the first row of Table 2. Results

shown in the column labeled (2) are the average squared canonical coherences between the

relative inflation factors Rt and relative inflation rates for durables, nondurables, food, and

energy (benchmark model from Table 3, panel a, final row). Columns (3) and (4) show the

average squared coherence between pure inflation and the growth rate of M2 and the 3-

month Treasury bill rate (benchmark model from Table 3, panel b, rows 3 and 5). Column

(5) shows the average coherence between real GDP and headline PCE inflation after

controlling for the estimated relative inflation factors (benchmark model, Table 4, panel f,

first row). The final two columns show the fraction of business cycle variability explained

by the factors (at, Rt) (Column 6) and the fraction explained by pure inflation, vt (benchmark

models results from Table 5, row 1 of panels a and b).

       Looking across the entries in the table, the key quantitative conclusions from Tables

2-5 appear to be robust to the changes in specification studied in Table 6. From column (1),

relative inflation factors explain a significant fraction of the business cycle variability of

aggregate inflation (as measured by the headline PCE deflator), while pure inflation (v)


                                                30
explains a smaller, but non-negligible fraction.      Observable measures of relative price

inflation are reasonably highly correlated with one of the relative inflation factors (the first

canonical coherence is roughly 0.90), but less highly correlated with the other factor (the

other canonical coherences are generally less than 0.50). For all of the specifications the

estimates of pure inflation are very weakly correlated with M2, but more highly correlated

with nominal interest rates. Finally, in all of the specifications, controlling for the relative

inflation factors essentially eliminates the correlation between PCE inflation and real GDP

(column 5), and, while the estimated factors are highly correlated with real GDP (column 6),

the pure inflation factor is very weakly correlated with real GDP (column 7).



                       VII. What Have we Done and Why Does it Matter?



           In this paper, we decomposed the quarterly change in sectoral goods’ prices into

three components: pure inflation, an aggregate relative-price index, and idiosyncratic relative

prices.   We used different estimation techniques and specifications to estimate these

components, proposed a simple method to compute their correlations with other

macroeconomic variables, and presented a stylized structural model that showed how these

components relate to different economic shocks.

           Our first finding was that pure inflation, the relative-price index, and conventional

measures of inflation, like the PCE deflator or its core version, can all differ markedly. Pure

inflation is smoother and less volatile than the others, and much of the low-frequency swings

in standard inflation measures are associated with changes in relative prices.            More

concretely, a large part of the increase in inflation in the early 1970s and the decrease in

inflation in the 1990s was associated with changes in relative prices, while some of the

increase in the late 1970s and the decrease in inflation in the early 1980s was associated with


                                              31
changes in pure inflation.

          Second, we found that aggregate shocks account for roughly 90 percent of the

variability of aggregate inflation, and a still sizable 1/3 of the variability of sectoral inflation

rates. Within aggregate shocks, the relative-price index dominates, but pure inflation is also

quantitatively significant, accounting for 15-20 percent of the variability in inflation

measured by conventional price indices, like the PCE deflator, the GDP deflator, or the CPI.

This finding has at least two implications for the work of economic theorists building models

to explain inflation. First, it shows that comparing the predictions of one-good models with

common measures of inflation is flawed. Changes in the relative prices of goods are large

enough that they can easily lead to mistakenly accepting or rejecting models that ignore this

feature of the data. Second, our estimates provide statistics that can be used to calibrate the

relative variances of anticipated versus unanticipated shocks, and aggregate versus sectoral

shocks.

          Our third finding was that conventional measures of relative-price inflation, such as

the relative inflation of non-durables, food and energy, or combinations of several of them,

all fall short of capturing most of the relative-price inflation in the data. Our 2-dimensional

relative-price index provides a parsimonious yet comprehensive measure of relative-price

inflation that we hope will be useful in other studies that either need to statistically control

for relative-price changes, or that seek to provide economic models of the main sources of

relative-price movements. Pure inflation is only partly related to monetary policy variables.

The link to the growth rate in monetary aggregates is weak, but the correlation with nominal

interest rates at business cycle frequencies is stronger (approximately 0.5).

          Our most striking finding was perhaps that, once we controlled for the two relative

price factors, the Phillips correlation became quantitatively insignificant. Therefore, the

correlation between real quantity variables and nominal inflation variables observed in the


                                                32
data can be accounted for by changes in goods’ relative prices. This implies that models that

break the classical dichotomy via nominal rigidities in good’s price adjustment are likely

more promising than models that rely on money illusion on the part of agents. Moreover,

changes in the relative prices of labor and intertemporal prices were less successful in

explaining the Phillips correlation, suggesting a less important role for rigidities in the labor

and asset markets.

       To conclude, the distinction between absolute and relative prices is a central one in

economic theory. Models of inflation have strong predictions on the relative sizes of pure

and relative-price inflation and on what accounts for the Philips correlation. However,

separating absolute and relative-price movements is naturally difficult, since the two

concepts themselves are more a fruit of thought experiments than something easily observed.

As a result, there have been few systematic attempts to measure and separate them in the

data. The goal of this paper was to make some progress on this decomposition and on

understanding its effects. Our estimates are certainly not perfect. We hope, however, that

they are sufficiently accurate that future research can look deeper into the time-series and the

moments that we provide, and that by stating the challenges and putting forward a

benchmark, we can motivate future research to come up with better estimators. Likewise, we

are sure that our findings will not settle the debates around the Phillips correlation. Our more

modest hope is that they offer a new perspective on how to bring data to bear on this long-

standing question.




                                               33
                                         REFERENCES

Altissimo, Filippo, Benoit Mojon, and Paolo Zaffaroni. 2009. “Can Aggregation Explain

       the Persistence of Inflation?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(2): 231-241.

Amengual, Dante and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Consistent Estimation of the Number of

       Dynamic Factors in a Large N and T Panel." Journal of Business and Economic

       Statistics, 25(1): 91-96.

Amstad, Marlene and Simon M. Potter. 2007. “Real Time Underlying Inflation Gauges for

       Monetary Policy Makers.” Unpublished.

Bai, Jushan. 2003. “Inferential Theory for Factor Models of Large Dimensions.”

       Econometrica, 71(1): 135-171.

Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng. 2002. “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate

       Factor Models.” Econometrica: 70(1): 191-221.

Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng. 2006. “Confidence Intervals for Diffusion Index Forecasts and

       Inference for Factor Augmented Regressions.” Econometrica, 74(4): 1133-1150.

Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng. 2007. “Determining the Number of Primitive Shocks in Factor

       Models.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25(1): 52-60.

Bernanke, Ben , Jean Boivin and Piotr S. Eliasz. 2005. “Measuring the Effects of

       Monetary Policy: A Factor-augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach.”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 387-422.

Blanchard, Olivier J. 2003. Macroeconomics. Upper Saddle River NJ: Prentice-Hall,

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 1987. “Monopolistic Competition and the

       Effects of Aggregate Demand.” American Economic Review, 77(4): 647-666.

Boivin, Jean, Marc Giannoni and Ilian Mihov. 2009. “Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy:

       Evidence from Disaggregated Data.” American Economic Review, 99(1): 350-384.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein. 2007. “Product Creation and Destruction:


                                            34
       Evidence and Price Implications.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working

       Paper 13041.

Bryan, Michael F. and Stephen G. Cecchetti. 1993. “The Consumer Price Index as a

       Measure of Inflation.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review, 15-24.

Bryan, Michael F., Stephen G. Cecchetti and Rodney L. Wiggins II. 1997. “Efficient

       Inflation Estimation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6183.

Cristadoro, Riccardo, Mario Forni, Lucrezia Reichlin and Giovanni Veronese. 2005. “A

       Core Inflation Index for the Euro Area.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,

       37(3): 539-560.

Del Negro, Marco. 2006. “Signal and Noise in Core PCE.” Unpublished.

Doz, Catherine, Domenico Giannone and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2008. “A Quasi Maximum

       Likelihood Approach for Large Dynamic Factor Models.” Unpublished.

Fisher, Irving. 1930. The Theory of Interest. New York: MacMillan.

Forni, Mario, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2000. “The Generalized

       Dynamic Factor Model: Identification and Estimation.” Review of Economics and

       Statistics, 82(4): 540-554.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States.

       Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hallin, Marc and Roman Liška. 2007. “Determining the Number of Factors in the

       Generalized Dynamic Factor Model.” Journal of the American Statistical

       Association, 102: 603-617.

Hamilton, James D. 1993. Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hume, David. 1752. Political Discourses. Reprinted in “Essays, Moral, Political, and

       Literary” edited by Eugene F. Miller, Liberty Fund.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1973. “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Trade-Offs.”


                                                35
       American Economic Review, 63(3): 326-334.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A

       Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 117(4): 1295-1328.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1992. “Is the Fisher Effect for Real? A Reexamination of the

       Relationship between Inflation and Interest Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics,

       30(2): 195-215.

Phillips, Alban W. H. 1958. “The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change

       of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957.” Economica, 25(2): 283-

       299.

Pivetta, Frederic and Ricardo Reis. 2007. “The Persistence of Inflation in the United

       States.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(4): 1326-1358.

Quah, Danny and Thomas J. Sargent. 1993. “A Dynamic Index Model for Large Cross-

       Sections.” In Business Cycles, Indicators, and Forecasting, ed. James H. Stock and

       Mark W. Watson, 161–200. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER.

Rao, C. Radhakrishna. 1973. Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, 2nd Edition.

       New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Reis, Ricardo and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Measuring Changes in the Value of the

       Numeraire.” Unpublished.

Selvanathan, E. Anthony and D. S. Prasada Rao. 1994. Index Numbers: A Stochastic

       Approach. Michigan: University of Michigan Press.

Shumway, Robert H. and David S. Stoffer. 1982. “An Approach to Time Series Smoothing

       and Forecasting using the EM Algorithm.” Journal of Time Series Analysis, 2: 253-

       264.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 1989. “New Indexes of Leading and Coincident


                                            36
       Indicators.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 4: 351-394.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 1999. “Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S.

       Macroeconomic Time Series.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. John B. Taylor

       and Michael Woodford. Elsevier.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 2002. “Forecasting Using Principal Components

       from a Large Number of Predictors.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,

       97: 1167-1179.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 2005. “Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for

       VAR Analysis.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11467.

Watson, Mark W. 1989. “Recursive Solution Methods for Dynamic Linear Rational

       Expectations Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 41(1): 65-91.

Watson, Mark W. and Robert F. Engle. 1983. “Alternative Algorithms for the Estimation

       of Dynamic Factors, MIMIC, and Varying Coefficient Regression models.” Journal

       of Econometrics, 23: 385-400.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                            37
   Table 1. Fundamental shocks, inflation components and the Phillips correlation


Fundamental shocks               Inflation component         Phillips correlation?
Anticipated money (ω)                     ν                          No
Unanticipated money (μ)                   ρ                          Yes
Aggregate productivity (ζ)                ρ                          Yes
Sectoral productivity (χ)                 u                          No
Firm-level productivity ()                                         No
Anticipated tax changes (τ)               ν                          Yes




                                        38
  Table 2. Fraction of Variability of Inflation associated with Aggregate Components
          Average squared coherence over frequencies (standard errors in parentheses)


 Inflation measure                   All frequencies               π/32 ≤ ω ≤ π/6
                                    ρt              νt            ρt             νt
 Aggregate Inflation Rates
   Headline PCE                 0.51 (0.05)   0.16 (0.04)    0.76 (0.10)    0.15 (0.07)
   Headline GDP                 0.35 (0.06)   0.21 (0.04)    0.71 (0.11)    0.15 (0.07)
   Headline CPI                 0.47 (0.04)   0.12 (0.03)    0.76 (0.09)    0.15 (0.06)
   Core PCE                     0.32 (0.05)   0.24 (0.05)    0.69 (0.11)    0.21 (0.09)
   Median CPI                   0.39 (0.08)   0.14 (0.04)    0.64 (0.13)    0.18 (0.08)


 187 Sectoral Inflation Rates
   25th Percentile                 0.13            0.03         0.15            0.02
   Median                          0.19            0.05         0.25            0.05
     th
   75 Percentile                   0.25            0.07         0.42            0.08
Notes: PCE is the Personal Consumption Expenditures deflator, GDP is the Gross Domestic
Product deflator, and CPI is the Consumer Price Index. Median CPI inflation is from the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and these data are available for t ≥ 1967:2. For the last
three rows, we computed the fraction of variability explained by pure inflation for each of the
187 goods’ series, and report the 25, 50, and 75 percent values.




                                              39
           Table 3. The Components of Inflation and Other Observables
  Average squared canonical coherence over frequencies (standard errors in parenthesis)

Observable                                          Frequencies
                                          All                   /32 ≤  ≤ /6
                              a. Relative-Price Index ρt
 Durables                        0.42 (0,06)                 0.58 (0.09)
 Nondurables                     0.47 (0.05)                 0.72 (0.09)
 Services                        0.48 (0.05)                 0.75 (0.08)
 Food                            0.20 (0.05)                 0.55 (0.14)
 Energy                          0.30 (0.05)                 0.37 (0.11)
 Food, Energy              0.53 (0.04) 0.06 (0.03)     0.78 (0.08) 0.10 (0.08)
 Durables, Nondurables,
                        0.62 (0.04) 0.25 (0.04)         0.87 (0.05) 0.42 (0.10)
Food, Energy

                                 b. Pure Inflation νt
 M0                              0.04 (0.02)                  0.01 (0.02)
 M1                              0.06 (0.03)                  0.01 (0.02)
 M2                              0.03 (0.02)                  0.01 (0.02)
 Federal Funds Rate              0.11 (0.04)                  0.27 (0.10)
 3-Month T-bill Rate             0.12 (0.03)                  0.27 (0.12)
 Term Spread                     0.08 (0.04)                  0.27 (0.11)
 (10Y-3Month)




                                           40
    Table 4. Fraction of Variability of Real Variables associated with PCE Inflation
       Average squared coherence over frequencies (standard errors in parenthesis)

Real Variable                                        Frequencies
                                         All                   /32 ≤  ≤ /6
                                    a. No Controls
  GDP                              0.11 (0.05)                     0.28 (0.12)
  Industrial Production            0.13 (0.06)                     0.27 (0.14)
  Consumption                      0.15 (0.06)                     0.28 (0.13)
  Employment                       0.19 (0.06)                     0.32 (0.12)
  Unemployment Rate                0.22 (0.07)                     0.34 (0.15)

                     b. Controls: Interest Rates, Stock Returns, Wages
  GDP                               0.09 (0.05)                   0.14 (0.07)
  Industrial Production             0.13 (0.05)                   0.12 (0.05)
  Consumption                       0.07 (0.04)                   0.12 (0.06)
  Employment                        0.15 (0.04)                   0.24 (0.09)
  Unemployment Rate                 0.14 (0.04)                   0.18 (0.07)

      c. Controls: Interest Rates, Stock Returns, Wages, Exchange Rates (t ≥ 1973)
  GDP                               0.14 (0.05)                 0.17 (0.08)
  Industrial Production             0.15 (0.05)                 0.14 (0.06)
  Consumption                       0.10 (0.05)                 0.18 (0.08)
  Employment                        0.12 (0.04)                 0.24 (0.10)
  Unemployment Rate                 0.13 (0.04)                 0.20 (0.08)

                 d. Controls: Relative Inflation Rates of Food and Energy
  GDP                              0.03 (0.02)                   0.05 (0.04)
  Industrial Production            0.07 (0.03)                   0.08 (0.05)
  Consumption                      0.07 (0.03)                   0.04 (0.04)
  Employment                       0.12 (0.04)                   0.10 (0.06)
  Unemployment Rate                0.10 (0.04)                   0.12 (0.06)

    e. Controls: Relative Inflation Rates of Durable, Non-durables, Food and Energy
  GDP                               0.02 (0.02)                 0.03 (0.03)
  Industrial Production             0.04 (0.02)                 0.04 (0.04)
  Consumption                       0.05 (0.02)                 0.03 (0.03)
  Employment                        0.09 (0.03)                 0.06 (0.04)
  Unemployment Rate                 0.07 (0.03)                 0.08 (0.05)

                            f. Controls: Relative-Price Index ρt
  GDP                              0.02 (0.02)                     0.01 (0.02)
  Industrial Production            0.03 (0.02)                     0.01 (0.02)
  Consumption                      0.06 (0.03)                     0.03 (0.02)
  Employment                       0.08 (0.03)                     0.03 (0.03)
  Unemployment Rate                0.08 (0.03)                     0.03 (0.03)

Notes: The results in panel (c) use only data only from 1973 onwards because of data
availability for the weighted U.S. real exchange rate series.


                                             41
Table 5. Fraction of Variability of Real Variables associated with Inflation Components
        Average squared coherence over frequencies (standard errors in parenthesis)

Real Variable                                     Frequencies
                                         All                  /32 ≤  ≤ /6
                     a. Aggregate Inflation Components, νt and t
  GDP                             0.26 (0.05 )                  0.60 (0.10 )
  Industrial Production           0.28 (0.06 )                  0.59 (0.12 )
  Consumption                     0.28 (0.06 )                  0.62 (0.11 )
  Employment                      0.35 (0.05 )                  0.65 (0.10 )
  Unemployment Rate               0.42 (0.06 )                  0.70 (0.11 )

                                b.       Pure Inflation νt
  GDP                                0.05 (0.02)                  0.09 (0.05)
  Industrial Production              0.06 (0.02)                  0.09 (0.06)
  Consumption                        0.08 (0.03)                  0.08 (0.04)
  Employment                         0.07 (0.02)                  0.12 (0.06)
  Unemployment Rate                  0.12 (0.03)                  0.14 (0.07)

           c. Pure inflation νt, control for Interest Rates, Stock Returns, Wages
  GDP                                0.04 (0.02)                    0.05 (0.03)
  Industrial Production              0.05 (0.02)                    0.04 (0.02)
  Consumption                        0.05 (0.02)                    0.06 (0.03)
  Employment                        0.06 (0.02)                     0.10 (0.04)
  Unemployment Rate                 0.12 (0.03)                     0.07 (0.03)

 d. Pure inflation νt, control for Interest Rates, Stock Returns, Wages, Exchange Rates
                                         (t ≥ 1973)
  GDP                                 0.03 (0.02)                  0.07 (0.04)
  Industrial Production               0.04 (0.02)                  0.04 (0.03)
  Consumption                         0.04 (0.02)                  0.06 (0.04)
  Employment                          0.06 (0.02)                  0.16 (0.07)
  Unemployment Rate                   0.10 (0.02)                  0.09 (0.05)

Notes: The results in panel (d) use only data only from 1973 onwards because of data
availability for the weighted U.S. real exchange rate series.




                                               42
                                              Table 6: The Robustness of the Conclusions
                         Average squared coherences over business cycle frequencies (standard errors in parenthesis)

 Factor   VAR                   (1)                              (2)                        (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
Estimates
                                                                          Benchmark Model
 (1,1,0)    D,4   0.76 (0.10) 0.15 (0.07)     0.87 (0.05) 0.42 (0.10)                     0.01 (0.02)  0.27 (0.12)   0.01 (0.02)   0.60 (0.10)   0.09 (0.05)
                                                               Alternative Parametric Factor Estimates
 (1,1,0)    D,6   0.85 (0.06)   0.11 (0.04)   0.90 (0.04) 0.37 (0.12)                     0.06 (0.07)  0.20 (0.09)   0.07 (0.05)   0.67 (0.08)   0.11 (0.06)
 (0,0,0)    D,4   0.74 (0.10)   0.16 (0.08)   0.87 (0.04) 0.42 (0.10)                     0.01 (0.02)  0.30 (0.11)   0.02 (0.02)   0.61 (0.10)   0.09 (0.06)
 (0,0,0)    D,6   0.84 (0.06)   0.12 (0.05)   0.90 (0.04) 0.36 (0.12)                     0.05 (0.07)  0.20 (0.09)   0.06 (0.04)   0.68 (0.08)   0.11 (0.06)
(1,1,0,0)   D,4   0.80 (0.08)   0.12 (0.06)   0.89 (0.04) 0.56 (0.08) 0.14 (0.07)         0.01 (0.01)  0.21 (0.10)   0.01 (0.01)   0.62 (0.10)   0.08 (0.05)
(1,1,0,0)   D,6   0.87 (0.05)   0.09 (0.03)   0.92 (0.03) 0.50 (0.12) 0.13 (0.09)         0.05 (0.06)  0.15 (0.09)   0.06 (0.04)   0.70 (0.08)   0.12 (0.06)
 (1,1,0)    L,4   0.80 (0.08)   0.11 (0.05)   0.87 (0.05) 0.53 (0.11)                     0.02 (0.03)  0.20 (0.11)   0.01 (0.01)   0.62 (0.10)   0.12 (0.07)
 (1,1,0)    L,6   0.86 (0.05)   0.09 (0.04)   0.90 (0.05) 0.50 (0.12)                     0.03 (0.05)  0.20 (0.11)   0.05 (0.04)   0.71 (0.09)   0.17 (0.08)
 (0,0,0)    L,4   0.79 (0.08)   0.11 (0.05)   0.88 (0.05) 0.52 (0.12)                     0.02 (0.03)  0.19 (0.11)   0.00 (0.01)   0.62 (0.10)   0.12 (0.07)
 (0,0,0)    L,6   0.85 (0.05)   0.09 (0.04)   0.90 (0.04) 0.49 (0.12)                     0.03 (0.05)  0.19 (0.11)   0.05 (0.04)   0.72 (0.08)   0.16 (0.08)
(1,1,0,0)   L,4   0.82 (0.07)   0.10 (0.05)   0.90 (0.04) 0.61 (0.09) 0.15 (0.07)         0.02 (0.03)  0.24 (0.10)   0.01 (0.01)   0.64 (0.09)   0.11 (0.06)
(1,1,0,0)   L,6   0.87 (0.05)   0.08 (0.04)   0.92 (0.03) 0.56 (0.11) 0.16 (0.09)         0.03 (0.04)  0.22 (0.10)   0.05 (0.04)   0.72 (0.08)   0.16 (0.07)
                                                            Using Principal Component Factor Estimates
 PC-3       D,4   0.70 (0.11)   0.19 (0.08)   0.82 (0.07) 0.37 (0.11)                     0.00 (0.01)  0.30 (0.12)   0.01 (0.01)   0.53 (0.11)   0.05 (0.04)
 PC-3       D,6   0.80 (0.07)   0.15 (0.06)   0.86 (0.05) 0.40 (0.11)                     0.06 (0.06)  0.28 (0.10)   0.04 (0.03)   0.64 (0.10)   0.06 (0.05)
 PC-4       D,4   0.71 (0.10)   0.19 (0.08)   0.85 (0.05) 0.50 (0.09) 0.10 (0.06)         0.01 (0.02)  0.36 (0.10)   0.01 (0.02)   0.55 (0.11)   0.05 (0.04)
 PC-4       D,6   0.80 (0.07)   0.14 (0.05)   0.87 (0.04) 0.46 (0.11) 0.09 (0.07)         0.08 (0.06)  0.33 (0.09)   0.04 (0.03)   0.68 (0.08)   0.08 (0.04)
 PC-2       D,4   0.69 (0.11)   0.17 (0.07)   0.57 (0.13)                                 0.00 (0.01)  0.30 (0.13)   0.01 (0.01)   0.40 (0.12)   0.03 (0.03)
 PC-2       D,6   0.81 (0.07)   0.13 (0.05)   0.74 (0.09)                                 0.06 (0.06)  0.29 (0.10)   0.05 (0.05)   0.49 (0.12)   0.07 (0.06)
 PC-3       L,4   0.81 (0.07)   0.07 (0.04)   0.86 (0.06) 0.50 (0.11)                     0.01 (0.01)  0.15 (0.09)   0.00 (0.00)   0.56 (0.11)   0.04 (0.04)
 PC-3       L,6   0.87 (0.05)   0.06 (0.03)   0.89 (0.05) 0.44 (0.11)                     0.05 (0.07)  0.16 (0.09)   0.04 (0.04)   0.65 (0.10)   0.07 (0.04)
 PC-4       L,4   0.82 (0.07)   0.08 (0.04)   0.89 (0.04) 0.58 (0.10) 0.11 (0.06)         0.00 (0.01)  0.26 (0.10)   0.00 (0.00)   0.61 (0.10)   0.05 (0.04)
 PC-4       L,6   0.87 (0.04)   0.06 (0.03)   0.90 (0.04) 0.47 (0.11) 0.09 (0.06)         0.07 (0.07)  0.24 (0.10)   0.02 (0.02)   0.71 (0.09)   0.09 (0.05)
 PC-2       L,4   0.78 (0.08)   0.07 (0.04)   0.78 (0.08)                                 0.02 (0.04)  0.18 (0.10)   0.01 (0.01)   0.40 (0.13)   0.02 (0.03)
 PC-2       L,6   0.85 (0.06)   0.07 (0.03)   0.81 (0.08)                                 0.04 (0.06)  0.21 (0.11)   0.04 (0.05)   0.50 (0.12)   0.08 (0.06)




                                                                             43
Notes: The first column describes the factor estimates, where the parametric estimates
are based on signal extraction applied to (5)-(7) with parameters estimated by Gaussian
MLE, and the numbers in parenthesis indicate the number of factors and whether the
relevant factor is modeled as an I(1) or I(0) process. For example, “(1,1,0)” is a three
factor model modeled as I(1), I(1), and I(0) processes. PC-k denotes a k-factor model
estimated by principal components. The column labeled VAR shows the specification of
the VAR used to compute the VAR-spectral estimates, where “D” and “L” denote first
differences and levels specifications and the numbers 4 and 6 denote the number of lags
in the VAR. Results shown in the column (1) are the average squared coherences
between Headline PC and t and vt (benchmark model results from Table 2 first row); (2)
canonical coherences between the relative prices of (Durables, Nondurables, Food,
Energy) and Rt (benchmark model results from Table 3 row 7); (3) coherence between
M2 and v (Table 3 row 10); (4) coherence between Federal Funds Rate and vt (Table 3
row 11); (5) coherence between PCE Inflation and GDP controlling for Rt (Table 4, panel
f, row 1); (6) coherence between vt + t and GDP (Table 5, panel a, row 1), and (7)
between vt and GDP (Table 5, panel b, row 1).




                                            44
                                    Figure 1. Choosing the number of factors


                                   Panel A. Eigenvalues of the correlation matrix
                  45



                  40



                  35



                  30



                  25



                  20



                  15



                  10



                   5



                   0
                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10   11   12    13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20



                   Panel B. Contribution of more factors to the R2 of each good
                       1



                   0.9



                   0.8



                   0.7



                   0.6



                   0.5



                   0.4



                   0.3



                   0.2



                   0.1



                       0



                                           k=1             k=2             k=3             k=4

Notes: Panel a) shows the eigenvalues of the N×N sample correlation matrix of inflation
rates. Panel b) shows the fraction of sample variance of inflation explained by k factors,
where k varies from k=1 to k=4.




                                                           45
                             Figure 2. Comparison with unrestricted factor model


                         Panel A. Increase in R2 from moving to unrestricted model
                  0.25




                   0.2




                  0.15




                   0.1




                  0.05




                    0




              Panel B. Estimates of ςi, the coefficient on the absolute-price component
                   4



                   3



                   2



                   1



                   0



                  -1



                  -2


                                Panel C. Individual t-statistics for hypothesis ςi=1
                         6


                         4


                         2


                         0


                       -2


                       -4


                       -6


                       -8




Notes: The horizontal axis in each panel goes from i = 1 to i = 187. In each panel, the goods
are organized in increasing order.




                                                    46
Figure 3. Estimates of inflation and its components

          Panel A. Headline PCE inflation




   Panel B. Major household appliances inflation




                    47
         Figure 4. The Relative Price Index and Other Observables

Panel A. Relative services inflation (thick line) and projection onto ρ (thin line).




Panel B. Relative energy inflation (thick line) and projection onto ρ (thin line).




                                    48
                                                APPENDIX


A.1 Data
        All    price    series      are     from        NIPA        Table     2.4.4U    available      from
http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/nipa_underlying/SelectTable.asp.                             Quarterly
inflation rates were computed using the first difference of logarithms of the price indices
for the last month of the quarter. Inflation observations that differed from the series
median by more than six times the interquartile range were replaced by the local median
computed using the six adjacent observations. The table below shows the price index
from the NIPA table, the series description, the standard deviation of the (outlier-
adjusted) series over 1959:2-2006:2 and the 2005 PCE expenditure share. To save space,
the final four columns of this table are used to show the estimated parameters from the
benchmark 3-factor model.

                    Table A1: Series Descriptions, Summary Statistics,
               and Parameter Estimates from the Benchmark 3-factor Model

Num.   Label                      Description                  s     2005     Benchmark Model Parameters
                                                                      Share     1     2      β     e
001    P1NFCG D    New foreign autos                           4.5     0.5    1.14   0.00   -0.13   0.88
002    P1NETG D    Net transactions in used autos              1.8     0.4    2.35   0.42   0.15    2.71
003    P1MARG D    Used auto margin                            6.9     0.3    1.09   0.18   0.02    4.22
004    P1REEG D    Employee reimbursement                       7.5    0.0    1.11   0.15   -0.19   1.68
005    P1TRUG D    Trucks, new and net used                     4.8    2.4    1.25   -0.09  -0.12   0.96
006    P1TATG D    Tires and tubes                              5.8    0.3    0.15   0.57   0.12    1.27
007    P1PAAG D    Accessories and parts                        5.5    0.4    -0.21  -0.04  0.26    1.15
008    P1FNRG C    Furniture, incl. matt. and bedsprings        4.1    0.9    0.53   0.30   -0.29   0.77
009    P1MHAG D    Major household appliances                   4.0    0.4    0.84   0.13   0.09    0.73
010    P1SEAG D    Small electric appliances                    5.0    0.1    1.06   0.35   0.12    0.93
011    P1CHNG C    China, glassware, tableware, and utensil     6.7    0.4    1.32   0.93   -0.28   1.25
012    P1TVSG D    Television receivers                         5.4    0.2    1.16   0.47   0.42    0.99
013    P1AUDG D    Audio equipment                              5.2    0.3    0.57   0.06   -0.17   1.17
014    P1RTDG D    Records, tapes, and disks                    4.9    0.2    -0.21  0.07   -0.06   1.17
015    P1MSCG D    Musical instruments                          4.0    0.1    0.41   0.22   -0.13   0.85
016    P1FLRG D    Floor coverings                              5.8    0.2    0.60   0.09   -0.24   1.27
017    P1CLFG D    Clocks, lamps, and furnishings               6.0    0.4    1.22   0.45   -0.04   1.29
018    P1TEXG D    Blinds, rods, and other                      8.6    0.1    1.54   1.07   -0.28   1.81
019    P1WTRG D    Writing equipment                            5.1    0.0    0.18   -1.01  -0.28   1.06
020    P1HDWG D    Tools, hardware, and supplies                4.7    0.1    0.56   0.14   -0.04   1.05
021    P1LWNG D    Outdoor equipment and supplies               5.1    0.0    0.73   0.13   -0.16   1.11
022    P1OPTG C    Ophth. prd, and orthopedic appliances        2.8    0.3    0.29   -0.05  -0.07   0.55
023    P1CAMG D    Photographic equipment                       6.0    0.1    1.26   0.04   0.34    1.25
024    P1BCYG D    Bicycles                                     4.3    0.1    -0.09  0.30   -0.15   0.90
025    P1MCYG D    Motorcycles                                  4.7    0.2    1.18   -0.11  0.01    1.00
026    P1AIRG D    Pleasure aircraft                            7.2    0.0    0.05   0.57   0.06    1.64
027    P1JRYG C    Jewelry and watches (18)                     7.3    0.7    0.15   0.33   -0.21   1.67
028    P1BKSG C    Books and maps (87)                          5.8    0.5    1.00   -0.37  -0.25   1.23
029    P1GRAG D    Cereals                                      6.3    0.4    -1.34  -0.19  0.45    1.34
030    P1BAKG D    Bakery products                              4.6    0.6    -0.22  0.25   0.14    1.01
031    P1BEEG D    Beef and veal                               13.0    0.4    -4.16  -0.28  -0.16   2.88
032    P1PORG D    Pork                                        6.9     0.3    -3.52  -0.91  0.19    3.96
033    P1MEAG D    Other meats                                  8.3    0.2    -2.72  -0.74  0.17    1.84
034    P1POUG D    Poultry                                     7.0     0.5    -2.23  0.03   -0.20   4.06
035    P1FISG D    Fish and seafood                             5.7    0.2    -0.69  0.01   0.18    1.22
036    P1GGSG D    Eggs                                        7.4     0.1    -5.34  -0.42  -0.03   6.63


                                                   49
037   P1MILG D   Fresh milk and cream                          6.9    0.2   -1.10   0.04    -0.03   1.63
038   P1DAIG D   Processed dairy products                      6.2    0.5   -1.19   0.08    0.28    1.32
039   P1FRUG D   Fresh fruits                                 4.5     0.3   -0.89   0.21    -0.07   3.55
040   P1VEGG D   Fresh vegetables                             9.3     0.4   -2.70   -0.21   -0.41   6.59
041   P1PFVG D   Processed fruits and vegetables               5.7    0.2   0.40    0.15    0.38    1.21
042   P1JNBG D   Juices and nonalcoholic drinks                6.4    0.8   0.16    0.64    0.32    1.22
043   P1CTMG D   Coffee, tea and beverage materials           1.8     0.2   1.49    0.89    0.58    2.31
044   P1FATG D   Fats and oils                                 9.3    0.1   -0.60   1.33    0.52    1.71
045   P1SWEG D   Sugar and sweets                              6.3    0.5   -0.97   0.36    0.27    1.37
046   P1OFDG D   Other foods                                   4.1    1.3   0.11    0.05    0.11    0.76
047   P1PEFG D   Pet food                                      3.9    0.3   -0.19   0.04    -0.04   0.79
048   P1MLTG D   Beer and ale, at home                         3.6    0.7   0.42    0.18    0.13    0.66
049   P1WING D   Wine and brandy, at home                      3.9    0.2   -0.51   0.14    -0.02   0.79
050   P1LIQG D   Distilled spirits, at home                    2.1    0.2   -0.17   -0.40   0.25    0.54
051   P1OPMG D   Other purchased meals                         2.8    4.5   -0.15   0.09    0.30    0.32
052   P1APMG C   Alcohol in purchased meals                    3.7    0.6   0.45    -0.06   -0.16   0.79
053   P1MFDG D   Food supplied military                        3.0    0.0   -0.20   0.10    0.25    0.40
054   P1FFDG C   Food produced and consumed on farms          0.9     0.0   -4.86   -1.37   -0.09   4.98
055   P1SHUG C   Shoes (12)                                    3.8    0.6   -0.01   0.41    0.01    0.78
056   P1WGCG D   Clothing for females                          4.5    1.8   -0.14   0.30    0.02    1.10
057   P1WICG D   Clothing for infants                          8.9    0.1   1.40    0.58    -0.33   1.88
058   P1MBCG D   Clothing for males                            3.5    1.2   0.30    0.34    0.11    0.74
059   P1MSGG D   Sewing goods for males                        6.4    0.0   0.28    0.25    -0.29   1.46
060   P1MUGG D   Luggage for males                            2.6     0.0   1.29    1.25    -0.21   2.82
061   P1MICG C   Std. clothing issued to military personnel    2.8    0.0   0.28    0.16    0.15    0.43
062   P1GASG D   Gasoline and other motor fuel                4.2    3.2    -6.30   1.54    -0.13   5.37
063   P1LUBG D   Lubricants                                    5.5    0.0   -0.37   0.47    0.37    1.09
064   P1OILG D   Fuel oil                                      3.7    0.1   -7.75   2.55    0.21    4.84
065   P1FFWG D   Farm fuel                                     6.0    0.0   -3.91   1.84    0.14    3.38
066   P1TOBG C   Tobacco products                              7.5    1.0   0.36    -0.70   0.06    1.83
067   P1SOAG D   Soap                                          4.9    0.1   1.21    0.25    -0.13   0.92
068   P1CSMG D   Cosmetics and perfumes                        4.3    0.2   1.07    0.17    -0.24   0.78
069   P1SDHG C   Semidurable house furnishings                 7.4    0.5   1.76    0.64    -0.44   1.40
070   P1CLEG D   Cleaning preparations                         4.2    0.4   0.66    0.13    0.09    0.75
071   P1LIGG D   Lighting supplies                             7.2    0.1   0.87    0.53    -0.13   1.59
072   P1PAPG D   Paper products                                5.6    0.3   0.36    0.40    0.04    1.17
073   P1RXDG D   Prescription drugs                            4.0    2.6   0.33    -0.62   0.67    0.55
074   P1NRXG D   Nonprescription drugs                         4.0    0.3   0.91    -0.45   0.10    0.64
075   P1MDSG D   Medical supplies                              3.7    0.1   0.77    -0.58   -0.13   0.64
076   P1GYNG D   Gynecological goods                           4.2    0.0   1.02    0.24    -0.08   0.68
077   P1DOLG D   Toys, dolls, and games                        5.4    0.6   1.04    0.47    0.10    1.08
078   P1AMMG D   Sport supplies, including ammunition          4.7    0.2   0.35    0.15    -0.16   1.06
079   P1FLMG D   Film and photo supplies                       4.6    0.0   0.62    -0.25   0.10    1.06
080   P1STSG D   Stationery and school supplies                4.7    0.1   0.91    0.50    -0.04   0.95
081   P1GREG D   Greeting cards                                4.8    0.1   0.92    0.50    -0.04   0.97
082   P1ABDG C   Expenditures abroad by U.S. residents        16.8    0.1   0.28    0.54    0.18    4.02
083   P1MGZG D   Magazines and sheet music                     5.5    0.3   0.66    -0.44   -0.31   1.17
084   P1NWPG D   Newspapers                                    3.8    0.2   0.87    0.24    0.14    0.78
085   P1FLOG C   Flowers, seeds, and potted plants             6.7    0.2   0.57    0.29    -0.12   1.54
086   P1OMHG D   Owner occupied mobile homes                   2.5    0.4   0.03    -0.74   -0.30   0.24
087   P1OSTG D   Owner occupied stationary homes               2.4   10.7   0.00    -0.75   -0.17   0.19
088   P1TMHG D   Tenant occupied mobile homes                  3.8    0.1   0.07    -0.75   -0.26   0.77
089   P1TSPG D   Tenant occupied stationary homes              2.4    2.8   -0.04   -0.77   -0.31   0.17
090   P1TLDG D   Tenant landlord durables                      3.8    0.1   0.45    -0.51   0.25    0.66
091   P1FARG C   Rental value of farm dwellings (26)           4.3    0.2   -0.27   -0.15   0.70    0.84
092   P1HOTG D   Hotels and motels                             6.3    0.6   0.19    -0.01   -0.10   1.38
093   P1HFRG D   Clubs and fraternity housing                  2.9    0.0   0.03    -0.65   -0.33   0.43
094   P1HHEG D   Higher education housing                      3.0    0.2   -0.15   -0.78   0.04    0.54
095   P1HESG D   El. and secondary education housing           8.9    0.0   0.16    -0.84   -0.36   2.01
096   P1TGRG D   Tenant group room and board                   3.4    0.0   -0.12   -0.70   -0.38   0.60
097   P1ELCG C   Electricity (37)                              5.7    1.5   0.43    -0.16   0.23    1.15
098   P1NGSG C   Gas (38)                                     2.6     0.8   0.35    0.19    0.44    2.71
099   P1WSMG D   Water and sewerage maintenance                3.9    0.6   0.88    -0.50   0.20    0.75
100   P1REFG D   Refuse collection                             4.1    0.2   1.02    -0.56   0.29    0.75
101   P1LOCG D   Local and cellular telephone                  4.5    1.3   0.41    -0.84   0.05    0.98
102   P1OLCG D   Local telephone                               4.4    0.6   0.05    -1.00   0.00    1.00
103   P1LDTG D   Long distance telephone                       5.3    0.3   0.15    -0.31   0.33    1.24
104   P1INCG D   Intrastate toll calls                         5.1    0.1   -0.08   -0.66   0.36    1.17
105   P1ITCG D   Interstate toll calls                         6.3    0.2   0.38    0.09    0.23    1.52
106   P1DMCG D   Domestic service, cash                        4.3    0.2   0.27    0.10    0.24    0.98
107   P1DMIG D   Domestic service, in kind                     6.0    0.0   -1.76   -0.21   -0.03   1.24


                                                  50
108   P1MSEG D   Moving and storage                              3.7   0.2   0.15    0.09    -0.03   0.69
109   P1FIPG D   Household insurance premiums                    3.7   0.2   0.13    -0.49   0.32    0.84
110   P1FIBG D   Less: Household insurance benefits paid         3.3   0.1   0.86    0.38    -0.28   0.40
111   P1RCLG D   Rug and furniture cleaning                      4.4   0.0   0.33    0.06    -0.36   0.79
112   P1EREG D   Electrical repair                               3.8   0.1   0.06    0.12    0.17    0.79
113   P1FREG D   Reupholstery and furniture repair               3.2   0.0   -0.11   -0.20   0.13    0.74
114   P1MHOG D   Household operation services, n.e.c.            3.7   0.2   0.03    0.09    -0.02   0.73
115   P1ARPG D   Motor vehicle repair                            2.9   1.7   0.17    0.06    0.30    0.34
116   P1RLOG D   Motor vehicle rental, leasing, and other        4.9   0.6   0.82    0.15    -0.16   0.96
117   P1TOLG C   Bridge, tunnel, ferry, and road tolls           6.2   0.1   0.00    -0.75   -0.19   1.42
118   P1AING C   Insurance                                      4.2    0.7   0.84    -0.73   0.13    3.61
119   P1IMTG C   Mass transit systems                            5.4   0.1   0.09    -0.45   0.09    1.35
120   P1TAXG C   Taxicab                                         5.7   0.0   0.05    0.22    0.02    1.27
121   P1IBUG C   Bus                                             9.2   0.0   -0.10   -0.37   -0.20   2.13
122   P1IAIG C   Airline                                        15.0   0.4   -0.64   0.75    -0.04   3.60
123   P1TROG C   Other                                           9.1   0.1   -0.23   -0.04   -0.05   2.11
124   P1PHYG C   Physicians                                      3.3   4.0   0.63    -0.09   0.50    0.42
125   P1DENG C   Dentists                                        2.7   1.0   0.39    -0.22   0.17    0.48
126   P1OPSG C   Other professional services                     3.2   2.7   0.61    0.04    0.25    0.50
127   P1NPHG C   Nonprofit                                       3.1   4.4   0.05    -0.02   0.03    0.48
128   P1GVHG C   Government                                      4.3   1.4   -0.10   -0.06   0.51    0.76
129   P1NRSG C   Nursing homes                                   3.3   1.3   0.05    0.11    -0.30   0.62
130   P1MING C   Medical care and hospitalization               0.3    1.4   -0.90   -0.95   0.29    4.89
131   P1IING C   Income loss                                    5.7    0.0   0.70    -1.74   0.64    4.86
132   P1PWCG C   Workers' compensation                           8.1   0.2   -0.55   0.26    0.80    1.16
133   P1MOVG C   Motion picture theaters                         4.1   0.1   0.05    0.08    0.15    1.07
134   P1LEGG C   Leg. theaters and opera,                        4.2   0.1   0.13    0.11    0.16    1.10
135   P1SPEG C   Spectator sports                                4.1   0.2   -0.15   -0.34   -0.08   1.03
136   P1RTVG C   Radio and television repair                     3.1   0.1   0.28    -0.52   0.33    0.62
137   P1CLUG C   Clubs and fraternal organizations               4.2   0.3   -0.13   0.42    -0.27   0.77
138   P1SIGG D   Sightseeing                                     5.3   0.1   0.04    0.00    -0.07   1.21
139   P1FLYG D   Private flying                                  9.8   0.0   0.48    0.19    -0.28   2.27
140   P1BILG D   Bowling and billiards                           4.1   0.0   0.46    -0.31   0.05    0.96
141   P1CASG D   Casino gambling                                 2.9   0.9   -0.28   0.10    -0.22   0.32
142   P1OPAG D   Other com. participant amusements               2.8   0.3   0.27    0.06    0.16    0.59
143   P1PARG C   Pari-mutuel net receipts                        4.8   0.1   -0.66   -0.09   0.51    0.99
144   P1PETG D   Pets and pets services excl. vet.               3.6   0.1   -0.12   -0.07   0.00    0.76
145   P1VETG D   Veterinarians                                   3.0   0.2   -0.18   -0.23   0.13    0.67
146   P1CTVG D   Cable television                                7.0   0.7   0.18    -0.21   0.08    1.76
147   P1FDVG D   Film developing                                 3.8   0.1   0.76    -0.08   0.39    0.85
148   P1PICG D   Photo studios                                   3.8   0.1   0.12    -0.12   0.09    0.89
149   P1CMPG D   Sporting and recreational camps                 3.4   0.0   0.09    -0.04   -0.07   0.81
150   P1HREG D   High school recreation                          4.7   0.0   0.05    -0.14   -0.22   1.12
151   P1NECG D   Commercial amusements n.e.c.                    3.4   0.6   0.25    0.00    -0.05   0.80
152   P1NISG D   Com. amusements n.e.c. except ISPs              3.3   0.4   0.12    -0.05   -0.04   0.80
153   P1SCLG D   Shoe repair                                     3.3   0.0   0.04    -0.27   0.12    0.64
154   P1DRYG D   Drycleaning                                     3.6   0.1   0.30    0.18    0.24    0.52
155   P1LGRG D   Laundry and garment repair                      3.6   0.1   -0.03   0.07    0.12    0.57
156   P1BEAG D   Beauty shops, including combination             3.9   0.5   0.08    -0.09   0.17    0.76
157   P1BARG D   Barber shops                                    2.8   0.0   0.01    0.08    0.11    0.56
158   P1WCRG D   Watch, clock, and jewelry repair                3.3   0.0   -0.01   -0.30   -0.03   0.66
159   P1CRPG D   Miscellaneous personal services                 3.8   0.5   0.17    0.11    -0.02   0.62
160   P1BROG C   Brokerage charges and inv. couns.              1.2    1.0   0.30    0.50    0.01    5.18
161   P1BNKG C   Bnk srv. chges, trust serv., s-d box rental     5.7   1.2   1.81    -0.70   0.39    1.02
162   P1IMCG D   Commercial banks                               2.4    1.0   -0.18   0.76    0.18    2.93
163   P1IMNG D   Other financial institutions                  15.0    1.4   0.19    -0.32   0.58    3.05
164   P1LIFG C   Exp. of handl. life ins. and pension plans      2.3   1.2   -0.37   -0.24   0.49    0.45
165   P1GALG C   Legal services (65)                             4.4   1.0   0.60    -0.41   0.14    0.91
166   P1FUNG C   Funeral and burial expenses                     3.2   0.2   0.47    -0.61   0.35    0.57
167   P1UNSG D   Labor union expenses                            4.1   0.2   -0.32   0.29    0.07    0.74
168   P1ASSG D   Profession association expenses                 6.5   0.1   -0.23   0.03    -0.37   1.33
169   P1GENG D   Employment agency fees                          5.5   0.0   1.40    -0.11   -0.04   1.03
170   P1AMOG D   Money orders                                    5.3   0.0   1.12    -0.24   -0.21   1.09
171   P1CLAG D   Classified ads                                  5.4   0.0   1.15    -0.23   -0.16   1.09
172   P1ACCG D   Tax return preparation services                 5.2   0.1   0.97    -0.31   -0.11   1.12
173   P1THEG D   Personal business services, n.e.c.              7.1   0.1   0.61    -0.55   -0.03   1.66
174   P1PEDG D   Private higher education                        4.4   0.7   -0.25   -0.13   0.02    0.89
175   P1GEDG D   Public higher education                         4.1   0.7   0.52    -0.27   0.07    0.89
176   P1ESCG D   Elementary and secondary schools                4.3   0.4   -0.47   0.20    -0.02   0.84
177   P1NSCG D   Nursery schools                                 4.8   0.1   -0.63   0.01    0.02    1.05
178   P1VEDG D   Commercial and vocational schools               4.1   0.4   -0.96   -0.38   0.20    0.88


                                                  51
179       P1REDG D             Foundations and nonprofit research               4.5        0.2     -0.37   -0.27       -0.03              1.05
180       P1POLG D             Political organizations                          8.2        0.0     0.04    0.39        -0.32              1.83
181       P1MUSG D             Museums and libraries                            5.7        0.1     -0.70   0.08        -0.13              1.18
182       P1FOUG D             Foundations to religion and welfare              5.4        0.2     -0.54   0.09        0.01               1.11
183       P1WELG D             Social welfare                                   3.3        1.7     -0.39   0.12        -0.01              0.54
184       P1RELG D             Religion                                         5.0        0.7     0.17    0.19        -0.09              1.11
185       P1AFTG D             Passenger fares for foreign travel               9.8        0.5     -0.95   0.39        -0.08              2.32
186       P1USTG D             U.S. travel outside the U.S.                     9.6        0.6     -2.04   0.50        0.15               2.16
187       P1FTUG D             Foreign travel in U.S.                           3.6        1.0     -0.20   0.00        0.04               0.62




A.2 Solving the restricted least squares problem in (6)
              To solve the least squares problem in (6), notice that (i) if at were known, the least
squares problem could be solved by computing principal components for variables
zit  wi ( it  at ) and (ii) if i′Rt were known, the least squares estimator of at could be

computed from the weighted least squares of it – i′Rt onto a constant. We iterated
between these two steps to solve (6).


A.3 State-space representation of the dynamic factor model, the log-likelihood
function, and the EM algorithm.
              Let B be an NxN diagonal matrix with i on the diagonal, let p be the order of the
VAR, and let the N×1 vector yt = t – Bt–1 – c. Then, the unobserved-components
model in (7)-(9) can be written in state-space form as:


(A.1)                                                           yt = Hst + et
(A.2)                                                        st = Fst–1 + Gt


where, st = ( x 't x 't-1 … x 't-p +1 )' with xt = (at Rt´)´ a k×1 vector, and:
                                                                                      
                                                                                         Φ1  Φp-1          Φp               
                                                                                                                                  
H     =             l    Γ    -Bl -BΓ         0 ( N ,( p  2)*( k 1))  ,   F                                                  ,          and
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                            I(p-1)(k+1)    0                      
                                                                                                            ( p 1)( k 1) k 1 

                      
             I k 1   
G                      . The Gaussian log-likelihood for the unknown parameters conditional on
          0            
       ( p 1)( k 1) 
                      


{y t }Tt 2 can be computed using the Kalman filter innovations and their variances as

described in Hamilton (1993, Chapter 13).
              The EM algorithm is a well-known approach (Watson and Engle, 1983, Shumway
and Stoffer, 1982) to maximize the Gaussian log-likelihood function for state-space
problems. The method is convenient here because it straightforward to compute the

                                                                      52
expected value of the “complete data” ({yt, st}) sufficient statistics conditional on the
observed data ({yt}), and because maximization of the complete data Gaussian likelihood
follows from familiar regression formulae. The standard linear regression formulae are
modified in two ways to estimate the parameters in (A.1)-(A.2).                    First, Gauss-
Seidel/Cochrane-Orcutt iterations are used to estimate B conditional on c and Γ, and c
and Γ conditional on B. Second, Γ is estimated subject to the constraint l´Γ = 0 using the
standard restricted least squares formula, in order to impose the normalization that we
used.
        While there are many parameters to estimate (971 in the benchmark model), there
are two features of the model that make estimation feasible. First, while N is large,
because R is diagonal, the sufficient statistics for the complete data likelihood can be
computed in O(Tm) calculations, where m is the dimension of the state vector s. Second,
because N and T are large, the principal component estimators of (at Rt´) are reasonably
accurate and regression based estimators of the model parameters can be constructed
using these estimates of the factors. These principal component based estimates serve as
useful initial values for the MLE algorithm. (See Doz, Giannone and Reichlin, 2008, for
further discussion.) Results reported in the text are based on 40,000 EM iterations,
although results using 5,000 iterations are essentially identical.


A.4 MLEs for the benchmark model
        Table A1 includes the estimates of Γ, B, and e for the benchmark 3-factor model.
The estimated parameters in the VAR(4) state transition equation are


                     0.40 0.10 0.35                     0.73 0.06 0.28
              Φ1   0.44 0.63 0.01          , Φ 2   0.19 0.06 0.06  ,
                     0.72 0.25 1.33                  1.14 0.21 0.71
                                      0.00       0.13 0.05 
                              Φ 2   0.45      0.16 0.10 
                                      0.30     0.36 0.36 



                    0.13 0.17 0.01              0.40 0.16 0.45
              Φ4   0.20 0.15 0.12  , Var (ε)   0.16 1.0
                                                               0 
                    0.11 0.39 0.11            0.45  0   1.0 



                                            53
A.5 Estimating υt and t
               Recall that υt = at – E ( at | {R τ }T 1 ) . We estimate υt using the inflation data, that is

we construct E(υt| { i }iN1,,T 1 ). One way to construct this estimate is to note that the

projection E ( at | {R τ }T 1 ) can be computed from the Kalman smoother of at from a state
space system with state equation given by (A.2) and observation equation given by Rt =
[0 Ik 0(k,        (k+1)p)]st.   That is, the Kalman smoother implicitly computes the projection
coefficients, say , for the equation E ( at | {R τ }T1 )    1 β t,τ R τ , so that υt = at –
                                                                                                  T





     T
         1
              βt,τ R τ . From the law of iterated expectations

                                                            
                                                               T
E(υt| { i }iN1,,T 1 ) = E(at| { i }iN1,,T 1 ) –          1
                                                                        β t,τ E (R τ |{ i }iN1,,T 1 ) . As a practical matter this

can be computed in two steps:


               Step 1: Use the Kalman smoother applied to (A.1) and (A.2) to compute the
smoothed estimates of at and Rt given { i }iN1,,T 1 . Call these estimates at/T and Rt/T.

                                          
                                              T
               Step 2: Construct                  1
                                                       β t,τ R τ/T as the smoothed estimate of at from a state-space

model with observation equation Rt/T = [0 Ik 0(k,                                    (k+1)p)]st   and state transition equation
(A.2). Then E(υt| { i }iN1,,T 1 ) is the smoothed estimate of at from Step 1 minus its

smoothed estimate from Step 2.


               Similarly, recall that t = E[Ft | {Rτ }T1 ], which we estimate as E(t| { i }iN1,,T 1 ).

From (2) Ft = (′)–1′lat + (′)–1′Rt. The component of the projection of Ft onto
{Rτ }T1 that depends on at can be computed from the smoothed estimate of at in step 2.

The component that depends directly on Rt can be computed from the smoothed estimate
of Rt from step 1.




A.6 Calculating the Average Squared Coherences shown in the tables
               Consider a VAR for a vector of variables Xt written as (L)Xt = t, where var(t)
= . The spectral density of X at frequency  is given by S() = (e-i)–1(ei)′–1.



                                                                        54
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                     Sij ( )
The squared coherence between the Xit and Xjt at frequency  is cohij ( )                                                            ,
                                                                                                                  Sii ( ) S jj ( )

which is recognized at the frequency domain analogue of the squared correlation between
the variables. Similarly, the squared coherence between Xit and Xjt , controlling from Xkt
                                                                2
                                                Sij  k ( )
at frequency  is cohij  k ( )                                       , where Sij  k ( ) = Sij() – Sik()Skk()–
                                           Sii  k ( ) S jj  k ( )
1
    Skj(), and Sii  k ( ) and S jj  k ( ) are defined analogously.

           Estimates of these coherences were computed by estimating the VAR parameters
in (L) and , and then plugging these estimates into the formula above. The average
coherences reported in the tables are averages of the coherences over a fine grid of
frequencies in the desired frequency band. Finally, standard errors were computed using
the delta method and the asymptotic covariance matrix of the estimated VAR parameters.


A.7 Solution of the model in section 3
           The representative agent’s satisfies the conditions for Gorman aggregation, so it
can be split into two stages. The optimal choice of how much of each variety to consume
implies the optimality conditions:


(A.3)                        Cit  Ct ( Pit / Pt )   and Cit ( j )  Cit ( Pit ( j ) / Pit )   ,
                                                             1/(1 )                              1/(1 )
                                   1                                                  N
                                                                                                 
(A.4)                        Pit    Pit ( j )1 dj                 and Pt   N 1  Pit1             .
                                   0                                                 i 1     

These imply that St = PtCt. Log-linearizing the static cost-of-living price indices around
the steady state where all the prices are the same leads to:


                                                       N                          1
(A.5)                                   pt  N 1  pit and pit   pit ( j )dj
                                                      i 1                        0




           The second-stage optimality conditions for the representative consumer are:




                                                             55
                                  1        Lt
                                                   zt
                                PC
                                 t t   (1  Tt )Wt
                                    Lt                  Lt 1               
                                              Et                     zt 1 
(A.6)                           (1  Tt )Wt         (1  Tt 1 )Wt 1         
                                zt ( M t 1  H t  PC
                                                     t t)  0

                                                   M t 1 Lt i 
                                limi   t i Et                    0
                                                   (1  Tt i )Wt i 

where zt is the Lagrange multiplier on the cash-in-advance constraint (15). The first
condition is the static labor supply condition equating the marginal utility of consumption
divided by its price to the marginal disutility of labor divided by its after-tax wage plus zt
reflecting the tightening of the cash-in-advance constraint that comes with consuming
more. The second condition is the standard Euler equation, equating the marginal utility
of an extra dollar today from working to its discounted expected value tomorrow, which
also includes the relaxation of the budget constraint that comes with holding money as
savings. Third, we have the complementary slackness condition associated with the
constraint, and fourth the transversality condition.
        We conjecture that, in equilibrium, the cash-in-advance constraint holds at all
dates and states, so zt > 0 always. To verify the conjecture, note that it implies that in

             t t  M t . Combining the first two optimality conditions in (A.6), we obtain
equilibrium PC

an expression for zt  1   Et  M t / M t 1   / M t , which given the assumption on m

verifies the conjecture. Using the result for zt on the first optimality condition gives an
expression for the real wage, which after taking logs and ignoring constants is:


(A.7)                                      wt  pt  yt  lt  ln(1  Tt ) .



Turning to the problem of the firm, using the production function to replace out Lit(j), the
demand for each variety in (A.3) to substitute out Cit(j), and the market clearing condition
in the goods market to replace Ct for Yt, real profits are:


                                            1                       /
                                 Pit ( j )            P ( j)              WtYt1/ 
(A.8)                                           Yt   it                               1/ 
                                 Pt                   Pt                  Pt X it ( j ) 

Maximizing this expression, taking logs and ignoring constants, the price charged by an
                                                  56
attentive firm in sector i is:


                                                                  1        
                                         pit* ( j )  pt                    ( wt  pt )  (1  ) yt  xit ( j )
(A.9)                                                          (1   ) 

The desired price rises one-to-one with the price index, and increases with marginal
costs, which rise with the price of the labor input, rise with output because of diminishing
returns to scale, and fall with higher productivity. Only i of the firms actually set

pit ( j )  pit* ( j ) with the remaining 1  i choosing, up to a first-order log-linear

approximation, the certainty-equivalent pit ( j )  Eˆ  pit* ( j )  .

         Finally, integrating over j the prices set by the firms, using the definition of pit in
(A.5), and substituting out wages using equation (A.7), we obtain the solution in (20),
where the parameters are:  1     (1   ) and   (1   ) . The cash-in-advance
constraint combined with market clearing in the goods market implies equation (22), and
the first equation in (A.5) is (21).
         Turning to the solutions for πit and yt, start by defining a new variable qt = pt +
αyt. Taking the Eˆ (.) operator over both sides of (A.9) and substituting out for real wages

gives: Eˆ  pit   Eˆ  qt   xt   t    xit  xt   . Taking the average over N, using the

process for xit(j) in (17), using the price index equation in (21), and ignoring constants:
Eˆ  pt   Eˆ  qt    t   t 1 . Then, using the definition of qt and (22), qt= αmt + (1-

α)pt,    so    substituting        out      for    pt     in    the     previous        expression,          we    find:
Eˆ  qt   t   t 1   t 1  1 /   1  t   t 1  .     Now, using the quantity theory

relation (22), it follows that: Eˆ ( yt )   ( /  ) t   t 1 . Moreover, one gets:


                                                         
(A.10)             Eˆ ( pit )  t   t 1  t 1       t      i      t 1   it 1
                                                        

         By going through the same steps, one solves for the “news” part qt  Eˆ  qt  , and

again taking the same steps find:


(A.11)



                                                        57
                         i                                (1   )(1   )(   ) 
pit  Eˆ ( pit )                   t   t   i                                    t
                    1  (1   )                                1  (1   )           
                 i (i   ) t  i  it

                                             1                         (  1) 
(A.12)                     yt  Eˆ ( yt )                   t    1  (1   )   t .
                                            1  (1   )                           

Adding the two parts of each solution, taking first-differences of the solution for prices to
obtain πit, and using the definitions of the three components of price changes gives the
expressions in (23)-(26).




                                                   58
