                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO MULTINATIONALS' R&D ACTIVITIES STIMULATE INDIGENOUS ENTREPRENEURSHIP?
                EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S "SILICON VALLEY"

                                                Hongbin Cai
                                               Yasuyuki Todo
                                                Li-An Zhou

                                           Working Paper 13618
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w13618


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       November 2007




  The authors would like to thank Thomas Hellmann, Rebecca Henderson, Scott Stern, and participants
  of the NBER conference on "Entrepreneurship: Strategy and Structure" and CCER-NBER conference
  on "China and World Economy" for helpful comments and the Kauffman Foundation for financial
  support. We are also grateful to Hongjia Wang at the Research Department of Zhongguancun Administrative
  Commission for his valuable help on the project, and to the companies we interviewed for their cooperation.
  Todo thanks the New Energy and Industrial Technology Organization for financial support. The views
  expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

  © 2007 by Hongbin Cai, Yasuyuki Todo, and Li-An Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
  not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
  including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Multinationals' R&D Activities Stimulate Indigenous Entrepreneurship? Evidence from
China's "Silicon Valley"
Hongbin Cai, Yasuyuki Todo, and Li-An Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 13618
November 2007
JEL No. F23,L26,O33

                                            ABSTRACT

Using a unique firm-level dataset from China's "Silicon Valley," we investigate how multinational
enterprises (MNEs) affect local entrepreneurship and R&D activities upon entry. We find that R&D
activities of MNEs in an industry stimulate entry of domestic firms into the same industry and enhance
R&D activities of newly entering domestic firms. By contrast, MNEs' production activities or domestic
firms' R&D activities do not have such effect. Since MNEs are technologically more advanced than
domestic firms, our findings suggest that diffusion of MNEs' advanced knowledge to potential indigenous
entrepreneurs through MNEs' R&D stimulates entry of domestic firms.


Hongbin Cai                                        Li-An Zhou
Guanghua School of Management and IEPR             Guanghua School of Management and IEPR
Peking University                                  Peking University
Beijing 100871                                     Beijing 100871
China                                              CHINA
hbcai@gsm.pku.edu.cn                               zhoula@gsm.pku.edu.cn

Yasuyuki Todo
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences
University of Tokyo
5-1-5 Kashiwanoha
Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8563
Japan
yastodo@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
1     Introduction

The clustering of high-tech ﬁrms has played an important role in the prosperity of some

regions in the United States, such as Silicon Valley in California and Route 128 in Boston.

Similar examples can also be found in less developed countries, such as Bangalore in India

and Hsinchu Science Park in Taiwan. These successful high-tech clusters become a birthplace

of new technology and contribute to innovation in their home economies as well as in the

world economy.

    To investigate how such clustering takes place, this study focuses on the role of technol-

ogy leaders in stimulating entrepreneurship in the cluster. Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize that
development of a high-tech cluster can be promoted by knowledge diﬀusion from technolog-

ically leading ﬁrms to potential entrepreneurs.

    To test the knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis, we use a unique dataset for a new high-

tech cluster in China, the Zhongguancun Science Park (hereafter, the Z-Park) during the

period 1998-2003. The Z-Park, established in Beijing in 1988, is the ﬁrst and largest na-

tional science park in China and has recently experienced rapid agglomeration of high-tech

ﬁrms. Therefore, the Z-Park, now widely known as China’s “Silicon Valley,” provides us a

unique case for studying what promotes clustering of high-tech ﬁrms. The Z-Park is also

home to many high-tech multinational enterprises (MNEs) such as Google, IBM, Microsoft,

Motorola, Nokia, and Panasonic, which account for 12 percent of all establishments in the

Z-Park in terms of the number of ﬁrms in 2003. These MNEs are technologically more

advanced to a large extent than domestic ﬁrms. Therefore, in the case of the Z-Park, tech-
nological leaders in our knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis are MNEs, whereas followers are

domestic ﬁrms.

    Thus, this paper speciﬁcally examines how MNEs (technological leaders) aﬀect the entry

decision of potential indigenous entrepreneurs (technological followers) through knowledge

diﬀusion. In particular, we distinguish between MNEs’ production and R&D activities

and examine whether each type of MNEs’ activity induces entry of indigenous ﬁrms and

stimulates R&D of the entrants, highlighting important roles of MNEs’ R&D in promoting



                                              2
knowledge diﬀusion and fostering domestic entrepreneurship.

   In estimating those impacts, we employ Blundell and Bond’s (1998) system GMM to

control for possible biases due to endogeneity and ﬁxed eﬀects. Then, we ﬁnd that the size

of MNEs’ R&D activities in a particular industry has a positive and statistically signiﬁcant

impact on the number of entries of domestic ﬁrms into the same industry and on the size of

R&D of entering domestic ﬁrms. The benchmark results indicate that 31 percent of entries
of domestic ﬁrms attribute to MNEs’ R&D activities. By contrast, either MNEs’ production

activities or domestic ﬁrms’ R&D activities do not have such eﬀect on domestic entry.

   We also ﬁnd that MNEs’ R&D activities contribute to not only gross entry of newly born

domestic ﬁrms but also gross entry of domestic ﬁrms existing elsewhere in China to the Z-

Park and net entry of domestic ﬁrms. These results indicate that MNEs’ R&D activities

enhance clustering of domestic ﬁrms in the Z-Park by stimulating local entrepreneurship

and promoting the relocation of existing ﬁrms.

   These ﬁndings are consistent with the knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis, leading to a con-

clusion that diﬀusion of MNEs’ advanced knowledge to potential indigenous entrepreneurs

particularly through MNEs’ R&D activities stimulates entry of domestic ﬁrms. Our inter-

views with managers of several multinational and domestic ﬁrms in the Z-Park point out

several potential mechanisms of such knowledge diﬀusion, most notably learning by doing in

MNEs’ R&D centers, inter-ﬁrm R&D cooperation between MNEs and domestic institutions,
and technical assistance associated with outsourcing from MNEs to domestic ﬁrms.

   This paper relies on the literature on the eﬀect of MNEs on the growth of domestic ﬁrms

in general and on indigenous entrepreneurship in particular. Many empirical studies have

explored the eﬀects of MNEs on the productivity of domestic ﬁrms in less developed coun-

tries, such as Kokko (1994), Aitken and Harrison (1999), and Javorcik (2004). In particular,

Todo and Miyamoto (2006), using ﬁrm-level data from Indonesia, ﬁnd that MNEs’ R&D

activities improve domestic ﬁrms’ productivity, while MNEs’ production activities do not.

Todo, Zhang, and Zhou (2006) identify a similar eﬀect, using the same dataset from the

Z-Park as in this paper. In a related study, Swenson (2007) using ﬁrm-level data for China

ﬁnds that growth in the size of MNEs is positively associated with the formation of new


                                             3
export connections by local Chinese ﬁrms, and there is evidence suggesting that information

spillovers from MNEs to local ﬁrms may drive this result.

   Closest to our analysis includes Görg and Strobl (2002) who use industry-level data of

the Irish manufacturing sector and ﬁnd a positive eﬀect of the size of MNEs on entry of

indigenous ﬁrms. Backer and Sleuwaegen (2003) also analyze the eﬀect of foreign direct

investment (FDI) on domestic entrepreneurship, using Belgian data. They ﬁnd that FDI
discourages entry and stimulates exit of domestic entrepreneurs in the short run, while in

the long run the knowledge-diﬀusion eﬀect of FDI through learning and networking will

mitigate or even reverse the short-run crowding-out eﬀect.

   Our innovation, compared with these existing studies on MNEs and indigenous en-

trepreneurship, is that we are the ﬁrst to explore impacts of R&D activities of MNEs on

entry of domestic ﬁrms, distinguishing them from impacts of MNEs’ production activities.

Another contribution of this study is that we compare predictions of several hypotheses, such

as those based on the standard agglomeration theory of Marshall (1890) and on crowding-out

eﬀects of MNEs, concluding that the knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis best ﬁts the data.

   Our analysis is also related to the studies on the recent growth of the computer soft-

ware industry in less developed countries such as Arora and Gambardella (2004) and Arora,

Arunachalam, Asundi, and Fernandes (2001), since this industry is one of the major indus-

tries in our data for China’s “Silicon Valley.” In particular, Arora and Gambardella (2004),
who analyze ﬁve non-G7 economies including China, point to a positive role of MNEs in the

growth of the software industry in these economies. However, they do not focus on MNEs’

R&D activities as a particular stimulus to indigenous entrepreneurship or use ﬁrm-level data

for the analysis, as we do in this paper.

   Our study may be able to contribute to debate on FDI policies in China and other less

developed countries. MNEs’ potential threat to domestic ﬁrms through market competition

frequently raises serious concerns among policy makers in less developed countries about

whether policies subsidizing FDI ultimately beneﬁt the domestic economy. In China, one of

the largest recipients of FDI in the world, there has been hot debate on the eﬀect of MNEs




                                             4
on the catch-up of Chinese ﬁrms in innovative capacity with foreign rivals.1 The conclusion

of this study suggests that such policies favoring FDI in R&D may be beneﬁcial to local

ﬁrms through knowledge diﬀusion.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy describes the insti-

tutional background of the Zhongguancun Science Park and discusses the linkages between

MNEs and domestic entrepreneurship in the Z-Park, based on our ﬁeld interviews. Section
3 develops several theoretical hypotheses to be tested in this paper. Section 4 explains the

estimation procedure, whereas Section 5 describes the dataset and variables used in the

estimation. Section 6 presents estimation results, and Section 7 concludes.



2     Entrepreneurship and MNEs in the Zhongguancun
      Science Park

2.1     Description of the Z-Park

The Zhongguancun Science Park was established in 1988 as the ﬁrst national-level high

technology district and has remained the largest science park in China since its establish-

ment.2 In 2003, the Z-Park was home to more than 12,000 knowledge-intensive ﬁrms with a
total employment of over 480,000 and a gross industrial value of about 80 billion US dollars.

According to a research report released by Beijing Bureau of Statistics (2002), the Z-Park

contributed to one seventh of the total output of all science parks combined in China and

two thirds of the industrial growth in Beijing. In the early years of its development, the

Z-Park was only conﬁned to a small geographical area of Zhongguancun, located in the

northwestern part of the Haidian District in Beijing. However, the past two decades has

witnessed its evolution into an agglomeration of ﬁve sub-parks spread all over Beijing.

    A unique advantage of the Z-Park is that it has the highest density of top universities

and research institutions in China. The whole park hosts 73 universities and 232 research
   1 For example, there has been a popular view that China’s automobile industry is still heavily dependent

on imported foreign technology and lacks self-innovation after over 20 years of joint ventures with foreign
automobile producers.
   2 Nowadays China has 58 national-level science parks and more than six thousand industrial parks at

local levels. We thank Mr. Hongjia Wang at the Research Department of Zhongguancun Administrative
Commission for providing the background information of the Z-Park.



                                                    5
institutions, while the Zhongguancun area itself accommodates over 50 universities including

the two leading universities in the nation, Peking University and Tsinghua University, and

more than one hundred research institutions including the Chinese Academy of Sciences

and the Chinese Academy of Engineering. By the end of 2005, the Zhongguancun area had

one third of China’s national laboratories and accounted for one ﬁfth of China’s total R&D

expenditure.
    Another feature of the Z-Park is the strong, continuing support from the government.

In order to encourage entry of high-tech ﬁrms and develop the Z-Park as the innovation

engine for China’s high-tech industries, the government oﬀers several preferential beneﬁts

to ﬁrms located in the Z-Park. The most notable is the tax incentive which has been

issued since the establishment of the Z-Park. For all eligible ﬁrms, the corporate income

tax rate is 15 percent, less than half of the normal corporate income tax rate of 33 percent.

New entrants additionally enjoy tax wavier for the ﬁrst three years. In 1999, additional

preferential policies were granted by the government, such as enlarging the scope of the tax

waiver and deductions (e.g., reduction of sales taxes on technological transfers, consulting,

and services and R&D expenditures). In order to attract strong inﬂows of brainpower from

other parts of China as well as from overseas, the government allows high-tech employees in

the Z-Park to obtain Beijing residence.3


2.2     Domestic Entrepreneurship in the Z-Park

Entrepreneurial activities in the Z-Park resulted in the birth of numerous small- and medium-

sized high-tech ﬁrms.4 In particular, the Z-Park experienced a dramatic increase in entry
of domestic ﬁrms into the Z-Park after 1998, an increase which attributes to the break-

throughs in information technology (IT), the booming new economy in the United States,

and supportive government policies.

    Among the domestic entrants into the Z-Park, there are two groups of ﬁrms which

stand out because of their distinctive origins. The ﬁrst group of ﬁrms are those closely
   3 China has long instituted a strict hu kou (household registration) system to regulate the mobility of

people across localities. A person is not entitled to social beneﬁts (e.g., schooling and housing subsidies) in
a locality if s/he does not have a hu kou in that locality.
   4 Section 5 will give a detailed description of ﬁrm entry in major industries in the Z-Park.




                                                      6
connected with universities and research institutions in the Zhongguancun area.5 These

research centers provide ample supply of new ideas and talents and hence nurture the birth

of start-ups. In addition, many universities are keen in setting up new venture incubators

within the campuses to encourage and help young graduates to try out their ideas and start

up their own business. Peking University and Tsinghua University have established many

university-aﬃliated high-tech ﬁrms, some of which are leading ﬁrms in the Z-Park, such as
Founder from Peking University and Tsinghua Unisplendour from Tsinghua University. A

signiﬁcant portion of CEOs of the well-known companies in the Z-Park are alumnus of the

universities located in Zhongguancun.6
   The second group of entrepreneurs are returnees from overseas. They hold overseas

master or Ph.D. degrees, mostly in engineering, and many of them have previously worked

in MNEs in foreign countries. When good opportunities arise in China, they come back to

China and start up their businesses. The exposure to the frontier of new technology, previous

working experience in MNEs, and familiarity with Chinese business environments provide

these returnees with unique advantages. The overseas background including ﬂuent English

and understanding of foreign business culture also helps those returnees take advantage of

cooperative relationship with MNEs in China.


2.3     MNEs and their Linkages with Domestic Entrepreneurship

MNEs have been a critical part of the high growth of the Z-Park. Our data show that up

to 2003, the shares of MNEs in sales, employment and R&D employment are 40%, 20%,

and 19%, respectively, as we will explain in more detail in Table 3. Many multinational
giants, such as Microsoft, IBM, Motorola, Nokia, and LG, are the residents of the Z-Park.

More importantly, the Z-Park has become a cluster of MNEs’ R&D centers. By the end of
   5 Our data show that the share of ﬁrms aﬃliated to universities or research institutions in the Z-Park

peaked (18 percent) in 2000 in terms of the number of ﬁrms and declined to less than 5 percent in 2003 due
to the large-scale privatization of these publicly-owned ﬁrms.
   6 Research institutions also support their researchers to commercialize research outputs by providing

start-up ﬁnancing. An early legendary example in this regard is the establishment of Legend (the former
incarnation of Lenovo) in 1984. The Chinese Academy of Sciences invested 300 thousand yuan (or about
40 thousand US dollars) as the seed money and became the owner of the company. The founding CEO,
Chuanzhi Liu, was then a researcher at the CAS, and many of his colleagues at that time came from the
CAS.




                                                    7
2005, 43 corporations out of the top 500 in the world have located their R&D centers in

the Z-Park. The ﬁrst MNE which sets up an R&D center in the Z-Park was IBM in 1995,

followed by Microsoft, Bell Labs, Fujitsu, Intel, Motorola, and Oracle, among many others.

In general, those MNEs are technologically more advanced than domestic ﬁrms: Using the

same dataset as in this paper, Todo, Zhang, and Zhou (2006) ﬁnd that the total factor

productivity (TFP) of MNEs is about 40 percent higher than the TFP of domestic ﬁrms on
average.

   The presence of MNEs in the Z-Park and especially their R&D centers has profoundly

changed the landscape of the Chinese IT industry as well as business opportunities in the

Z-Park. The spike in the entry of domestic ﬁrms since late 1990s coincided with the signif-

icant presence of MNEs in the Z-Park and their decision to build R&D centers. But was

it just a coincidence? Our ﬁeld interviews with managers of several domestic ﬁrms and

MNEs collected a number of interesting cases pointing to the potential mechanisms through

which MNEs improve the knowledge level of domestic engineers and thus promote domestic

entrepreneurship. Such mechanisms include learning by doing in MNEs’ R&D units, R&D

cooperation between MNEs and domestic ﬁrms and universities, and outsourcing from MNEs

to domestic ﬁrms.

   A notable example of local engineers’ learning by doing in MNEs and their subsequent

spin-oﬀs from the MNEs is the start-up of TechFaith, a cell-phone software company. The
CEO of TechFaith, Defu Dong, had formally been a sales manager of Motorola in China.

Several years of close contact with suppliers and clients made him familiar with the whole

process of cell phone production and marketing, and especially China’s dynamic market. In

the late 1990s, many MNEs started to enter China’s cell phone industry and set up their

R&D centers in the Z-Park, which triggered ﬁerce competition in China’s market. While

the whole industry suﬀered from proﬁt erosion during 1999-2001, Dong realized that a good

business opportunity emerged in the software design of cell phones which was typically

outsourced by MNEs. Dong jumped at this golden opportunity and quit from Motorola in

2002, together with a dozen of designers and engineers who were his colleagues in Motorola

and had experiences in its R&D unit. He set up his own company TechFaith in the Z-Park


                                            8
which specialized in software design and development for cell phones. The later success

proved that Dong’s judgment was right: the company’s sales and proﬁts grew by over 100-

200% in the ﬁrst 3 years. The promising prospect attracted several prominent venture

capitalists to pour further investment in the company. Remarkably, TechFaith succeeded in

going public in the NASDAQ in 2005. In May 2006, it signed an R&D alliance agreement

with Microsoft which promised to cooperate in the R&D of mobile entertainment based on
Windows Mobile and Windows Media technologies.

   The growth of Ultrapower Software provides an example of knowledge improvement of

local engineers through R&D cooperation with and outsourcing from MNEs. Ultrapower

Software is one of numerous start-up companies established in the Z-Park in 2001 when

China’s IT industry grew in leaps and bounds and many MNEs rushed in to compete for

the big Chinese IT market. It specializes in business service management (BSM), provision

of management schemes using IT solutions and services, in industries ranging from telecom-

munication and ﬁnance to government services. Despite its short history, Ultrapower has

become the largest in the BSM industry in China, with a market share of 15 percent. Ul-

trapower’s unique advantage comes from its great R&D team in China, and especially its

sustained strong partnership in R&D and outsourcing relationships with multinational in-

dustrial leaders, such as BMC Software, CA, Hewlett Packard, and IBM. Such relations in

R&D with those industrial innovators lay an important platform for Ultrapower’s continuing
product innovation and improvements in service quality.

   TechFaith and Ultrapower are not alone in making use of R&D linkages with MNEs to

outperform competitors in the market. Smartdot, which was originated from the new ven-

ture incubator of Tsinghua University in 1998, is a leading provider of solutions and services

in the areas of enterprise oﬃce automation, information management, and e-government

projects in China. These solutions and services are mainly built on IBM advanced soft-

ware platforms. As the Preferred Lotus Partner in China and the winner of the Beacon

Award from IBM in 2005 and 2006, Smartdot has been engaged in a long-term strategic

cooperation with IBM. Since 2004, the IBM Innovation Center has sent several technical

consultants on-site to provide hands-on training, on-site enablement and troubleshooting


                                              9
support on diﬀerent applications of IBM software. This constant and comprehensive sup-

port has substantially improved Smartdot’s R&D strength and extended its core competitive

capacity.

    Those relations between MNEs and domestic engineers and ﬁrms above are conﬁrmed

by the interview with a manager of an MNE in the Z-Park. The manager told that local

engineers of the MNE generally start with a relatively low level of knowledge, learn advanced
knowledge of the MNE through learning by doing in its laboratory, and tend to leave the

ﬁrm after three years of experiences either moving to another MNE or starting up a new

ﬁrm. The manager also informed us that the MNE often engaged in R&D cooperation with

domestic ﬁrms and universities, since domestic institutions are more familiar with local

conditions such as consumers’ needs and the government’s regulations.

    These cases from the domestic and multinational ﬁrms in the Z-Park suggest that the

relation with MNEs, particularly their R&D activities, can beneﬁt domestic ﬁrms and engi-

neers through knowledge diﬀusion. Since local engineers who achieve a high level of knowl-

edge are likely to start up their own ﬁrms, MNEs’ R&D activities may promote domestic

entrepreneurship. Below, we use industry-level panel data for quantitative analysis of this

hypothesis.



3     Empirical Hypotheses

The previous section suggests a knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis on the relation between

MNEs and domestic entrepreneurship, whereas the existing literature has suggested some

other hypotheses about how the presence of incumbent ﬁrms aﬀects entry of new ﬁrms.

In this section, we discuss these hypotheses and compare their predictions on the eﬀect of

MNEs on entry of domestic ﬁrms. We will also examine the prediction of each hypothesis

on the eﬀect of incumbent MNEs on R&D activities of domestic entrants and entry and

R&D of new MNEs, since by so doing, we can ﬁnd which hypothesis ﬁts the actual data

with greater precision.




                                             10
3.1    Knowledge-Diﬀusion Eﬀect

One possible reason why MNEs stimulate entry of domestic ﬁrms is knowledge diﬀusion from

incumbent MNEs, technology leaders. Such diﬀusion of knowledge improves knowledge of

potential indigenous entrepreneurs to a level suﬃciently high to start up a ﬁrm. As our case

studies in Section 2 have shown, knowledge of MNEs diﬀuses to domestic entrepreneurs
through several channels, most notably through learning by doing in MNEs’ units, inter-

ﬁrm R&D cooperation, and technical assistance associated with R&D outsourcing. These

observations suggest that MNEs’ R&D activities in particular contribute to knowledge diﬀu-

sion, while MNEs’ production activities may not have such a diﬀusion eﬀect after controlling

for the size of MNEs’ R&D activities.

   Therefore, the number of entries of domestic ﬁrms should increase in the size of incum-

bent MNEs’ R&D activities in the same industry, while it is not aﬀected by the size of

MNEs’ production activities. In addition, since MNEs’ R&D enhances the knowledge level

of domestic entrants through knowledge diﬀusion, the size of R&D activities of new domestic

ﬁrms upon entry should also increase in the size of R&D of incumbent MNEs.

   By contrast, since potential entrants of MNEs are likely to be as technologically advanced

as incumbent MNEs, their beneﬁts from incumbent MNEs due to knowledge diﬀusion are

not as large as domestic ﬁrms’ beneﬁts. Consequently, incumbent MNEs’ R&D activities
should not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on entry of MNEs or their R&D activities upon entry.

   In addition, the hypothesis that knowledge diﬀuses from leaders to followers implies that

incumbent domestic ﬁrms’ R&D should have no eﬀect on entry of either domestic ﬁrms or

MNEs, nor on their R&D activities upon entry.

   These predictions from the knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis are summarized in rows 1-3

in Table 1, as predictions from the alternative hypotheses presented below are shown in

lower rows.


3.2    Agglomeration Eﬀect

The standard theory of agglomeration of ﬁrms claims that ﬁrms want to cluster together

to take advantage of potential positive externalities they generate for each other (Marshall,


                                             11
1890; Krugman, 1991; Ellison and Glaeser, 1997). For example, an eﬀective labor market

for skilled labor or some critical inputs is more likely to form and function well when there

are a large number of ﬁrms in the cluster.

   Unlike the knowledge-diﬀusion eﬀect that works unilaterally from technologically supe-

rior ﬁrms to inferior ﬁrms, this agglomeration eﬀect emphasizes mutual forces driving ﬁrms

to cluster together. Therefore, the agglomeration eﬀect predicts that the size of production
activities of incumbent ﬁrms, regardless of whether domestic or multinational, should be

positively correlated with the degree of entry of both domestic and multinational ﬁrms.

Furthermore, when there are positive externalities among ﬁrms in the same industry in the

area of R&D through, for example, creating an eﬀective labor market for scientists and en-

gineers, then R&D activities of new ﬁrms should expand when R&D of incumbent domestic

or multinational ﬁrms is large in size.


3.3    Crowding-out Eﬀect

MNEs may not be benign to local entrepreneurship. With their technological and ﬁnancial

advantages, MNEs may put much competitive pressure on domestic ﬁrms producing similar

products, thus crowding out domestic investment (Backer and Sleuwaegen, 2003). This

crowding-out eﬀect suggests that entry of domestic ﬁrms should be negatively aﬀected by the

size of incumbent MNEs, regardless of whether the size of their R&D or non-R&D activities.

Incumbent domestic ﬁrms may also have the crowding-out eﬀect on entry of domestic ﬁrms,

but their eﬀect is likely to be smaller than that of MNEs because domestic ﬁrms do not have

technological advantages as MNEs do. The crowding-out eﬀect does not apply equally to
potential multinational entrants, as they are likely to be similarly competitive as incumbent

MNEs. Thus, entry and R&D of new MNEs should be little aﬀected by the incumbent

MNEs or domestic ﬁrms.


3.4    Preemption Eﬀect

Aghion, Blundell, Griﬃth, Howitt, and Prantl (2004) theoretically and empirically show

that in technologically advanced industries incumbent ﬁrms engage in innovation to a large


                                             12
extent to preempt entry of new ﬁrms. In the case of our analysis, by the Z-Park’s high-

tech requirements, most industries can be considered technologically advanced.7 Thus,

the preemption eﬀect implies that the size of incumbent MNEs’ R&D activities should be

negatively correlated with the extent of entry of domestic ﬁrms. Incumbent domestic ﬁrms

should also have the preemption motive, but since they are not as technologically advanced

as MNEs are, their eﬀect on entry of domestic ﬁrms should be negative but weak. The
preemption hypothesis does not predict any impact of R&D of incumbent ﬁrms on R&D of

new ﬁrms and thus we expect the impact to be ambiguous.

    The preemption eﬀect should also apply to potential multinational entrants. Thus,

according to this hypothesis, entry and R&D activities of new MNEs are aﬀected by R&D

of incumbent MNEs and domestic ﬁrms in the same way as those of new domestic ﬁrms are

aﬀected.


3.5     Demand-Creation Eﬀect

Another important channel through which MNEs can stimulate local entrepreneurship is

creation of demand for local intermediary products and services. Our case studies in fact

indicate that domestic ﬁrms often undertake outsourcing from MNEs. Note, however, that

our case studies also suggest that outsourcing is often associated with technical assistance

and hence leads to knowledge diﬀusion. Since the eﬀect through knowledge diﬀusion has

already been considered, here we distinguish between the pure demand-creation eﬀect of

outsourcing and its knowledge-diﬀusion eﬀect.

    When MNEs create demand for domestic ﬁrms’ products and services, entry of domestic
ﬁrms should be expanded in the presence of incumbent MNEs, represented by the size of

their production activities. If MNEs outsource their R&D activities in addition to pro-

duction activities, we would expect the same impact of MNEs’ production activities on

R&D activities of new domestic ﬁrms upon entry. However, the size of incumbent MNEs’

R&D activities should not have any eﬀect on entry and R&D of new domestic ﬁrms, after

controlling for the size of production activities of incumbent MNEs.
   7 Table 2 will later show that the information and communication industries are the leading industries in

the Z-Park in terms of sales, employment and the number of ﬁrms.


                                                    13
    In contrast to incumbent MNEs, incumbent domestic ﬁrms do not necessarily provide

demand to domestic entrants but can be even competitors to them. Thus, the demand

creation eﬀect does not have deﬁnite predictions regarding the eﬀect of incumbent domestic

ﬁrms on entry of domestic ﬁrms. Similarly, the eﬀect of incumbent MNEs on entry and

R&D activities of new MNEs is theoretically ambiguous.



4     Empirical Methodology

4.1    Econometric Speciﬁcation

To test our hypotheses, we employ the following estimation equation:

            Eit   = β1 M N Ei,t−1 + β2 R&D domi,t−1 + β3 Y domi,t−1 + β4 gYi,t−1

                     +β5 Y meani,t−1 + αi + νt + εit ,                                      (1)

where the deﬁnitions of the variables are as follows (all regressors except for gY are expressed

in logs):

1. The dependent variable Eit represents the size of entry of domestic ﬁrms to industry
i in year t. We aggregate ﬁrm-level data to 3-digit industry level data to construct the

following three alternative measures of entry at the ﬁrm level. First, Eit is represented by

the log of the number of gross entries of new domestic ﬁrms that did not exist anywhere

in previous years, which we will simply call new domestic ﬁrms. By using this measure

of domestic ﬁrms’ entry, we can examine whether the presence of MNEs stimulates local

entrepreneurship. Second, we employ the log of the number of gross entries of ﬁrms to the

Z-Park that have existed elsewhere in China, which we will call existing ﬁrms. By using this

measure, we can examine whether the presence of MNEs promotes relocation of domestic

ﬁrms to the Z-Park. Third, we also use the number of net entries of domestic ﬁrms, i.e., the

number of gross entries of both new and existing domestic ﬁrms less the number of exits

of domestic ﬁrms. The use of this measure enables us to investigate the overall impact of

MNEs on clustering of domestic ﬁrms in the Z-Park.

2. M N Ei,t−1 represents the presence of MNEs in the previous year. We use one or both of

                                              14
the two measures in the regressions: non-R&D and R&D employment of MNEs, respectively

denoted by L M N E and R&D M N E.8 All the regressors are ﬁrst-lagged, since we assume

that the entry decision is determined based on information in the previous year.

3. R&D domi,t−1 and Y domi,t−1 are R&D employment and sales of domestic ﬁrms of

industry i in year t − 1, respectively.

4. gYi,t−1 and Y meani,t−1 are the growth rate of total sales and the mean of ﬁrm-level
sales of industry i in year t − 1, respectively. These variable are included in the regressions

because following Görg and Strobl (2002), we need to control for industry characteristics

that may be related to the level of expected post-entry proﬁts and the level of barriers to

entry.9

5. αi , νt , and εit are industry-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects, the year-speciﬁc eﬀects, and the error

term, respectively.

    Besides entry of domestic ﬁrms, we also estimate equation (1) using either R&D em-

ployment of domestic ﬁrms upon entry, the number of gross entries of new MNEs, or R&D

employment of new MNEs upon entry as the dependent variable. The results from these 4

types of regression will inform us which hypothesis is supported by our data.


4.2       Estimation Method

There are two major econometric issues when estimating equation (1): estimation biases

due to the endogeneity of regressors and unobservable industry-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects. For

example, when growing industries attract more MNEs than stagnating industries, the reverse
causality leads to endogeneity of the MNE variables. In addition, policies in the Z-Park may

encourage entries of domestic ﬁrms to some particular industries and expand the presence
    8 R&D expenditure is commonly used in the literature as a measure for R&D activities. Our dataset does

not contain information on R&D expenditure until 2001. The use of R&D employment as a measure of R&D
can substantially increase the sample size. Moreover, our alternative estimation using R&D expenditure
yields qualitatively similar results.
    9 Another variable that may represent the level of entry barriers and is used in Görg and Strobl (2002)

is the mean of ﬁrm ages. Although we used this variable in our regression, we found that its eﬀect was
insigniﬁcant in all speciﬁcations, probably because ﬁrms in the Z-Park are mostly young so that the mean
age of ﬁrms does not reﬂect entry barriers as it often does in national-wide datasets. Therefore, we do not
use this variable in this study.




                                                    15
of MNEs in the same industries. The lack of information on such policies in our dataset

may lead to endogeneity due to omitted variables. Furthermore, the extent of entry to

each industry may be determined by time-invariant characteristics of the industry. Thus,

ordinary least squares (OLS) estimations without controlling for such industry-speciﬁc ﬁxed

eﬀects are, again, likely to be biased.

   To correct for these potential biases due to endogeneity and ﬁxed eﬀects, we employ
the system generalized method of moments (GMM) estimation developed by Blundell and

Bond (1998). In the system GMM estimation, we apply GMM estimation to the system of

equation (1) and its ﬁrst-diﬀerence in which the industry-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects are eliminated,

using the lagged ﬁrst-diﬀerenced regressors as instruments for equation (1) and the lagged

regressors as instruments for the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced equation. More speciﬁcally, instruments

used for the regressors in the level equation for year t are ∆zi,t−1 ≡ zi,t−1 − zi,t−2 where
z denotes endogenous regressors, whereas instruments in the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced equation are

zi,t−2 .10 The lagged regressors can be used as instruments, since they are predetermined and

thus should not be correlated with the contemporaneous error term. The major advantage of

the system GMM estimation, compared with its predecessor, the diﬀerence GMM developed

by Arellano and Bond (1991), is that in the latter, instruments are weak if regressors have

near unit root properties, whereas this problem can be alleviated in the former. We apply the

two-step procedure to the system GMM estimation to obtain larger eﬃciency. In addition,
we use Windmeijer’s (2005) methodology to obtain robust standard errors. The estimator

thus obtained is consistent even in the presence of heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation

and corrects for ﬁnite sample biases found in the two-step estimations.

  10 We restrict the number of lags so that the number of instruments is not too large compared with the

number of observations. Roodman (2007) argues that Hansen J tests for overidentifying restrictions are
weak when there are too many instruments in the system GMM estimations.




                                                  16
5     Data

5.1     Description of the Dataset and Variables

Firms in the Z-Park must ﬁle with the Administrative Commission of the Z-Park an an-

nual report containing balance sheets as well as information on their management, human

resources, and R&D activities. The ﬁrm-level annual data for the period 1998–2003 are

aggregated at the industry level and used in this study. An advantage of our dataset is

that since every ﬁrm in the Z-Park must ﬁle an annual report, entries and exits of ﬁrms

can be identiﬁed with precision. Industries are categorized according to the Industrial Clas-

siﬁcation Codes for National Economic Activities of China at the 3-digit level. To avoid

biases from including negligibly small industries, we restrict our sample to 54 3-digit indus-

tries in which the number of ﬁrms exceeds ﬁve in each year during the period 1998–2003.
Thus, we have 324 year-industry observations in total over the 6-year period. Since we use

twice lagged variables as instruments in our econometric estimations, the eﬀective number

of observations is reduced to 216 during the period 2000–2003.

    An entry of a ﬁrm is identiﬁed when the ﬁrm’s identiﬁcation number ﬁrst appears in the

dataset. We can thus obtain the number of gross entries into each industry in each year.

The number of net entries in an industry is deﬁned as the number of gross entries less the

number of exits in the industry. Domestic ﬁrms are deﬁned as those with zero foreign share

in capital. Among entries of domestic ﬁrms, we distinguish between entries of new and

existing domestic ﬁrms by deﬁning new ﬁrms as ﬁrms whose reported year of establishment

is equal to the year of entry and existing ﬁrms as other ﬁrms. We deﬁne MNEs as ﬁrms

with a foreign share in capital of 20 percent or more.11
    MNEs’ R&D employment in an industry, R&D M N E, is the log of the sum of em-

ployment in R&D activities of all MNEs in the industry.12 Similarly, MNEs’ non-R&D
employment, L M N E, is the log of the sum of total employment of MNEs less their R&D
  11 This deﬁnition of MNEs, combined with the deﬁnition of domestic ﬁrms above, implies that ﬁrms with

a foreign share between 0 and 20 percent are not classiﬁed as either domestic ﬁrms or MNEs. In an earlier
version of the paper, we deﬁned MNEs as ﬁrms with any positive share of foreign capital and obtained very
similar results.
  12 When we deﬁne R&D M N E as the log of the weighted sum of employment in R&D activities of all

MNEs in the industry, using the ﬁrm-level foreign share in capital as weights, we obtain similar results.



                                                   17
employment. The industry’s sales of domestic ﬁrms, S dom, are the log of the sum of sales

of all domestic ﬁrms. R&D employment of domestic ﬁrms, R&D dom, is deﬁned in the

same way. gS and S mean are the growth rate of total sales and the log of the average

sales of all ﬁrms in the industry, respectively. Note that we add one when we take logs of

variables, if the minimum of these variables is zero.


5.2    Descriptive Statistics

The extent of ﬁrm entry to the Z-Park by year is presented in the upper panel of Table 2.

Clearly, the number of ﬁrms in the Z-Park is rapidly increasing over time from 1,957 in 1998

to 8,487 in 2003. This increase largely comes from a large amount of entry of domestic ﬁrms,
in particular entry of new domestic ﬁrms, which takes place in an accelerating pace over

the years (except for a slower pace in 2003). For example, the number of gross entries of

new domestic ﬁrms increases from 203 in 1998 to 1,540 in 2003. The lower panel of Table 2

reports the extent of ﬁrm entry by 2-digit industry. The computer software industry has the

largest number of ﬁrms, followed by the communication and computing equipment industry

and the computing services industry. Naturally, these industries also see the largest amounts

of entry over the years.

   Table 3 shows total sales, total employment, employment in R&D activities, and the

share of MNEs in each of the three variables by year and by industry. The upper panel

shows that the share of MNEs in each of the three variables has an overall increasing trend,

with large jumps in 2000 and 2002. MNEs’ share in sales is 40 percent averaged over the

sample years, whereas their share in employment is 20 percent. This suggests that labor
productivity of MNEs is higher on average than that of domestic ﬁrms. MNEs’ share in R&D

employment is 19 percent averaged over the sample years, a ﬁgure similar to MNEs’ share in

total employment. From the lower panel of Table 3, we can see that the IT industries, such

as the communication and computing equipment, the computing services, and the computer

software industries, are dominant in the Z-Park in terms of sales and employment. Note that

these industries are also among those with the largest foreign shares. For example, MNEs

account for 42 percent of sales in the communication and computing equipment industry.


                                             18
   The upper panel of Table 4 shows the mean of sales, overall employment, and employment

in R&D for each of ﬁve types of ﬁrm: incumbent domestic ﬁrms, new domestic ﬁrms entering

to the Z-Park, existing domestic ﬁrms newly entering to the Z-Park, incumbent MNEs, and

newly entering MNEs. Clearly, new domestic ﬁrms are on average the smallest in sales,

employment, and R&D activities, and the diﬀerence between incumbent domestic ﬁrms

and existing domestic ﬁrms newly entering to the Z-Park is quite small. These observations
suggest that the Z-Park hosts local entrepreneurs starting with a small venture ﬁrm, whereas

established large ﬁrms in other areas of China are also attracted to the Z-Park. Incumbent

MNEs are signiﬁcantly larger than any other type of ﬁrm in all three dimensions. New

MNEs are substantially smaller than incumbent MNEs, but are larger in sales and R&D

than any type of domestic ﬁrm. In particular, both incumbent and new MNEs have much

higher sales-employment ratios than domestic ﬁrms, consistent with our assumption that

MNEs are technologically superior and more eﬃcient.

   The lower panel of Table 4 presents changes from 1998 to 2003. Notably, the number

of ﬁrms and the average sales increased from 1998 to 2003 for any type of ﬁrm, while the

average level of employment and R&D employment substantially decreases in the same

period for any type of domestic ﬁrm. This decrease in the ﬁrm-level employment can be

explained by the massive entry of smaller ﬁrms to the Z-Park.

   Finally, Table 5 exhibits summary statistics of the dependent and independent variables
used in the regressions below. This table indicates that the minimum of some variables, such

as the log of the number of gross entries of new domestic ﬁrms and the log of MNEs’ non-

R&D and R&D employment, is zero. In addition, the standard deviation of these variables

is often large, suggesting that there may be some outliers. If the data include many zeros

and outliers, our estimation results may be biased. Therefore, we check if this is the case

by creating scatter diagrams which present relation between the log of gross entries of new

domestic ﬁrms, the major dependent variable, and the log of MNEs’ non-R&D and R&D

employment, the key independent variables (Figure 1). These diagrams indicate that the

log of the number of gross entries of new domestic ﬁrms is zero for only six observations

out of 216 observations during the period 2000–2003. Moreover, we do not ﬁnd any clear


                                            19
outliers in Figure 1. Therefore, we conclude that it is not necessary to correct for possible

biases due to many zeros and outliers.



6     Estimation Results

6.1    The Impact of MNEs on Entry of Domestic Firms

We start with the estimation of equation (1) using the log of the number of gross entries

of new domestic ﬁrms as the dependent variable and report the results from both the OLS

and the system GMM estimation in Table 6.
    Columns (1) and (2) use MNEs’ non-R&D employment as a proxy for the size of MNEs,

whereas columns (3) and (4) use MNEs’ R&D employment. Columns (5) and (6) use both

measures of MNEs. The p value of the Hansen J and the Arellano-Bond statistics shown

in the last two rows indicates that instruments are orthogonal to the error term and that

there is no autocorrelation in the error term in all GMM estimations. Therefore, we mostly

rely on the GMM results, while the OLS results are reported for reference.

    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 show that non-R&D employment of MNEs has a positive

and signiﬁcant impact on entry of new domestic ﬁrms, even after controlling for the possible

endogeneity problem through the system GMM estimation. Columns (3) and (4) indicate

that R&D employment of MNEs also has a positive and signiﬁcant impact, and the size

of the estimated coeﬃcient is larger for R&D employment than for non-R&D employment.

Moreover, when we use both measures of MNEs, we ﬁnd in columns (5) and (6) that the

eﬀect of non-R&D employment of MNEs turns to be insigniﬁcant, while the eﬀect of R&D
employment of MNEs remains positive and signiﬁcant.

    This evidence suggests that the positive eﬀect of non-R&D employment of MNEs found

in columns (1) and (2) may actually pick up the eﬀect of R&D employment of MNEs and

that non-R&D employment of MNEs may not have a signiﬁcant impact on the entry of

new domestic ﬁrms. These results are consistent with the knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis

that MNEs’ R&D activities create beneﬁts through knowledge linkage to local entrepreneurs

and thereby promote birth of domestic ﬁrms. In contrast, these results do not support the


                                             20
predictions of the agglomeration, crowding-out, preemption, or demand-creation hypothesis

summarized in Table 1.

   The impact of MNEs’ R&D on domestic entrepreneurship is quantitatively large. Using

the result in column (6) of Table 6 and the mean of the log of the number of gross entries

of new domestic ﬁrms and the log of MNEs’ R&D employment, 1.80 and 2.23, respectively,

presented in Table 5, we conclude that on average, MNEs’ R&D activities contribute to 33
percent of entries of domestic ﬁrms.13
   In contrast to MNEs’ R&D employment, R&D employment of domestic ﬁrms has no

signiﬁcant eﬀect on the entry of new domestic ﬁrms in all GMM estimations (columns

[2], [4], and [6] of Table 6), although it has a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect in all OLS

estimations (columns [1], [3], and [5]). The comparison between the GMM and OLS results

suggests that the positive correlation between R&D employment of domestic ﬁrms and

the number of entries of domestic ﬁrms in OLS does not reﬂect causality but is generated

by endogeneity of R&D employment of incumbent ﬁrms. This result implies that unlike

R&D activities of MNEs, R&D activities of domestic incumbent ﬁrms do not facilitate

entry of new domestic ﬁrms. Since domestic incumbents in the industry generally do not

embody so high technological advantage over potential entrants as incumbent MNEs do, this

evidence provides further support to our knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis that emphasizes

technological leadership as a primary source of knowledge diﬀusion.
   The coeﬃcient of other regressors, while not necessarily statistically signiﬁcant, mostly

shows the expected sign. Sales of domestic ﬁrms always have a positive and signiﬁcant

eﬀect, whereas the eﬀect of the growth rate of total sales is positive but often insigniﬁcant.

The mean of ﬁrm-level sales of the industry has a negative and signiﬁcant eﬀect, suggesting

that ﬁxed costs of starting a ﬁrm (or economies of scale in a certain range) may present

some entry barrier.
 13 exp(0.276   × 2.52 − 1.80) = 0.331.




                                             21
Alternative Measures of Firm Entry

So far we have focused on the gross entry of new ﬁrms, i.e., birth of new ﬁrms. To check the

robustness of the benchmark results, we employ two alternative measures of domestic entry.

First, existing ﬁrms in other areas of China also enter to the Z-Park in order to beneﬁt from

the cluster of high-tech ﬁrms. Thus, we now investigate whether the presence of MNEs or
their R&D activities facilitates the entry of existing ﬁrms to the Z-Park, using the log of

the number of gross entries of existing ﬁrms as the dependent variable for equation (1).

   Second, even when the presence of MNEs stimulates indigenous entrepreneurship, com-

petition in product and labor markets between MNEs and domestic ﬁrms may drive some

domestic ﬁrms out of the industry. Thus, to check the total eﬀect of MNEs on the growth

of indigenous industries, we employ the number of net entries of domestic ﬁrms. Since the

number of net entries of domestic ﬁrms is deﬁned as the number of gross entries of new and

existing ﬁrms less the number of exits, it can be negative. So the dependent variable is not

expressed in logs, unlike the case of gross entries.

   Columns (1)–(3) of Table 7 report the results from the system GMM regressions on gross

entries of existing ﬁrms, whereas columns (4)–(6) report those on net entries of domestic

ﬁrms. Results from the two alternative measures of entry are even more supportive to the

knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis than are the results on gross entries of new ﬁrms presented in
Table 6: Non-R&D employment of MNEs has no signiﬁcant impact in all the GMM results,

while the eﬀect of R&D employment of MNEs is positive and signiﬁcant. In addition,

R&D employment of domestic ﬁrms has no signiﬁcant impact. From these results, we can

conclude that the R&D activities of MNEs promote local entrepreneurship and contribute

to the growth of the Z-Park as a high-tech cluster.


6.2    The Impact of MNEs on R&D of Domestic Entrants

If knowledge diﬀusion drives the observed relationship between MNEs’ R&D activities and

local entrepreneurship, then the size of R&D activities of newly entering domestic ﬁrms

should be positively linked with the size of R&D activities of incumbent MNEs. To check

if this is the case, we further examine the eﬀect of MNEs’ R&D activities on R&D of both


                                              22
new domestic ﬁrms and existing ﬁrms newly entering to the Z-Park.

   The GMM results on new domestic ﬁrms reported in columns (1)-(3) of Table 8 indicate

that MNEs’ non-R&D activities do not have a robust impact on R&D activities of new

domestic ﬁrms, while MNEs’ R&D activities have a positive and robust impact. On the

other hand, incumbent domestic ﬁrms’ R&D activities do not have a statistically signiﬁcant

eﬀect on domestic entrants’ R&D activities. Columns (4)-(6) of Table 8 show similar results
for existing domestic ﬁrms entering to the Z-Park. In both cases, the impact of incumbent

MNEs’ R&D activities on domestic entrants’ R&D is quantitatively large: a 1-percent in-

crease in MNEs’ R&D employment leads to a 0.6-0.8 percent increase in R&D employment

of domestic ﬁrms upon entry into the Z-Park.

   Overall, these results provide further evidence supporting the knowledge-diﬀusion hy-

pothesis: knowledge of incumbent MNEs diﬀuses to indigenous entrepreneurs through

MNEs’ R&D activities, and such improvement in knowledge enlarges the size of R&D ac-

tivities of new entrants. In addition, the results are not consistent with the predictions of

the alternative hypotheses shown in Table 1.


6.3    The Impact of Incumbent MNEs on New MNEs

If the positive eﬀect of MNEs’ R&D on domestic entrepreneurship and clustering is induced

by knowledge diﬀusion from technologically leading MNEs to local followers, then a natural

implication is that R&D activities of incumbent MNEs will not have the same eﬀect on

entry of new MNEs which are also technologically advanced. To test this prediction, we

estimate equation (1), using the number of gross entries of MNEs or R&D employment of
new MNEs as the dependent variable. The GMM results for these estimations are reported

in Table 9.

   Columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 show that either MNEs’ non-R&D employment or MNEs’

R&D employment has an insigniﬁcant eﬀect on the entry of MNEs in any speciﬁcation. It

is worth pointing out that compared to the eﬀect of MNEs’ R&D employment on entry of

domestic ﬁrms identiﬁed in column (6) of Table 6, its eﬀect on gross entries of MNEs shown

in column (3) is not only statistically insigniﬁcant, but also very small in magnitude (0.067


                                             23
versus 0.276). Columns (4)–(6) of Table 9 investigate the eﬀect of MNEs’ R&D employment

on R&D activities of entering MNEs and show a similar pattern: either non-R&D or R&D

employment of incumbent MNEs has no signiﬁcant impact on the size of R&D activities of

new MNEs.

   These results clearly show that incumbent MNEs’ impacts on entry and R&D of new

MNEs are much weaker than their impacts on entry and R&D of new domestic ﬁrms.
This stark contrast suggests that the strength of knowledge diﬀusion from MNEs through

their R&D activities depends on the technological gap between leaders and followers, pro-

viding further support for our knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis and rejecting the alternative

hypotheses.


6.4    Summary and Discussion

The results above have established strong evidence for the positive role of MNEs’ R&D ac-

tivities in promoting local entrepreneurship, clustering, and R&D upon entry. We interpret

this evidence as consistent with the knowledge-diﬀusion hypothesis which emphasizes posi-

tive impacts of knowledge diﬀusion from technologically leading MNEs to local followers on

local entrepreneurship. Our results conﬁrm the conclusion of the existing studies of Görg

and Strobl (2002) and Backer and Sleuwaegen (2003) and in addition, reveal the importance

of MNEs’ R&D activities in particular in knowledge diﬀusion.

   We also ﬁnd that every alternative hypothesis explained in Section 3 and summarized in

Table 1 is inconsistent with our empirical ﬁndings. First, the agglomeration eﬀect predicts

that the size of MNEs’ non-R&D activities has a positive impact on entry of domestic and
multinational ﬁrms. However, we do not ﬁnd such evidence. Second, the crowding-out

eﬀect provides an obviously wrong prediction, since the presence of MNEs does not have

any negative impact on entry of domestic ﬁrms. Third, the prediction of the preemption

hypothesis that R&D activities of incumbent ﬁrms have a negative impact on R&D of new

entrants is also inconsistent with our results. Finally, the demand-creation eﬀect suggests

that MNEs’ production activities enhance demand for products and services of domestic

ﬁrms, for example, through outsourcing, and thus stimulate indigenous entrepreneurship.


                                            24
This eﬀect is positive and signiﬁcant in some speciﬁcations (columns [1] and [2] of Table

6) but insigniﬁcant in others (columns [5] and [6] of Table 6 and columns [1], [3], [4], and

[6] of Table 7). Thus, we conclude that the evidence supporting the demand-creation eﬀect

is weak. In summary, competing with each of the alternative hypotheses, the knowledge-

diﬀusion hypothesis is the clear winner.

    Two cautious notes are in order here. First, our analysis is based on data from the Z-Park.
As the existing literature has shown, those alternative hypotheses that are not supported in

this paper may be supported by evidence in other cases, since whether a particular eﬀect is

relevant and important may be case-dependent. Second, we cannot rule out the possibility

that some combination of the alternative eﬀects are simultaneously operating in the Z-Park.



7     Conclusion

Using a unique ﬁrm-level dataset from the Zhongguancun Science Park in Beijing, we inves-

tigate how the presence of MNEs aﬀects entry of new ﬁrms and their R&D activities upon

entry. We ﬁnd that MNEs’ R&D activities in an industry stimulate entry of domestic ﬁrms

into the same industry and enhance R&D activities of newly entering domestic ﬁrms, while

MNEs’ production activities do not have such eﬀect. In addition, the eﬀect of incumbent

MNEs’ R&D activities on entry of MNEs is insigniﬁcant, whereas the R&D activities of
incumbent domestic ﬁrms have little eﬀect on entry of either domestic ﬁrms or MNEs.

    Since MNEs are substantially more eﬃcient and technologically more advanced than

domestic ﬁrms, our ﬁndings provide strong evidence supporting the knowledge-diﬀusion hy-

pothesis that diﬀusion of MNEs’ advanced knowledge to potential indigenous entrepreneurs

through MNEs’ R&D activities stimulates entry of domestic ﬁrms. Our interviews with

managers of domestic ﬁrms and MNEs in the Z-Park indicate speciﬁc channels of diﬀusion,

such as learning by doing in MNEs’ R&D units, inter-ﬁrm R&D cooperation, and technical

assistance associated with outsourcing from MNEs. By contrast, alternative hypotheses

studied in the existing literature, such as the agglomeration eﬀect, the crowding-out eﬀect,

the preemption eﬀect, and the demand-creation eﬀect, are not supported by our empirical



                                              25
ﬁndings.

   Finally, although our regression analysis identiﬁes an important link between MNEs’

R&D activities and local entrepreneurship, and our ﬁeld interviews point out speciﬁc mech-

anisms through which the knowledge-diﬀusion eﬀect takes place, as our current dataset does

not allow us to examine which mechanisms are relatively more important and eﬀective than

others. Examination of this issue will deepen our understanding of how technology and
managerial knowledge diﬀuses from industry leaders to followers, and will help design more

speciﬁc policies to facilitate such diﬀusion. This awaits better data and further research.




                                             26
References

Aghion, Philippe, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griﬃth, Peter Howitt, and Susanne Prantl,

  2004, Entry and productivity growth: Evidence from microlevel panel data, Journal of

  European Economic Association 2, 265–376.

Aitken, Brian J., and Ann E. Harrison, 1999, Do domestic ﬁrms beneﬁt from direct foreign

  investment? Evidence from Venezuela, American Economic Review 89, 605–618.

Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, Some tests of speciﬁcation for panel data: Monte

  carlo evidence and an application to employment equations, Review of Economic Studies

  58, 277–297.

Arora, Ashish, V.S. Arunachalam, Jai Asundi, and Ronald Fernandes, 2001, The Indian

  software services industry, Research Policy 30, 1267–1287.

Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso Gambardella, 2004, The globalization of the software industry:
  Perspectives and opportunities for developed and developing countries, NBER Working

  Paper, No. 10538.

Backer, Koen De, and Leo Sleuwaegen, 2003, Does foreign direct investment crowd out

  domestic entrepreneurship?, Review of Industrial Organization 22, 67–84.

Beijing Bureau of Statistics, 2002, Firm innovations in the zhongguancun science park: An

  international comparison, http://www.stats.gov.cn.

Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond, 1998, Initial conditions and moment restrictions in

  dynamic panel data models, Journal of Econometrics 87, 115–143.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser, 1997, Geographic concentration in U.S. manufac-

  turing industries: A dartboard approach, Journal of Political Economy 105, 889–927.

Görg, Holger, and Eric Strobl, 2002, Multinational companies and indigenous development:
  An empirical analysis, European Economic Review 46, 1305–1322.




                                           27
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, 2004, Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity

  of domestic ﬁrms? In search of spillovers through backward linkages, American Economic

  Review 94, 605–627.

Kokko, Ari, 1994, Technology, market characteristics, and spillovers, Journal of Development

  Economics 43, 279–293.

Krugman, Paul, 1991, Increasing returns and economic geography, Journal of Political Econ-

  omy 99, 483–499.

Marshall, Alfred, 1890, The Principles of Economics (Macmillan: London).

Roodman, David, 2007, How to do xtabond2: An introduction to ”diﬀerence” and ”system”

  GMM in Stata, Working Paper, No. 103, Center for Global Development.

Swenson, Deborah, 2007, Multinationals and the creation of chinese trade linkages, NBER

  Working Paper, No. 13271.

Todo, Yasuyuki, and Koji Miyamoto, 2006, Knowledge spillovers from foreign direct invest-

  ment and the role of R&D activities: Evidence from Indonesia, Economic Development

  and Cultural Change 55, 173–200.

Todo, Yasuyuki, Weiying Zhang, and Li-An Zhou, 2006, Intra-industry knowledge spillovers

  from foreign direct investment in R&D: Evidence from a Chinese science park, SSRN

  Working Paper, No. 938079.

Windmeijer, Frank, 2005, A ﬁnite sample correction for the variance of linear two-step GMM

  estimators, Journal of Econometrics 126, 25–51.




                                            28
Figure 1: Relation between Entries of Domestic Firms and the Presence of MNEs
                      8




                                                                                                                    8
Gross entries of domestic firms (in logs)




                                                                                              Gross entries of domestic firms (in logs)
                                      6




                                                                                                                                    6
                   4




                                                                                                                 4
 2




                                                                                               2
                      0




                                                                                                                    0




                                            0        2     4       6       8        10                                                    0      2      4       6       8        10
                                                Non−R&D Employment of MNEs (in logs)                                                          R&D Employment of MNEs (in logs)




                                                                                         29
                      Table 1: Comparison between Hypotheses

                                            Effectȱonȱentryȱofȱ         EffectȱonȱR&Dȱofȱ
 Hypothesisȱ     Causeȱofȱtheȱeffectȱ   Domesticȱ                   Domesticȱ
                                                          MNEsȱ                      MNEsȱ
                                         firmsȱ                      firmsȱ

                 MNEs’ȱproductionȱ         0ȱ                0ȱ        0ȱ              0ȱ

 Knowledgeȱ
  diffusionȱ
                    MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ             +ȱ                0ȱ        +ȱ ȱ            0ȱ

                  Domesticȱfirms’ȱ
                     R&Dȱ
                                           0ȱ                0ȱ        0ȱ              0ȱ

                 MNEs’ȱproductionȱ         +ȱ                +ȱ        0ȱ              0ȱ
Agglomerationȱ
                    MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ             0ȱ                0ȱ        +ȱ              +ȱ

                 MNEs’ȱproductionȱ         Ȭȱ                0ȱ        Ȭȱ              0ȱ
Crowdingȱoutȱ
                    MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ             Ȭȱ                0ȱ        Ȭȱ              0ȱ

                    MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ             Ȭȱ                Ȭȱ        0ȱ              0ȱ
 Preemptionȱ
                  Domesticȱfirms’ȱ         Ȭȱ                Ȭȱ
                     R&Dȱ
                                                                       0ȱ              0ȱ
                                         (weak)ȱ          (weak)ȱ

                 MNEs’ȱproductionȱ         +ȱ                0ȱ        +ȱ              0ȱ
  Demandȱ
  creationȱ
                    MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ             0ȱ                0ȱ        0ȱ              0ȱ




                                                30
                  Table 2: The Extent of Firm Entry by Year and by Industry

                                                                                         Numberȱofȱgrossȱ
                         ȱ                                 ȱ                 Numberȱ          entriesȱ ȱ
                                                                                                                Numberȱ
                                                               Numberȱ          ofȱ      ofȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ
                                                                                                                 ofȱnetȱ
                                                               ofȱfirmsȱ     domesticȱ
                                                                                         Newȱ      Existingȱ    entriesȱ
                         ȱ                                 ȱ                  firmsȱ
                                                                                         firmsȱ     firmsȱ

                       Yearȱ                               ȱ        ȱ           ȱ         ȱ            ȱ           ȱ
1998ȱ                                                  ȱ        1957ȱ          1584ȱ      203ȱ        159ȱ             Ȭ8ȱ
1999ȱ                                                  ȱ        2030ȱ          1652ȱ      302ȱ         38ȱ         68ȱ
2000ȱ                                                  ȱ        2903ȱ          2463ȱ      811ȱ        124ȱ        811ȱ
2001ȱ                                                  ȱ        3799ȱ          3280ȱ      935ȱ        177ȱ        817ȱ
2002ȱ                                                  ȱ        6828ȱ          5911ȱ     1803ȱ       1476ȱ       2631ȱ
2003ȱ                                                  ȱ        8487ȱ          7445ȱ     1540ȱ        545ȱ       1534ȱ
ȱ                                                      ȱ                 ȱ           ȱ         ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
Averageȱ                                               ȱ        4334ȱ          3723ȱ      932ȱ        420ȱ        976ȱ
ȱ                                                      ȱ                 ȱ           ȱ         ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
                 2Ȭdigitȱindustryȱ                  Code                 ȱ           ȱ         ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
Foodȱprocessingȱ                                      13ȱ            27ȱ         25ȱ          4ȱ           1ȱ          3ȱ
Foodȱproductsȱ                                        14ȱ            21ȱ         19ȱ          4ȱ           3ȱ          4ȱ
Petroleumȱrefineryȱ                                   25ȱ            14ȱ         14ȱ          3ȱ           1ȱ          3ȱ
Chemicalsȱ                                            26ȱ           154ȱ        140ȱ       28ȱ         16ȱ         31ȱ
Pharmaceuticalȱ                                       27ȱ           202ȱ        169ȱ       39ȱ         19ȱ         39ȱ
Plasticȱproductsȱ                                     30ȱ               7ȱ          5ȱ        1ȱ           1ȱ          2ȱ
NonȬmetallicȱmineralȱproductsȱ                        31ȱ            66ȱ         54ȱ       11ȱ             6ȱ          9ȱ
Metalȱproductsȱ                                       34ȱ            49ȱ         44ȱ       10ȱ             4ȱ          9ȱ
Machineryȱ                                            35ȱ           155ȱ        134ȱ       28ȱ             8ȱ      12ȱ
Generalȱequipmentȱ                                    36ȱ           315ȱ        276ȱ       62ȱ         33ȱ         67ȱ
Transportȱequipmentȱ                                  37ȱ            51ȱ         46ȱ       10ȱ             6ȱ      12ȱ
Electricalȱmachineryȱ                                 39ȱ           109ȱ         97ȱ       20ȱ         12ȱ         24ȱ
Communicationȱandȱcomputingȱequipmentȱ                40ȱ           696ȱ        548ȱ      117ȱ         56ȱ         94ȱ
Precisionȱandȱopticalȱinstrumentsȱ                    41ȱ           332ȱ        295ȱ       55ȱ         32ȱ         66ȱ
Computingȱservicesȱ                                   61ȱ           653ȱ        576ȱ      124ȱ         86ȱ        194ȱ
ComputerȱSoftwareȱ                                    62ȱ       1246ȱ          1054ȱ      365ȱ         93ȱ        306ȱ
Scientificȱservicesȱ                                  77ȱ           239ȱ        228ȱ       54ȱ         44ȱ        102ȱ

Note:ȱYearlyȱaveragesȱareȱreportedȱforȱfiguresȱforȱeachȱ2Ȭdigitȱindustry.ȱ ȱ




                                                               31
                    Table 3: The Extent of FDI Penetration by Year and by Industry

    ȱ                                                                    Salesȱ                 Employmentȱ             R&Dȱemploymentȱ

                                                            Amountȱ            Shareȱofȱ                  Shareȱofȱ                 Shareȱofȱ
                                                                                              Amountȱ                   Amountȱ
    ȱ                                                       (billionȱ           MNEsȱ                      MNEsȱ                     MNEsȱ
                                                                                            (thousand)                (thousand)
                                                             yuan)ȱ           (percent)ȱ                 (percent)ȱ                (percent)ȱ
                        Yearȱ                        ȱ               ȱ                  ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
1998ȱ                                                ȱ        18.7ȱ               10.8ȱ       102.5ȱ       10.8ȱ         24.6ȱ         8.8ȱ
1999ȱ                                                ȱ        52.2ȱ                6.2ȱ       114.9ȱ         8.6ȱ        19.5ȱ         9.9ȱ
2000ȱ                                                ȱ        95.4ȱ               32.2ȱ       166.2ȱ       17.0ȱ         28.8ȱ       21.7ȱ
2001ȱ                                                ȱ       129.6ȱ               25.1ȱ       202.5ȱ       15.6ȱ         43.8ȱ       17.2ȱ
2002ȱ                                                ȱ       183.6ȱ               55.1ȱ       283.7ȱ       26.0ȱ         59.6ȱ       24.1ȱ
2003ȱ                                                ȱ       219.3ȱ               49.9ȱ       347.5ȱ       23.8ȱ         67.8ȱ       21.7ȱ
ȱ                                                    ȱ           ȱ                  ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
Averageȱ                                             ȱ       116.5ȱ               39.9ȱ       202.9ȱ       19.5ȱ         40.7ȱ       19.3ȱ
ȱ                                                    ȱ           ȱ                  ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
                 2Ȭdigitȱindustryȱ                 Code          ȱ                  ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ
Foodȱprocessingȱ                                    13ȱ        0.6ȱ               12.3ȱ         1.6ȱ         5.5ȱ         0.1ȱ         4.4ȱ
Foodȱproductsȱ                                      14ȱ        0.2ȱ                1.5ȱ         0.8ȱ         3.3ȱ         0.1ȱ         2.6ȱ
Petroleumȱrefineryȱ                                 25ȱ        0.7ȱ                0.0ȱ         1.1ȱ         0.0ȱ         0.1ȱ         0.0ȱ
Chemicalsȱ                                          26ȱ        2.3ȱ               11.7ȱ         7.4ȱ         7.7ȱ         0.8ȱ         8.4ȱ
Pharmaceuticalȱ                                     27ȱ        3.7ȱ               12.8ȱ        12.3ȱ       14.2ȱ          1.3ȱ       13.0ȱ
Plasticȱproductsȱ                                   30ȱ        0.0ȱ               26.2ȱ         0.2ȱ       27.4ȱ          0.0ȱ       30.5ȱ
NonȬmetallicȱmineralȱproductsȱ                      31ȱ        1.6ȱ               10.3ȱ         5.4ȱ         9.5ȱ         0.4ȱ       10.3ȱ
Metalȱproductsȱ ȱ                                   34ȱ        0.4ȱ                9.6ȱ         2.5ȱ         9.1ȱ         0.2ȱ         7.0ȱ
Machineryȱ                                          35ȱ        1.6ȱ               20.4ȱ         7.2ȱ       12.2ȱ          1.1ȱ         8.6ȱ
Generalȱequipmentȱ                                  36ȱ        4.1ȱ               28.2ȱ        12.9ȱ         9.3ȱ         2.3ȱ         7.4ȱ
Transportȱequipmentȱ                                37ȱ        2.2ȱ               29.4ȱ         4.2ȱ         7.1ȱ         0.4ȱ         2.5ȱ
Electricalȱmachineryȱ                               39ȱ        2.5ȱ               23.8ȱ         7.7ȱ       10.8ȱ          0.9ȱ         4.9ȱ
Communicationȱandȱcomputingȱequipmentȱ              40ȱ       62.3ȱ               51.5ȱ        61.0ȱ       26.7ȱ          9.8ȱ       27.6ȱ
Precisionȱandȱopticalȱinstrumentsȱ                  41ȱ       11.2ȱ               30.5ȱ        15.1ȱ       22.8ȱ          2.4ȱ       18.2ȱ
Computingȱservicesȱ                                 61ȱ       10.8ȱ               33.8ȱ        18.0ȱ       18.7ȱ          4.2ȱ       16.8ȱ
ComputerȱSoftwareȱ                                  62ȱ       10.3ȱ               32.9ȱ        40.5ȱ       23.3ȱ         15.4ȱ       20.4ȱ
Scientificȱservicesȱ                                77ȱ        2.0ȱ               12.8ȱ         5.0ȱ       11.3ȱ          1.3ȱ       17.4ȱ

Note:ȱYearlyȱaveragesȱareȱreportedȱforȱfiguresȱforȱeachȱ2Ȭdigitȱindustry.ȱ ȱ




                                                                     32
                     Table 4: Characteristics of Firms in the Z-Park by Type

                               FirmȬlevelȱmeanȱoverȱtheȱperiodȱ1998Ȭ2003ȱ

                                Numberȱofȱfirms            Salesȱ ȱ                                    R&Dȱ
                 ȱ                                                            Employmentȱ
                                 (yearlyȱmean)ȱ       (millionȱyuan)ȱ                                Employmentȱ

Domesticȱfirmsȱ                          ȱ                     ȱ                       ȱ                      ȱ

ȱ Incumbentȱfirmsȱ                     2370ȱ                 20.7ȱ                   47.8ȱ                  10.1ȱ

ȱ Newȱfirmsȱ                           932ȱ                   5.6ȱ                   23.7ȱ                   6.1ȱ

ȱ Existingȱfirmsȱnewlyȱ
                                       420ȱ                  27.9ȱ                   56.7ȱ                   8.8ȱ
ȱ enteringȱtoȱtheȱParkȱ

MNEsȱ                                    ȱ                     ȱ                       ȱ                      ȱ

ȱ Incumbentȱfirmsȱ                     451ȱ                 100.1ȱ                   88.0ȱ                  16.1ȱ

ȱ Newȱfirmsȱ                           160ȱ                  36.1ȱ                   42.8ȱ                  10.4ȱ

Totalȱ                                 4334ȱ                 27.1ȱ                   47.5ȱ                   9.8ȱ



                              FirmȬlevelȱmeanȱinȱ1998ȱandȱinȱ2003ȱ(inȱitalic)ȱ

                                                          Salesȱ ȱ                                     R&Dȱ
             ȱ                Numberȱofȱfirms                                 Employmentȱ
                                                     (millionȱyuan)ȱ                                 Employmentȱ

             ȱ                 1998ȱ         2003ȱ   1998ȱ         2003ȱ     1998ȱ           2003ȱ   1998ȱ          2003ȱ

                                 ȱ             ȱ       ȱ               ȱ
Domesticȱfirmsȱ                                                                ȱ               ȱ       ȱ              ȱ

ȱ Incumbentȱfirmsȱ             1222ȱ         5360ȱ   10.2ȱ           18.2ȱ   45.2ȱ           41.7ȱ   12.1ȱ          8.2ȱ

ȱ Newȱfirmsȱ                    203ȱ         1540ȱ   1.6ȱ            4.0ȱ    37.9ȱ           17.1ȱ   9.3ȱ           4.4ȱ

ȱ Existingȱfirmsȱnewlyȱ
                                159ȱ         545ȱ    4.3ȱ            11.2ȱ   101.6ȱ          30.3ȱ   20.6ȱ          4.8ȱ
ȱ enteringȱtoȱtheȱParkȱ

MNEsȱ                            ȱ             ȱ       ȱ               ȱ       ȱ               ȱ       ȱ              ȱ

ȱ Incumbentȱfirmsȱ              312ȱ         842ȱ    16.2ȱ         116.9ȱ    80.1ȱ           90.6ȱ   17.2ȱ          15.8ȱ

ȱ Newȱfirmsȱ                    61ȱ          200ȱ    3.2ȱ            55.7ȱ   38.1ȱ           37.4ȱ   4.5ȱ           8.4ȱ

Totalȱ                         1957ȱ         8487ȱ   9.6ȱ            25.9ȱ   54.2ȱ           41.3ȱ   13.0ȱ          8.1ȱ




                                                      33
                          Table 5: Summary Statistics of the Key Variables

ȱ                     ȱ                                                          Meanȱ        S.D.ȱ        Min.ȱ         Max.ȱ


Dependentȱvariablesȱ                                                                ȱ            ȱ            ȱ             ȱ


    Logȱofȱtheȱnumberȱofȱgrossȱentriesȱofȱnewȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ                     1.80ȱ        1.23ȱ        0.00ȱ         6.62ȱ


    Logȱofȱtheȱnumberȱofȱgrossȱentriesȱofȱexistingȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ                1.16ȱ        1.12ȱ        0.00ȱ         5.71ȱ


    Numberȱofȱnetȱentriesȱ ȱ                                                     18.06ȱ       72.39ȱ   Ȭ111.00ȱ         732.00ȱ


    LogȱofȱtheȱnumberȱofȱgrossȱentriesȱofȱnewȱMNEsȱ                               0.66ȱ        0.88ȱ        0.00ȱ         4.74ȱ


    LogȱofȱR&Dȱemploymentȱofȱnewȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ                                  6.32ȱ        3.42ȱ        0.00ȱ        16.84ȱ

    LogȱofȱR&Dȱemploymentȱofȱexistingȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ ȱ
                                                                                  4.95ȱ        3.75ȱ        0.00ȱ        15.68ȱ
    newlyȱenteringȱtoȱtheȱParkȱ

    LogȱofȱR&DȱemploymentȱofȱnewȱMNEsȱ                                            3.47ȱ        3.82ȱ        0.00ȱ        14.93ȱ


Independentȱvariablesȱ                 ȱ                                     ȱ            ȱ            ȱ            ȱ


    L_MNEȱ            LogȱofȱMNEs’ȱnonȬR&Dȱemploymentȱ                            4.18ȱ        2.46ȱ        0.00ȱ         9.49ȱ


    R&D_MNEȱ          LogȱofȱMNEs’ȱR&Dȱemploymentȱ                                2.52ȱ        2.07ȱ        0.00ȱ         8.68ȱ


    L_domȱ            Logȱofȱdomesticȱfirms’ȱnonȬR&Dȱemploymentȱ                  6.88ȱ        1.38ȱ        2.20ȱ        10.51ȱ


    R&D_domȱ          Logȱofȱdomesticȱfirms’ȱR&Dȱemploymentȱ                      5.01ȱ        1.60ȱ        0.00ȱ         9.98ȱ


    Y_domȱ            Logȱofȱdomesticȱfirms’ȱsalesȱ                              12.20ȱ        2.10ȱ        6.52ȱ        17.09ȱ


    Yȱ                Logȱofȱtotalȱsalesȱofȱtheȱindustryȱ                        12.62ȱ        2.12ȱ        6.52ȱ        17.62ȱ


    gSȱ               Growthȱrateȱofȱtotalȱsalesȱ(inȱrawȱratios)ȱ                 0.65ȱ        1.20ȱ       Ȭ2.71ȱ         8.64ȱ


    S_meanȱ           LogȱofȱtheȱmeanȱofȱfirmȬlevelȱsalesȱ                        9.27ȱ        1.40ȱ        4.72ȱ        14.13ȱ


    Note:ȱ Theseȱ figuresȱ aboveȱ areȱ theȱ summaryȱ statisticsȱ forȱ theȱ 54ȱ industriesȱ duringȱ theȱ periodȱ 1998Ȭ2003.ȱ
    Thus,ȱtheȱnumberȱofȱobservationsȱisȱ324.ȱ ȱ




                                                             34
                 Table 6: Impact of MNEs on the Entry of New Domestic Firms

      ȱ                    ȱ               (1)ȱ             (2)ȱ         (3)ȱ         (4)ȱ          (5)ȱ          (6)ȱ

               Dependentȱvariable:ȱ ȱ                Logȱofȱtheȱnumberȱofȱgrossȱentriesȱofȱnewȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ

Regressorȱ     Descriptionȱ               OLSȱ            GMMȱ          OLSȱ        GMMȱ           OLSȱ          GMMȱ

               MNEs’ȱnonȬR&Dȱ             0.101ȱ           0.133ȱ        ȱ            ȱ            0.011ȱ        0.003ȱ
L_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ                (0.027)**       (0.035)**      ȱ            ȱ           (0.038)ȱ       (0.061)ȱ

               MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ                   ȱ               ȱ           0.182ȱ       0.275ȱ        0.170ȱ        0.276ȱ
R&D_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ                  ȱ               ȱ          (0.036)**    (0.063)**     (0.052)**ȱ     (0.089)**

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ           0.279ȱ           0.061ȱ       0.261ȱ      Ȭ0.002ȱ        0.257ȱ        0.038ȱ
R&D_domȱ
               R&Dȱemploymentȱ            (0.070)**       (0.082)ȱ     (0.067)**    (0.126)ȱ      (0.068)**ȱ     (0.080)ȱ

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ           0.347ȱ           0.316ȱ       0.259ȱ       0.256ȱ        0.265ȱ        0.250ȱ
Y_domȱ
               salesȱ                     (0.074)**       (0.090)**    (0.073)**    (0.097)**     (0.076)**ȱ     (0.108)*

               Growthȱrateȱofȱ ȱ          0.131ȱ           0.037ȱ       0.138ȱ       0.075ȱ        0.139ȱ        0.067ȱ
gYȱ
               totalȱsalesȱ               (0.051)*        (0.042)ȱ     (0.049)**    (0.043)+      (0.050)**ȱ     (0.041)ȱ

               MeanȱofȱfirmȬlevelȱ        Ȭ0.473ȱ         Ȭ0.301ȱ      Ȭ0.387ȱ      Ȭ0.271ȱ       Ȭ0.394ȱ        Ȭ0.257ȱ
Y_meanȱ
               salesȱ                     (0.067)**       (0.099)**    (0.065)**    (0.093)**     (0.069)**ȱ     (0.088)**
No.ȱofȱobservationsȱ            ȱ          216ȱ            216ȱ         216ȱ          216ȱ         216ȱ           216ȱ
Rȱ2                             ȱ         0.672ȱ            ȱ           0.688ȱ        ȱ            0.688ȱ          ȱ
HansenȱJȱstatisticȱ             ȱ           ȱ              0.480ȱ        ȱ           0.294ȱ         ȱ            0.501ȱ
ArellanoȬBondȱstatisticȱ        ȱ           ȱ              0.583ȱ        ȱ           0.734ȱ         ȱ            0.783ȱ

Notes:ȱAllȱregressorsȱareȱfirstȱlagged.ȱAllȱregressorsȱexceptȱforȱgYȱareȱinȱlogs.ȱStandardȱerrorsȱareȱinȱparentheses.ȱ**,ȱ
*,ȱandȱ+ȱsignifyȱstatisticalȱsignificanceȱatȱtheȱ1%,ȱ5%,ȱandȱ10%ȱlevels,ȱrespectively.ȱYearȱdummiesȱareȱincludedȱinȱallȱ
specifications.ȱGMMȱestimationȱisȱbasedȱonȱtheȱsystemȱGMMȱestimationȱdevelopedȱbyȱBlundellȱandȱBondȱ(1998).ȱPȱ
valuesȱareȱreportedȱforȱtheȱHansenȱJȱandȱArellanoȬBondȱstatistics.ȱ ȱ




                                                                35
Table 7: Impact of MNEs on the Entry of Domestic Firms: Alternative Measures of Entry

      ȱ                    ȱ               (1)ȱ          (2)ȱ          (3)ȱ          (4)ȱ            (5)ȱ            (6)ȱ

                                       Logȱofȱtheȱnumberȱofȱgrossȱentriesȱofȱ
               Dependentȱvariable:ȱ                                                         Numberȱofȱnetȱentriesȱ
                                              existingȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ

Regressorȱ     Descriptionȱ              GMMȱ          GMMȱ          GMMȱ          GMMȱ            GMMȱ         GMMȱ

               MNEs’ȱnonȬR&Dȱ             0.060ȱ         ȱ            0.021ȱ        3.205ȱ           ȱ          Ȭ2.817ȱ
L_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ               (0.064)ȱ        ȱ           (0.053)ȱ      (2.409)ȱ          ȱ          (3.646)ȱ

               MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ                  ȱ            0.173ȱ        0.158ȱ         ȱ             10.773ȱ      13.334ȱ
R&D_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ                 ȱ           (0.060)**     (0.077)*        ȱ             (4.031)**ȱ   (5.301)*

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ           0.025ȱ        0.022ȱ       Ȭ0.002ȱ       Ȭ2.519ȱ         Ȭ3.773ȱ      Ȭ2.671ȱ
R&D_domȱ
               R&Dȱemploymentȱ           (0.074)ȱ      (0.082)ȱ      (0.083)ȱ      (3.054)ȱ        (5.866)ȱ     (3.845)ȱ

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ           0.091ȱ        0.074ȱ        0.069ȱ        8.511ȱ          5.872ȱ       4.701ȱ
Y_domȱ
               salesȱ                    (0.077)ȱ      (0.056)ȱ      (0.084)ȱ      (3.412)*        (3.765)ȱ     (3.685)ȱ

               Growthȱrateȱofȱ ȱ          0.065ȱ        0.078ȱ        0.081ȱ        4.525ȱ          6.113ȱ       6.100ȱ
gYȱ
               totalȱsalesȱ              (0.038)+      (0.031)*      (0.033)*      (3.195)ȱ        (3.763)ȱ     (3.883)ȱ

               MeanȱofȱfirmȬlevelȱ       Ȭ0.134ȱ       Ȭ0.060ȱ       Ȭ0.098ȱ       Ȭ7.376ȱ         Ȭ4.918ȱ      Ȭ3.390ȱ
Y_meanȱ
               salesȱ                    (0.110)ȱ      (0.079)ȱ      (0.095)ȱ      (3.957)+        (4.852)ȱ     (4.839)ȱ
No.ȱofȱobservationsȱ            ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ         216ȱ             216ȱ            216ȱ
HansenȱJȱstatisticȱ             ȱ         0.308ȱ        0.325ȱ        0.363ȱ        0.643ȱ          0.249ȱ       0.489ȱ
ArellanoȬBondȱstatisticȱ        ȱ         0.700ȱ        0.837ȱ        0.655ȱ        0.256ȱ          0.278ȱ       0.278ȱ

Notes:ȱAllȱregressorsȱareȱfirstȱlagged.ȱAllȱregressorsȱexceptȱforȱgYȱareȱinȱlogs.ȱStandardȱerrorsȱareȱinȱparentheses.**,ȱ
*,ȱandȱ+ȱsignifyȱstatisticalȱsignificanceȱatȱtheȱ1%,ȱ5%,ȱandȱ10%ȱlevels,ȱrespectively.ȱYearȱdummiesȱareȱincludedȱinȱallȱ
specifications.ȱGMMȱestimationȱisȱbasedȱonȱtheȱsystemȱGMMȱestimationȱdevelopedȱbyȱBlundellȱandȱBondȱ(1998).ȱPȱ
valuesȱareȱreportedȱforȱtheȱHansenȱJȱandȱArellanoȬBondȱstatistics.ȱ ȱ




                                                             36
          Table 8: Impact of MNEs on R&D Employment of New Domestic Entrants

      ȱ                    ȱ               (1)ȱ           (2)ȱ           (3)ȱ        (4)ȱ           (5)ȱ          (6)ȱ

                                                                    LogȱofȱR&Dȱemploymentȱofȱ

               Dependentȱvariable:ȱ ȱ
                                                                                          Existingȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ ȱ
                                                  Newȱdomesticȱfirmsȱ
                                                                                         newlyȱenteringȱtoȱtheȱParkȱ

Regressorȱ     Descriptionȱ              GMMȱ           GMMȱ           GMMȱ        GMMȱ            GMMȱ         GMMȱ

               MNEs’ȱnonȬR&Dȱ             0.224ȱ          ȱ            Ȭ0.167ȱ      0.124ȱ           ȱ          Ȭ0.104ȱ
L_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ               (0.089)*         ȱ            (0.155)ȱ    (0.178)ȱ          ȱ          (0.188)ȱ

               MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ                  ȱ             0.626ȱ         0.798ȱ       ȱ             0.530ȱ        0.604ȱ
R&D_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ                 ȱ            (0.153)**      (0.234)**     ȱ             (0.143)**ȱ   (0.248)*

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ           0.451ȱ         0.208ȱ         0.271ȱ      0.413ȱ         0.226ȱ        0.264ȱ
R&D_domȱ
               R&Dȱemploymentȱ           (0.229)*       (0.284)ȱ       (0.218)ȱ    (0.284)ȱ        (0.319)ȱ     (0.350)ȱ

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ           0.582ȱ         0.601ȱ         0.453ȱ      0.268ȱ         0.270ȱ        0.223ȱ
Y_domȱ
               salesȱ                    (0.321)+       (0.262)*       (0.186)*    (0.282)ȱ        (0.244)ȱ     (0.266)ȱ

               Growthȱrateȱofȱ ȱ          0.013ȱ         0.066ȱ         0.051ȱ      0.120ȱ         0.213ȱ        0.219ȱ
gYȱ
               totalȱsalesȱ              (0.113)ȱ       (0.124)ȱ       (0.125)ȱ    (0.134)ȱ        (0.097)*ȱ    (0.087)*

               MeanȱofȱfirmȬlevelȱ       Ȭ0.358ȱ        Ȭ0.324ȱ        Ȭ0.169ȱ     Ȭ0.379ȱ         Ȭ0.006ȱ      Ȭ0.140ȱ
Y_meanȱ
               salesȱ                    (0.290)ȱ       (0.241)ȱ       (0.210)ȱ    (0.416)ȱ        (0.390)ȱ     (0.371)ȱ
No.ȱofȱobservationsȱ            ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ           216ȱ        216ȱ            216ȱ         216ȱ
HansenȱJȱstatisticȱ             ȱ         0.325ȱ         0.271ȱ         0.440ȱ      0.408ȱ         0.392ȱ        0.317ȱ
ArellanoȬBondȱstatisticȱ        ȱ         0.824ȱ         0.439ȱ         0.574ȱ      0.290ȱ         0.251ȱ        0.261ȱ

Notes:ȱAllȱregressorsȱareȱfirstȱlagged.ȱAllȱregressorsȱexceptȱforȱgYȱareȱinȱlogs.ȱStandardȱerrorsȱareȱinȱparentheses.**,ȱ
*,ȱandȱ+ȱsignifyȱstatisticalȱsignificanceȱatȱtheȱ1%,ȱ5%,ȱandȱ10%ȱlevels,ȱrespectively.ȱYearȱdummiesȱareȱincludedȱinȱallȱ
specifications.ȱGMMȱestimationȱisȱbasedȱonȱtheȱsystemȱGMMȱestimationȱdevelopedȱbyȱBlundellȱandȱBondȱ(1998).ȱPȱ
valuesȱareȱreportedȱforȱtheȱHansenȱJȱandȱArellanoȬBondȱstatistics.ȱ ȱ




                                                              37
                         Table 9: Impact of Incumbent MNEs on New MNEs

ȱ                          ȱ              (1)ȱ          (2)ȱ           (3)ȱ          (4)ȱ          (5)ȱ          (6)ȱ

                                        Logȱofȱtheȱnumberȱofȱgrossȱentriesȱ              LogȱofȱR&Dȱemploymentȱ ȱ
              Dependentȱvariable:ȱ
                                                    ofȱMNEsȱ                                  ofȱnewȱMNEsȱ

Regressorȱ     Descriptionȱ             GMMȱ          GMMȱ           GMMȱ          GMMȱ          GMMȱ          GMMȱ

               MNEs’ȱnonȬR&Dȱ            0.016ȱ         ȱ            Ȭ0.001ȱ       Ȭ0.015ȱ         ȱ            0.021ȱ
L_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ              (0.038)ȱ        ȱ            (0.041)ȱ      (0.202)ȱ        ȱ           (0.240)ȱ

               MNEs’ȱR&Dȱ                 ȱ            0.048ȱ        0.067ȱ          ȱ            0.033ȱ       Ȭ0.030ȱ
R&D_MNEȱ
               employmentȱ                ȱ           (0.063)ȱ       (0.089)ȱ        ȱ           (0.311)ȱ      (0.449)ȱ

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ         Ȭ0.092ȱ       Ȭ0.086ȱ        Ȭ0.048ȱ       Ȭ0.273ȱ       Ȭ0.248ȱ       Ȭ0.200ȱ
R&D_domȱ
               R&Dȱemploymentȱ          (0.083)ȱ      (0.082)ȱ       (0.113)ȱ      (0.466)ȱ      (0.480)ȱ      (0.520)ȱ

               Domesticȱfirms’ȱ          0.715ȱ        0.675ȱ        0.547ȱ        3.241ȱ         3.319ȱ        3.094ȱ
Y_domȱ
               salesȱ                   (0.166)**     (0.208)**      (0.259)*ȱ     (0.808)**     (1.036)**ȱ    (1.169)**

               Growthȱrateȱofȱ ȱ         0.050ȱ        0.056ȱ        0.060ȱ        0.215ȱ         0.248ȱ        0.307ȱ
gYȱ
               totalȱsalesȱ             (0.042)ȱ      (0.031)+       (0.040)ȱ      (0.224)ȱ      (0.183)ȱ      (0.199)ȱ

               MeanȱofȱfirmȬlevelȱ      Ȭ0.710ȱ       Ȭ0.669ȱ        Ȭ0.531ȱ       Ȭ3.296ȱ       Ȭ3.278ȱ       Ȭ3.174ȱ
Y_meanȱ
               salesȱ                   (0.159)**     (0.217)**      (0.264)*ȱ     (0.813)**     (1.024)**ȱ    (1.127)**
No.ȱofȱobservationsȱ           ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ          216ȱ
HansenȱJȱstatisticȱ            ȱ         0.379ȱ        0.344ȱ        0.299ȱ        0.348ȱ         0.319ȱ        0.432ȱ
ArellanoȬBondȱstatisticȱ       ȱ         0.805ȱ        0.846ȱ        0.784ȱ        0.898ȱ         0.845ȱ        0.926ȱ

Notes:ȱAllȱregressorsȱareȱfirstȱlagged.ȱAllȱregressorsȱexceptȱforȱgYȱareȱinȱlogs.ȱStandardȱerrorsȱareȱinȱparentheses.**,ȱ
*,ȱandȱ+ȱsignifyȱstatisticalȱsignificanceȱatȱtheȱ1%,ȱ5%,ȱandȱ10%ȱlevels,ȱrespectively.ȱYearȱdummiesȱareȱincludedȱinȱallȱ
specifications.ȱGMMȱestimationȱisȱbasedȱonȱtheȱsystemȱGMMȱestimationȱdevelopedȱbyȱBlundellȱandȱBondȱ(1998).ȱPȱ
valuesȱareȱreportedȱforȱtheȱHansenȱJȱandȱArellanoȬBondȱstatistics.ȱ ȱ




                                                            38
