NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAPPINESS, CONTENTMENT AND OTHER EMOTIONS FOR CENTRAL BANKS
Rafael Di Tella
Robert MacCulloch
Working Paper 13622
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13622

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, “Implications of Behavioral Economics
for Economic Policy” conference, September 27-28th, 2007. For very helpful comments and discussions,
we thank our commentators, Greg Mankiw and Alan Krueger, as well as conference participants, Huw
Pill, John Helliwell, Sebastian Galiani, Rawi Abdelal, and Julio Rotemberg. We thank Jorge Albanesi
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Rafael Di Tella and Robert MacCulloch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Happiness, Contentment and Other Emotions for Central Banks
Rafael Di Tella and Robert MacCulloch
NBER Working Paper No. 13622
November 2007
JEL No. E0,E58,H0
ABSTRACT
We show that data on satisfaction with life from over 600,000 Europeans are negatively correlated
with the unemployment rate and the inflation rate. Our preferred interpretation is that this shows that
emotions are affected by macroeconomic fluctuations. Contentment is, at a minimum, one of the important
emotions that central banks should focus on. More ambitiously, contentment might be considered one
of the components of utility. The results may help central banks understand the tradeoffs that the public
is willing to accept in terms of unemployment for inflation, at least in terms of keeping the average
level of one particular emotion (contentment) constant. An alternative use of these data is to study
the particular channels through which macroeconomics affects emotions. Finally, work in economics
on the design of monetary policy makes several assumptions (e.g., a representative agent, a summary
measure of emotions akin to utility exists and that individuals only care about income and leisure)
that can be used to interpret our results as weights in a social loss function.

Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rditella@hbs.edu
Robert MacCulloch
The Business School
Imperial College London
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
r.macculloch@imperial.ac.uk

Doctors sometimes ask their patients questions such as, “does it hurt?” Upon hearing these
words, reasonable patients do not throw a fit, accuse the doctor of unscientific reliance on
interpersonal comparisons of pain and leave the hospital in disappointment. Presumably, they
think these questions help doctors do their job. In contrast, economists are suspicious of such
questions. Welfare also occupies a central role in their profession, with most papers making some
reference to individual utility. However, in their applied work, measures of utility (or of the
emotions that are related to utility) are not common. One reason is that economists think that
utility can be inferred through actions. For example, if the patient buys a banana rather than an
apple, when both are available at similar prices and conditions, we make the inference that the
patient likes bananas more than apples. Economists say that preferences have been “revealed” to
them. In contrast to standard economics, happiness research takes the position that such an
indirect approach to measuring utility is not necessarily always superior to an approach based on
direct measures of utility or, more precisely, direct measures of the emotions that are related to
utility.
Several direct measures of these emotions can be constructed. One that appears promising and
which has received some attention by economists is well-being data (sometimes loosely called
“happiness data”). Examples include data on happiness (current mood), often captured by the
answers to a simple survey question such as “Are you happy?” and data on contentment (a global
judgment on how close we are to “the good life”), often captured by the answers to a survey
question such as “Overall, are you satisfied with your life?”. Large data sets, covering many
countries and years, are widely available. Of course there are limitations to such data, so the
question of how fruitful the approach is will typically depend on the context. In this paper we
discuss some uses of well-being data for Central Banks.
Before continuing it is worth pointing out that there are (at least) two different broad
interpretations of well being data. To economists trained to focus on utility, the natural
interpretation is that well being data are a proxy for utility. Indeed, this is the interpretation we
follow in this paper. On the other hand, to a psychologist who is trained to focus on a
multiplicity of emotions, the data are likely to refer to specific positive emotions that are relevant
to particular aspects of human existence, with no particular connection to an overall assessment
2

of welfare such as utility.1 Note that economists have suggested an approach which allows
individuals to experience many different mental states (regret, anxiety, excitement, etc) and relate
them to a person’s summary measure of utility (see Caplin and Leahy, 2001, and Elster and
Loewenstein, 1992, for discussions). In this paper we focus on proxies for contentment and note
that they are one possible instrument for Central Banks interested in exploring policy evaluation
without the restrictions arising when welfare can only be evaluated through revealed preference.
The main objective of this chapter is to illustrate how direct data on emotions - in particular, data
on contentment - can be used by Central Banks. The basic exercise involves the inflationunemployment trade-off, a ratio that is important in several models of the macroeconomy. Of
course, a reasonable position is also to question several of the assumptions made in these models,
so that a second focus of the paper is to use contentment data to explore the validity of these
assumptions. For example, one could question the assumption that people care exclusively about
money (and leisure).2 Beyond its’ lack of plausibility, such an assumption forces economists to
translate complex effects of changes in prices and business fluctuations into a monetary value,
which also seems hard. Or one could also question the standard assumption in macroeconomic
models that consider the existence of only one type of (representative) agent. A third and final
application where contentment data might be helpful is to verify some (broad) channels through
which inflation is assumed to affect welfare.
In section I we introduce the issues by briefly describing the literature on the costs of
macroeconomic fluctuations and the literature suggesting that well being data can be interpreted
as capturing (at least some component of) utility.
In section II we present the main exercise: estimating the correlation between contentment and
two basic macroeconomic variables (inflation and unemployment). In particular we focus on data
on overall satisfaction with life as our measure of positive emotions. Under some assumptions,
the coefficients can be used to get one estimate of the welfare costs of inflation relative to those
of unemployment. This simple exercise yields a different set of estimates to those typically used
One area where utility is a poor predictor of choice is moral decisions (see, for example, Green et al, 2001). Even
more narrowly, one can distinguish between positive and negative affect when constructing measures of emotions
(see, for example, Watson and Tellegen, 1985, and Myers and Diener, 1994).
2 See Akerlof (2007) for a discussion of subjectivity and models with more realistic motivation in macroeconomics.
1

3

by economists analyzing the conduct of monetary policy (see, for example, the numerical analysis
in Woodford, 2001, drawing on Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997). The section discusses some
possible interpretations of the basic results, both in terms of a narrow read of the previous
literature and the role of behavioral channels. The section includes a discussion on how to relax
the assumptions regarding interpersonal comparisons of utility that have to be made with the
help of direct data on emotions. It also presents a discussion of some limitations that arise
because we are unsure about the intertemporal content of contentment data. And finally, it
includes a discussion of the appropriate interpretation of our results when contentment is just
one of the emotions that make up utility.
In section III, we discuss some ways to use contentment data to construct tests useful to those
interested in understanding the channels through which macro fluctuations matter, including the
available evidence on non-linearities and adaptation. Section IV explores the question of which
emotion a Central Bank should target. Section V concludes.

I. Some Theory and Well Being Data
I.a. Theoretical Costs of Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Economists have emphasized two important costs of inflation. First, inflation induces people to
spend time and mental energy to save on holdings of money rather than on more productive
uses. And second, when price adjustments are staggered, inflation induces spurious volatility in
the prices of some firms relative to others, reducing the price system's ability to allocate resources
efficiently.3 The first problem is typically seen as small, as money balances are small (see, for
example, Bailey, 1956, Friedman, 1969 and Lucas, 2000) so this channel is unlikely to justify the
observed preoccupation with keeping inflation low. The efforts to derive high costs of inflation

Mankiw (2001) outlines four other costs of inflation: (1) Inflation induces firms to incur more ‘menu costs’ (2)
Because the tax laws are not indexed, inflation raises the effective tax on capital income and thereby discourages
capital accumulation and economic growth. (3) Inflation makes economic calculation more difficult, because the
currency is less reliable as a yardstick for measuring value. (4) Because unexpected changes in prices redistributes real
wealth between debtors and creditors, volatile inflation creates risks that people seek to avoid and makes the use of
long term contracts using money as the unit of account less tenable (see pp. 8-9). Fischer and Modigliani (1978) is a
classic paper outlining the costs of inflation.
3

4

are more successful in the approach followed by Benabou and Gertner (1993) and Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997), who focus on the second channel.
A similarly mixed picture emerges with respect to the costs of unemployment. Indeed, in spite of
a long tradition studying aggregate economic fluctuations, there is disagreement among
economists about the seriousness of their effects. The welfare costs of recessions in classical
economics arise from the lost output that occurs when actual output falls below potential output.
The welfare cost can be approximated by the area of a Harberger triangle, which is proportional
to the square of the size of the gap. This approach is sometimes adopted by real-business-cycle
theorists, who assume that individuals are optimizing and recessions are desirable adjustments to
productivity shocks. This means that the costs of business cycles are small – perhaps only 0.1
percent of total consumption in the US.4 Even when market imperfections are introduced, the
costs rise by only a factor of five, and they are significantly lower if borrowing is allowed. As
downturns typically follow booms, business cycles do not affect the average level of economic
activity. Consequently, these economists have turned their attention to economic growth and
away from fluctuations (see Lucas, 2003, for a discussion).
Given that one approach to cool down an overheated economy is often to raise interest rates,
which might increase the unemployment rate, there has been particular interest in deriving the
welfare losses that arise from changes in the unemployment and the inflation rate in the same
model so as to be able to compare them.5 This difficult task was undertaken in Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997), who develop a model where structural relations are grounded in optimizing
individual behavior and where firms must occasionally keep their prices fixed, resulting in
substantial relative price distortions when inflation increases (more on this below).6 As discussed
in Woodford (2001), their estimates for the United States imply a value for the costs of inflation
relative to the output gap of the order of 20, if the gap is measured in percentage points and
4 See Atkeson and Phelan (1994). A different approach to measuring the costs of business cycles using asset prices is
developed in Alvarez and Jermann (1999).
5 Note that such an exercise is of interest even if one believes that there is no trade-off between inflation and
unemployment in the long run because there might still exist shocks and there is the question of how draconian to
be during the adjustment path.
6 Broadly, on the one hand, prices change more often so forfeiting a purchase decision in favor of more search is
risky because prices might change. On the other, the fact that there are relative price oscillations means that there are
potentially more bargains out there, so search is more valuable. For a discussion of the role of markups, see Benabou
and Gertner (1993).

5

inflation is measured at an annualized percentage rate. That is, the weight on inflation is 20 times
the weight on the output gap in society’s welfare.7 This is a much higher emphasis on inflation
than in the literature on the evaluation of monetary policy which often gives equal weight to
inflation and output as stabilization objectives (for examples of discussions, see Rudebusch and
Svensson, 1999, and Williams, 2003). One advantage of the approach, as Rotemberg and
Woodford explain, is that “Demanding that one's structural relations be derived from individual optimization
also has the advantage that evidence from other sources about the nature of the problems that individuals face can
be used to corroborate the quantitative specifications that are used to explain the relations among aggregate time
series. Ultimately, this is the only way in which the ‘observational equivalence’ of a multitude of alternative possible
structural interpretations of the co-movements of aggregate series can be resolved.”
Answers to direct questions about why inflation matters are also one natural source to draw upon
when studying the nature of the problems that individuals face.8 Interestingly, such answers point
towards a completely different source of difficulties when inflation rises. The survey evidence
presented in Robert Shiller (1997), for example, shows that when asked directly about inflation,
individuals report a number of unconventional costs, like exploitation, national prestige or loss of
morale. It is likely that the confusion with prices when inflation picks up makes the status quo in
the income distribution harder to justify. For example, if relative price oscillations make
speculation more profitable, then people will find it hard to claim that effort pays. This change in
beliefs will particularly affect right wingers (left wingers already believe that luck, rather than
effort, determines income).
Rotemberg (2007) discusses a range of evidence supporting the idea that there are behavioral
costs of inflation relating to factors like an individual’s price knowledge and awareness, paying
too much attention when facing a menu of price choices and regret and anger about price
changes. However, we have only a few models to interpret these empirical findings, with the
exception of Rotemberg (2005) and, perhaps, adaptation of work in labor economics on the fair
While the loss measures derived depend on several details (in particular the assumptions about the timing of the
pricing decisions), the point remains that stabilizing the price level (and not just making expected inflation equal to
actual inflation) eliminates the main source of the costs of inflation, namely relative price distortions.
8 Economists have long been aware that their approach would be seen as slightly odd by other people: "we shall see
that standard characterisations of the policy-maker's objective function put more weight on the costs of inflation than is suggested by our
understanding of the effects of inflation; in doing so, they probably reflect political realities and the heavy political costs of high inflation."
(pp. 567-8, Blanchard and Fischer, 1989).
7

6

wage hypothesis (see Akerlof and Yellen, 1990). Research on these issues seems to be in its’
infancy, despite the enormous interest on behavioral economics and the central role of prices in
the economics profession.
Similarly, there seems to be enormous potential for behavioral economics to improve our
understanding of the potential costs of recessions. Substantial work in psychology and sociology
indicate that there are emotional costs to those who lose their jobs that far exceed the monetary
costs (see, for example, Clark and Oswald, 1994, Winkelmann and Winkelmann, 1998, Helliwell,
2003, Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004). This large loss is broadly comparable across many
countries (see Di Tella et al, 2003). And there may be emotional costs from knowing that fellow
humans are experiencing low utility, perhaps amplified by beliefs concerning the source of
unemployment (for example, those believing that unemployment follows lack of effort versus
those believing it follows bad luck).9 Given that such beliefs differ across countries (for example,
Alesina et al, 2001, report that 60% of Americans - yet only 26% of Europeans - believe the poor
are lazy as opposed to unlucky) the “costs” of unemployment will also differ. This will have
consequences both for the “correct” response to inflation shocks (see the discussion in section
IV) and to unemployment shocks in terms of the optimal amount of unemployment insurance
(see, for example, Di Tella and MacCulloch, 2006b).
Importantly, it seems that we are still quite far away from having estimates of the costs of
inflation that are potentially useful in formulating monetary policy, both because there is little
behavior-based research and because there is no easy way of deciding which of the many
psychological costs that are theoretically plausible exist in practice, or what weight to give each
one of them when an aggregate measure of welfare is derived.
Note that a behavior based approach also introduces the difficulty that people often mis-predict
utility (Gilbert et al, 1998). If this is a generalized phenomenon, calculating the welfare costs of
particular events properly is going to be extremely difficult, in part because taking a position on
whether there is a “right to be wrong” is controversial (for a discussion see, Oderberg, 2000).

9 In that case, one would expect that income inequality would have different effects across the US and Europe, or
across people with different ideological inclinations. See, for example, Alesina et al (2004) and Di Tella and
MacCulloch (2005).

7

I.b. Data on Positive Emotions and the Connection to Utility
The direct questions about inflation that Shiller (1997) used are subject to potential criticisms.
Diamond and Hausman (1994), for example, worry about strategic manipulation of the answers
in contingent valuation studies of environmental costs that use similar style of questions and that
a lot depends on the subject’s ability to understand difficult issues (such as the workings of the
economy or the state of the environment). An alternative to that approach is to ask subjects
about a particular emotion, for example, how happy or satisfied they feel with their life, and then
correlate the answers with the variables of interest (in our case, inflation and unemployment).
This imposes fewer informational demands, as presumably it is easier to know how one feels
than how the economy works.10
A natural reaction to data on well being (and other emotions) is to dismiss them as hopelessly
noisy. Thus, a first task for the approach we present is to establish some connection between the
answers to happiness questionnaires and true utility. The general strategy used by researchers in
the field is to correlate happiness and life satisfaction scores with some variable that we can
plausibly claim is associated with what an economist would call “true utility”. Note that,
traditionally, it has been quite hard to discern true utility accurately. For example, presumably
smiling reflects some positive emotion. Yet, in some situations and cultures smiling occurs in
settings that do not appear to involve high enjoyment or utility. In one famous experiment in
psychology, Landis (1924) photographed students while they listened to music, looked at
pornographic material, smelled ammonia or observed him decapitate a live rat. Third party
observers were unable to predict the activity by looking at the photographs.
However, more recent research shows that this inability results from a failure to distinguish
between different types of smiles. Researchers in this field, particularly Paul Ekman, emphasize
the distinction between the smile which mainly reveals teeth (the “Pan American smile” after the
famous American airline of the 1960’s) and the Duchenne smile, a type of smiling that involves a

10 Conceptually, happiness research need not have to rely on subjective data. For example, economists who want to
focus on actions could study suicide rates or hypertension under the assumption that these phenomena are
correlated with true internal happiness. See Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) and Blanchflower and Oswald (2007) for
examples of work along these lines. For a register of happiness surveys across 112 nations, visit the World Data Base
of Happiness: http://www1.eur.nl/fsw/happiness/. For a discussion of happiness malleability, see Seligman (2004).

8

muscle near the eye (called orbicularis oculi, pars laterali) which can indeed capture true enjoyment.
Importantly for us, Duchenne smiles are correlated with self-reported happiness (Ekman, Friesen
and O’Sullivan, 1988; Ekman, Davidson and Friesen, 1990). Happiness answers (and Duchenne
smiles) are also correlated with left frontal brain activity, which in turn appears to be connected
to different forms of what we are calling true utility. Fox and Davidson (1982), for example,
show that 10-month old infants exhibit greater activation of the left-frontal than the right-frontal
area of the brain in response to videotapes of an actress generating happy facial expressions. In
contrast, asymmetry in other parts of the brain failed to discriminate between the conditions. See
Urry et al (2004) for more recent evidence on the neural correlates of well being. Useful starting
points in the literature on happiness written by non-economists include Diener, Suh, Lucas and
Smith (1999) and Veenhoven (1993) as well as the recent reviews by Di Tella and MacCulloch
(2006a) and Clark et al (2007).
Another argument that has been made to justify a connection between happiness scores and
utility is that cross-sectional and panel studies (some of them cited above) reveal that unemployed
individuals tend to report low happiness scores. The connection occurs because we think that
other “bads” like divorce, addiction, depression and violence are correlated with unemployment.
Using large samples across many countries, Helliwell (2003) and Deaton (2007) find happiness
measures to be positively related to variables that are expected to be associated with high utility
like trust and income. Helliwell (2003) and Blanchflower and Oswald (2007) find a positive
connection between happiness scores and good health. A related point is that “well being
equations” (where happiness and life satisfaction scores are correlated with the demographic
characteristics of the respondents) are broadly “similar” across countries, an unlikely outcome if
the data contained just noise (see, for example, Di Tella et al, 2003).
To be sure, there are findings in the literature that do not fit our standard economic models,
including that conjoined twins are relatively happy, or that money doesn’t buy happiness in the
long run (see for example, Gilbert, 2006, and Easterlin, 1974).11 Ultimately, “happiness research”
takes the view that happiness and life satisfaction scores are related to true internal utility with

In our own estimates of adaptation to income using the German panel we find adaptation to income over 3-4
years. The process of adaptation to income is stronger for left than for right-wingers (see Di Tella et al, 2006).
11

9

some noise, but that the signal to noise ratio in the data is sufficiently high to make empirical
research productive.

II. Contentment and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
II.a. The Contentment Costs of Inflation and Unemployment: Basic Estimates
Once the approach is accepted as potentially fruitful, we run a regression of the form:
Life Satisfaction ntj = α Unemployment nt + β Inflation nt + δ Ω ntj + γ n + η t + µ ntj

(1)

where Life Satisfaction ntj is our proxy for a component of utility of individual, j, living in nation, n,
in year, t, derived from the survey question that asks, “On the whole, are you satisfied with the life you
lead?”. The four possible answers are ‘not at all satisfied’; ‘not very satisfied’; ‘fairly satisfied’ and ‘very
satisfied’. It comes from the Eurobarometer survey series, it is a repeated cross section, and this
particular question is administered towards the early part of the questionnaire (for more
description, see Di Tella et al, 2003). Inflationnt is measured by the rate of change in the Consumer
Price Index.12 Ωntj is a vector of personal characteristics (e.g., employment status - including self
employed, retired, keeping home or in school, income position, marital status, education, city
size, gender, age and age squared) and potentially other macroeconomic controls (like GDP or
hours). γn are country fixed effects and ηt are year fixed effects. µntj is the error term. The
standard interpretation (i.e., one given by somebody who adheres to the assumption of a
representative agent, that a summary measure of utility exists and that agents only care about
income) is that equation (1) is a reduced form of a welfare loss function (whereby inflation and
unemployment are assumed to affect utility only through their effect on income - and maybe
future income).
Finally, several factors conspire against a full treatment of causality. The first is that this is a
chapter about the left-hand side variable (an emotion). Thus, even if we use several pages to

12 There are also indicators of ‘perceived inflation’ that give quite different answers to the official CPI measures.
Conceptually we should be able to test whether it is actual inflation rates or perceived inflation rates that matter most
to consumers using happiness data.

10

convince the reader that we have clever instruments, most of them will still be wondering what it
is that we are estimating. Second, it is hard to think about instruments when the theoretical
literature has done so little to isolate convincing forces that reduce utility when there are
macroeconomic fluctuations. Indeed, the most convincing effects involve behavioral costs that
have not yet been fully modeled. Thus, specifying what are the omitted variables in equation (1) is
a daunting task until macroeconomists produce better models of the costs of macroeconomic
fluctuations (see also the discussion of the results in Table 5 below). Fourth, we report some
evidence concerning how unemployment arising due to plant closures in Germany is associated
with drops in contentment (see Figure 2A, taken from Di Tella et al, 2006). This evidence, whilst
obviously incomplete for some of our purposes, at least confirms that there is a causal negative
effect through which macroeconomic fluctuations affect positive emotions. Finally, we produce
some tests that are identified within the context of the Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) model,
although we are aware that reasonable people will perhaps see this as too narrow a test.
<Insert Table 1 about here>
Column (1) in Table 1 presents the results when equation (1) is estimated as an ordered probit,
which show that the coefficients on unemployment and inflation are both negative and
significant. Column (2) repeats the exercise controlling for country specific time trends, finding
similar results. They are similar to the estimates presented in previous work by Di Tella et al
(2001, 2003) and Wolfers (2003). In order to see the size of the effect note that a 10 percentage
point increase in unemployment reduces average life satisfaction by 0.32 standard deviations. A
10 percentage point increase in inflation reduces average life satisfaction by 0.24 standard
deviations. Figure 1 illustrates our results graphically. In the base scenario, the cut points leave
3.9% of the population in the lowest life satisfaction category, 12.7% in the second to last, 55.5%
in the next one up and 27.9% in the top category. The first scenario shows that when
unemployment increases 10 percentage points, the median person is as satisfied as the person at
the 43rd percentile in the base scenario (when unemployment and inflation are at their average
level in the sample). And when inflation increases by 10 percentage points, the median person is
as satisfied as the person at the 45th percentile in the life satisfaction distribution in the base
scenario. In an attempt to provide another metric for these changes, Wolfers focuses on the top
categories. The standard deviations of unemployment and inflation for the Euro-Barometer
11

surveys are 0.035 and 0.045, respectively. Finally, it is worth noting that the 90% interval for the
ratio of the coefficients on unemployment to inflation is 0.5 to 2.1 which implies a likelihood of
more weight on unemployment than on inflation.
We can repeat the exercise with World Values Survey data (see Helliwell, 2003). There are four
waves and a larger sample of countries (total of 145 country-year clusters), and a similar set of
demographics available. The contentment data also come from a Life Satisfaction question, but
with answers coded on a 1-10 scale, so that presumably fewer people are restricted by the limited
number of categories available in the construction of the answer key (still, the top category has
almost 14% of the sample).13 We group the answers into four categories, yielding similar
proportions to the Euro-Barometer sample (although no substantive conclusion depends on
this). The coefficient on inflation is negative and significant, whereas that on unemployment is
positive and marginally significant. The sample includes former socialist countries. When the
inflation and unemployment coefficients are allowed to take a different value in the former
socialist countries, the coefficient on inflation becomes more negative (almost three times in
absolute value) and more precisely estimated, while that on unemployment becomes negative
(but insignificant). Given that the sample includes countries with very unequal characteristics
(different levels of income, of informal family insurance, etc) it might be advisable to include the
log of GDP as a control, which yields similar results. The standard deviations of unemployment
and inflation for the World Values surveys are 0.06 and 1.00, respectively. Given this, once the
actual variation in inflation is taken into account, the size of the inflation coefficient is
comparable to the coefficient in equation (1).
In the European sample the estimate that a percentage point of unemployment causes at least as
much discontent as a percentage point of inflation seems robust, although the precise multiple
varies in different studies.14 Note that the coefficient on the unemployment rate in Table 1
13 There is a potential problem when life satisfaction scores are at the top of a certain measurement scale, so that
they cannot rise higher, or at the bottom of the scale, so that they cannot fall lower. This is more serious in surveys
with few categorical answers (the Eurobarometer has four, whereas most new surveys offer a 10 point scale). These
bounds can also make it appear that marginal utility is diminishing as consumption increases, when in fact the scores
are hitting the top of the scale and for that reason becoming less responsive to rising true utility.
14 Svensson (2002) converts these estimates to a trade-off between the output gap and inflation using Okun’s Law.
He states that “a simple version of Okun’s Law is that a change of the unemployment rate of one percentage point
corresponds to a change of the output gap of some 2 to 2.5 percentage points”. That is,

12

reflects how the average person changes their score when unemployment changes. But the average
person is not unemployed. Since the contentment regression in Table 1 also includes a control
variable for whether each person is unemployed (in the set of personal characteristics) the
coefficient on this variable measures the direct cost to those falling unemployed. Therefore to
calculate the total cost of unemployment, the cost must be increased by adding the individual
cost to the unemployed.
II.b. A Narrow View: Aggregating all Social Costs of Inflation and Unemployment
Adding up the total costs of inflation and unemployment (outlined in section I.a.) can be quite
difficult, especially when we know so little about them (particularly the psychic costs suggested by
behavioral economics). One can take a narrow view and take the models developed in the
previous literature literally. For example, consider the first paper to derive a social loss function
with both inflation and the output gap, Rotemberg and Woodford (1997).15 They start by
assuming a utility function with both consumption and leisure as arguments. Firms only
occasionally get a chance to change their prices and staggered price adjustments lead to
oscillations in relative prices. There are two costs of inflation. On the one hand, such oscillations
result in direct misallocation of resources, reducing income (consumption). And because there
are diminishing returns, the volatility in production means that productivity falls (so more labor
input - less leisure - is needed for the same output). This means that if we estimate a social loss
function on the output gap (or unemployment) with the hope of capturing the costs of lower
consumption we are missing out on the possibility that sometimes the same level of consumption
requires more labor input (due to higher inflation). Thus, societies’ loss function has the output
gap and hours (or inflation) as arguments. A narrow prediction of this model is that, controlling
for the output gap (proxied by the unemployment rate) and leisure (proxied by average weekly
hours worked), inflation should have no effect on an instantaneous measure of welfare. A test of
Output Gap = - κ Unemployment
where κ ∈ (2, 2.5) and both the output gap and unemployment are measured in percentage points. Consequently a
one percentage point reduction in the output gap would cause between 0.4 (=1/2.5) and 1 (=2/2) times as much of
a reduction in contentment as an additional percentage point of inflation.
15 Some question the desire to require the central bank correct all macroeconomic distortions (even when they are
aggregate in nature). As a justification, Gali (2002) invokes the principle of division of labor and suggests that “other
branches of government are likely to have more suitable tools than those under the control of the central bank to handle many of those
distortions. Hence, it would seem desirable to assign the central bank with the task of correcting the distortions of a monetary nature.” He
then assumes that the monetary authority’s mandate is to correct the distortion associated with the presence of
staggered price setting (see also Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999, and Gali and Monachelli, 2005).

13

this is presented in columns (3-4) in Table 1. It seems that inflation matters to people, even after
controlling for the channels that are assumed in the Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) model.
Of course, one can take the plausible position that contentment captures, at least in part, the
future somehow. In this case, inflation may enter because it is capturing future values of leisure.
One could see if this is indeed the case by checking if future leisure is really predicted by inflation
today, once current leisure, income and unemployment are included (it is not). But perhaps the
main point we are making is that simple tests relevant to central banks can be constructed with
these data.
In brief, a narrow reading of the literature suggests that with several assumptions (including that
a) a summary measure of utility exists, b) all channels through which inflation and unemployment
matter can be reduced to consumption and leisure, and c) there is a representative agent), the
welfare loss function of society can be written as:
Social Welfare Loss = g (Unemployment, Inflation)

(2)

Conditional on accepting these assumptions, the coefficients in equation (1) provide a way to
aggregate all the relevant costs and benefits of macroeconomic fluctuations. In this view, the
regression patterns detected in equation (1) turn out - unknown to the respondents completing
their contentment score sheets - to trace out a welfare loss function defined over inflation and
unemployment as described in (2).
It is tempting to claim that, even when people mispredict utility (as in Gilbert et al, 1998) the
coefficients in (1) adequately capture the costs of inflation and unemployment. Although it is
possible that they capture all instantaneous costs, there is still the problem that macrofluctuations may affect planning, and hence future utility (and that these cost only register at a
later date).16

16 An example illustrates: consider the hypothesis that inflation only matters because it makes people think that they
enjoy money more than they do. A one shot increase in prices at time t leads to plans for excessive work hours in the
future being made. However, at time t people would not tick down their happiness scores.

14

II.c. Cardinal Interpretation
One straightforward interpretation of the coefficients is that they reveal that individuals find
inflation and unemployment costly. This conclusion involves comparing contentment scores of
different people and at different points in time. Reliance on the interpersonal comparability of
contentment scores, however, is non-standard for economists. As Hammond (1991) puts it:
“Following [Lionel] Robbins, it became fashionable for economists to eschew interpersonal comparisons of utility,
apparently in an attempt to be scientific.” He also states: “And where interpersonal comparisons really have to
be made, because the gainers from a change were not going to compensate the losers, the monetary comparisons that
result from valuing all individuals’ dollars equally still seem to be the most popular among economists, who then
wonder why their policy advice does not receive wider acceptance.”
One possibility is to follow standard practice in macroeconomics and assume that a
representative agent exists, with the contentment measures as repeated attempts at getting a
reading of his/her utility. Staying with this assumption would be convenient given that it is
obviously quite difficult to interpret differences in contentment scores between just two
individuals.17 Consider the question of the importance of income, and the finding that
contentment is positively correlated with income in the cross-section. Since energetic/optimistic
people tend to work hard (earning high income) and also tend to see the bright side of things, it
is implausible that the error term is uncorrelated with income. Although one could theoretically
calculate bounds (where exaggeration needs to fall in order to affect the qualitative conclusions)
or even find ways to control for exaggeration (maybe through questions concerning a fixed
objective circumstance, as in some vignettes) this problem need not reduce Central Banks’
interest in contentment data. The reason is that several interesting estimates in macroeconomics
involve comparing large groups of people. Some of these exercises still require strong
assumptions to allow interpretations but others do not. Specifically, in the finding that
contentment scores are lower with high inflation, the unit is the country (in a particular year) and
it is reasonable to assume that exaggeration and modesty have similar distributions across
countries. Importantly, such distribution is unlikely to be correlated with the inflation rate.

17 The question of whether well being measures can be compared across cultures can be studied using vignettes as
anchors, as in King et al (2003). Helliwell and Huang (2005) use population shares above particular numerical life
satisfaction cut-off scores, as alternative dependent variables.

15

Note also that even when cultural differences make the assumption of a similar distribution of
“exaggerators” questionable, one could focus on changes over time within countries. Indeed,
panel estimates like equation (1) have the advantage of correlating changes in Life Satisfaction
reports with changes in the inflation rate. It is unlikely that countries enter into bouts of
collective of exaggeration, disconnected from hedonic fundamentals. Of course, booms have an
element of collective euphoria. But this is typically genuine (i.e., it is unlikely that it results in large
groups of people ticking up their scores even when they themselves are not experiencing higher
true utility). It is worth noting that another potential interest of equation (1) is the ratio, α/β. In
this particular case, even when temporal swings in exaggeration divorced from hedonic
fundamentals do take place, the ratio would be unaffected to the extent that these swings are
uncorrelated with macroeconomic performance (and instead with variables like the weather) or
are correlated in the same way with both of our indicators of macroeconomic performance
(unemployment and inflation).
To test the validity of these assumptions it is possible to estimate regressions separately for
different groups. For example, if left-wing individuals use language differently to right-wingers it
might be important to estimate these two groups separately. Conveniently, in the EuroBarometer Survey Series respondents are asked: “In political matters, people talk of ‘the left’ and ‘the
right’. How would you place your own views on this scale?” (from 1 to 10). In Di Tella and MacCulloch
(2005), respondents were classified as being ‘left-wing’ if their response was in categories 1 to 3
and as ‘right-wing’ if they answered categories 8 to 10.18 The main exercise in that paper is to
estimate the basic regression in equation (1) separately for the two sub-samples. If left-wingers
are assumed to use language similarly, and right-wingers are also assumed to use language
similarly, the α/β ratio in each regression does not have a problem of interpersonal
comparability. A natural alternative is poor and rich individuals.
One prominent application in macroeconomics involves the comparison of the ratio, α/β, across
different groups (e.g., left versus right, or poor versus rich) as in Alesina (1987). The estimation
exercise in Di Tella and MacCulloch (2005) is extremely unlikely to be affected by temporal
18 It is interesting to note that 36% of right wing individuals declare to be at the top life satisfaction category
(compared with almost 22% of left wingers). A second definition based on answers to the question: “If an election were
to be held tomorrow, which party would you vote for?” (and the subsequent classification of these parties into left and right by
political scientists) yields similar results.

16

swings in exaggeration that cause some form of measurement error in the contentment data,
since these swings would have to be correlated with unemployment and inflation differentially
across the two groups in order to affect our results. See also the discussion in section III.
Finally, it is worth noting that some of the limitations in these data are not inherent problems
with direct measures of utility or its’ components and that considerable progress could be made if
some resources went into designing new measures. For example, Hsee and Tang (2007) have
recently proposed asking about happiness in a way that fixes the values at the end of the scales
across people (by providing descriptions). Another interesting possibility, particularly for
economists, is described by Kahneman and Krueger (2006). They discuss how a focus on the
proportion of time people spend in an unpleasant emotional state would allow us to construct an
index that is based on an ordinal measure of feelings at the episode level that reduces the impact
of individual variability in the use of scales. One reason that such a formulation is significant is
because it shows that, in principle, it would be possible to derive direct measures of utility or its’
components without giving up too much in terms of strict assumptions about interpersonal
comparability.
II.d. Time Horizons: Instantaneous versus Life-time Effects
A serious difficulty for the approach we are discussing, at least for applications in
macroeconomics, is that ambiguity remains concerning the time horizon used by individuals in
framing their answers to the Life Satisfaction question. When researchers have the ability to
design the questions they have opted to capture what economists would call instantaneous utility.
Kahneman and Krueger (2006) have recently argued that well-being measures are best described
as “… a global retrospective judgment, which in most cases is constructed only when asked and is determined in
part by the respondent’s current mood and memory, and by the immediate context.” They then describe the
famous dime experiment of Schwarz (1987), whereby subjects “accidentally” find a dime before
filling out a Life Satisfaction questionnaire. The lucky half of the sample reports substantially
higher levels of satisfaction with life.
On the other hand, one would expect that such small shocks can be treated as noise in regression
analyses. And we know that contentment data react to other shocks in a way that is consistent
with standard economic models. As an illustration consider the Life Satisfaction response to two
17

shocks that have been observed to have large well-being impacts in cross-sectional studies,
namely unemployment (a negative correlation) and retirement (a positive correlation). Using the
German Socioeconomic Panel we can follow a sample of West Germans before and after an
unanticipated shock (unemployment arising from a plant closure) and the anticipated shock of
retirement (see Figure 2). As we are using a balanced panel the same people are being surveyed in
the period before and after the shock has occurred which means that some of those who lost
their job due to plant closure may be rehired subsequently whilst others may not. Note the large,
but temporary, satisfaction drop associated with the plant closing, in spite of the few long-term
problems that are revealed by this shock (which is presumably exogenous to the individual), in a
country with a generous system of unemployment insurance and with a relatively low
unemployment rate.19 In comparison, retirement is associated with no detectable changes in Life
Satisfaction.
This ambiguity in time horizon has been a serious problem for applications of contentment data,
particularly in macroeconomics. Most researchers have opted for showing high correlations, or
repeating their estimates using questions with slightly different wordings, and claim robustness
(see Di Tella et al, 2001, 2003, Wolfers, 2003, and Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004). Given that
this seems an important weakness for the data presently available, we now provide some
preliminary but suggestive evidence bearing on this issue. Our strategy is to exploit the fact that,
before 1987 most Euro-Barometers included (besides the question on Life Satisfaction described
in section II.a.) a question administered towards the end of the survey of the form: “Taking all
things together, how would you say things are these days—would you say you’re very happy, fairly happy, or not too
happy these days?” (small “don’t know” and “no answer” categories are not studied here). Let the
variable, Happiness, be defined as follows: 1=“not too happy”, 2=“fairly happy” and 3=“very happy”.
Life Satisfaction and Happiness are strongly positively correlated (Pearson’s correlation
coefficient equals 0.56). In Table 2 we test to see whether the future is also a part of what is being
captured in the Life Satisfaction responses in comparison with the Happiness responses by
repeating the basic regression using just the sample for which we have both sets of data available
and also including the future levels of unemployment and inflation. Although we have less than
Note that such a large drop seems inconsistent with the small difference between the lifetime expected utility of
the employed and the unemployed in some models (e.g., Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984).
19

18

half the sample (as Happiness data are available up to 1986 only) columns (1-2) show that
whereas the coefficients on future inflation are similar, future unemployment is uncorrelated with
Happiness data but strongly correlated with Life Satisfaction data. The difference between the
coefficients on the future unemployment rates in the two columns of Table 2 is significant at the
5 per cent level. One interpretation is that macroeconomics matters beyond the moment
(perhaps even beyond six months) and that Life Satisfaction, with its reference to “the life you lead”
(as opposed to “happy these days”) introduces a longer horizon.20
This ambiguity about the interpretation of these different measures is, perhaps, natural given that
they were not developed for macroeconomic applications where intertemporal matters are so
important.21 It does not, however, seem like an insurmountable problem if some energy went
into designing questions that can make the distinction. For new measurement strategies see, for
example, Kahneman et al, 2004, and Kimball and Willis, 2006.
Although these are relatively new (and not yet available across many countries and years), they do
remind us that the measurement of emotions in economics is still in its infancy as a research area,
and that it is hard to predict how effective this research program will be in the long run,
particularly relative to longstanding programs (e.g., national accounts) in which economists have
convinced society to spend considerable amounts of money. One natural (and cheap) starting
point for macroeconomists would be to include two questions, asked in succession one after the
other, with appropriate differential emphasis on the future and the present. We do not know of
any questionnaires available at present designed to deal effectively with this problem across
countries and years.22

One can presumably reject the hypothesis that the answers to the Happiness question are themselves just noise
because they are strongly correlated with Life Satisfaction answers.
21 Note that one can still push the idea that this ambiguity does not affect the relative coefficients on inflation and
unemployment (or comparisons across sub-groups of the population) under the assumption that changes in these
macroeconomic variables elicit a reaction of similar aspects of life satisfaction, and provided that both inflation and
unemployment are governed by similar stochastic processes so that both coefficients in a life satisfaction regression
are scaled up or down in the same proportion. However, there are many applications in macroeconomics that require
more precision in the interpretation.
22 Although, within the US, the University of Michigan monthly consumer survey has recently included the question
“Now think about the past week and the feelings you've experienced. Please tell me if each of the following was true for you much of the
time this past week: You were happy. You felt sad. You enjoyed life, You felt depressed.” People are asked to give ‘yes-no’
answers to each of those four questions.
20

19

II.e. Contentment versus Other Emotions
As mentioned in the introduction, there is the possibility that contentment is just one of the
components of utility. For illustration purposes, assume that only contentment and regret make
up utility. In that case, we have:
Utility = Contentmen t − β regret + ε

(3)

where β>0 and we normalize the coefficient on Contentment to equal 1. Assume also that we are
interested in estimating:
Utility = − A Unemployme nt − B Inflation + σ

(4)

which implies that:

Contentmen t = − A Unemployme nt − B Inflation + β regret − ε + σ

(5)

where A>0 and B>0. We maintain the assumption that shocks to inflation and unemployment
are uncorrelated with σ. Now assume that we try to estimate the following regression equation
(mistakenly believing that Life Satisfaction scores, which measure contentment, are also a good
proxy for utility):
Life Satisfacton ntj = −a Unemployment nt − b Inflation nt + ψ ntj

(6)

Then the error term contains the other elements of what we are calling true utility:
ψ ntj = β regret ntj − ε ntj + σ ntj

(7)

Let the expected values of the point estimates of the coefficients on unemployment and inflation
obtained from estimating equation (6) be equal to −â and − b̂ , respectively. We have the
following possibilities:

20

1. If correlation (ψ , Unemployment ) = 0 and correlation (ψ , Inflation ) = 0 then the estimates we obtain reveal
the true size of the effect of unemployment and inflation on true utility, even in levels. In
other words, we have â =A and b̂ =B.
2. If correlation (ψ , Unemployment ) ≠ 0 and correlation (ψ , Inflation ) ≠ 0 then the main coefficients of interest
are biased. An example illustrates. If regret plays an important role and is raised by inflation,
as suggested by Rotemberg (this volume), then our coefficient on Inflation might
underestimate the true effect of inflation on true utility, aˆ < A . Indeed, in Rotemberg’s
theory of regret, correlation (ψ , Inflation ) > 0 , so that when inflation goes up, true utility is going to
be falling more than Life Satisfaction (due to the extra effects of regret).
This is of course a simple illustration as the bias is hard to pin down, particularly when other
emotions discussed by psychologists are included (besides regret). A natural question, with a
multiplicity of emotions, is whether measures appropriate for empirical analyses can be
constructed to produce better tests as outlined above. It seems so. A simple theoretical position,
for example, is to view emotional expressions as a basic by-product of emotional experience.23 If
emotional expressions provide a guide for the actual experiences, then the expressions
themselves are one indicator of the range of emotions available in humans. A large amount of
work in this area is due to Paul Ekman (see, for example, Ekman et al, 1969, Hager and Ekman,
1983). Facial analysis has been facilitated by a method for coding emotions (called the Facial
Action Coding System, ‘FACS’). The following is taken from Hager and Ekman (1983).
<Insert Figure 3 about here>
Six different types of faces appear to be the most robust and are often described, namely happy,
sad, anger, fear, disgust and surprise. It seems possible to argue that other emotions can be
reduced to versions of these, although there is some contention about contempt (which is
arguably a version of disgust), shame and startle. The facial coding system and these faces are
described in: http://face-and-emotion.com/dataface/emotion/expression.jsp

An alternative, which originates in Charles Darwin, is to view emotional expressions as signals in communication
games. See the work of Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeld.
23

21

<Insert Figure 4 about here>

III. Other Contentment Tests in Macroeconomics
Further tests can be informative. First, a natural step is to move beyond the representative agent
paradigm and estimate the impact of macroeconomic fluctuations on contentment across groups.
This has intrinsic interest (e.g., in partisan political economy models) and is also relevant to the
discussions in sections II.b. and II.c. above (it is one solution when there are groups that are
suspected of using language differently in ways that may affect the estimates in equation (1) in
Table 1). Second, we can also use contentment data to help identify some of the channels
through which macro-fluctuations matter. And finally, it is possible to study how macro
fluctuations matter, in particular whether there is a significant role for non-linearities. These three
kinds of contentment tests are the focus of the present section, and we address each one in turn.
There has been some interest amongst macroeconomists in studying the costs of business cycles
for different groups. In some cases, such differences might even explain different views about the
optimal response to shocks, and hence, differences in the experience under policymakers of
different color (see, for example, Hibbs, 1987; Alesina, 1987). One dimension that has received
particular interest is income. Hibbs (1987) cites Paul Samuelson as saying, “We tend to get our
recessions during Republican administrations. .... The difference between the Democrats and the Republicans is the
difference in their constituencies. It’s a class difference. .... The Democrats constitute the people, by and large, who
are around the median incomes or below. These are the ones whom the Republicans want to pay the price and
burden of fighting inflation. The Democrats are willing to run some inflation (to increase employment); the
Republicans are not” (p. 213).
Contentment data can be used to study these questions. Table 3 shows how inflation and
unemployment affect life satisfaction responses, by demographic groups. In column (1) we
present the results for inflation, and note that those on low income display the biggest reductions
in life satisfaction. The negative coefficient on Inflation is monotonically smaller (in absolute
value) as we go up the income quartiles, although the effect is not significant. This is consistent
with Di Tella and MacCulloch (2005). It is also quite intriguing that the employed (the omitted
22

category) are significantly more adversely affected by inflation compared to the self-employed,
and those “at home”. Males are less affected by inflation than females and those with little
education (less than 15 years, the base category) are more affected by inflation than those with
high levels (more than 18 years) and in particular those with intermediate levels of education
(between 15 and 18 years). There are fewer detectable changes in the basic patterns in column
(2), which studies the effect of unemployment across the different groups. The biggest effects are
that recessions are particularly costly in contentment terms to those coming of age (see also
Bechetti et al, 2006) and those with intermediate and high levels of education.
An alternative is to focus on different partisan (i.e., left versus right) political beliefs. In several
estimates based on contentment regressions, we found weaker differences between these groups
than those found in Di Tella and MacCulloch (2005), which focuses on a smaller sample of
countries and years (up to 1992) and finds that the unemployment/inflation ratio is higher for
left-wingers than for right-wingers.
A second possible use of contentment data is to test the relevance of some of the channels
suggested in the theoretical literature. For example, in all of the papers in the literature that we
know, falling unemployed is associated with large emotional costs, even after controlling for the
income losses associated with loosing a job (see, for example, Clark and Oswald, 1994). The
coefficients typically imply very large costs, approximately similar to the well being difference
reported by individuals at the opposite ends of the income distribution (in the sample). Assuming
these estimates to reflect causal forces, they reject the approach used by real business cycle
theorists to measure the costs of business cycles, if only because jobless but insured individuals
would presumably experience smaller downturns in utility. One could still force a classic
interpretation by thinking that these are simply people with unrealistic aspirations about what
jobs they can get. However, Clark (2003) presents panel evidence showing that the well being
drop associated with becoming unemployed is smaller the higher is the unemployment rate in
this person’s reference group (see also Stutzer and LaLive, 2004).24

Another potential application of well being data in the labor market concerns the gains from better matching (see
Luechinger et al, 2007).

24

23

Some general information on these channels can be obtained by looking at the effect of
unemployment and inflation across different groups in Table 3. Column (2) finds that the
coefficient on being unemployed becomes more negative at higher unemployment rates,
although it is imprecisely estimated (and does not use the unemployment rate in the reference
group). Di Tella et al (2003) test the hypothesis that the welfare state has made life too easy for
the unemployed. They find a strong, positive relationship between the reported life satisfaction of
the unemployed and the generosity of unemployment insurance in panel regressions (see, for
example, column (2) in Table 12 in that paper).
Finally, another possible use of data on emotions is in answering the question of whether nonlinearities exist in the welfare loss function. This is important for answering the question of
whether it is more important for the Central Bank to produce low inflation or stable inflation.
Mankiw (2001) notes that “if low average inflation is the goal then the monetary policymakers of the 1990s
[in the United States] can be given only an average grade. But if stable inflation is the goal, then they go to the top
of the class”. He mentions that there is “little direct evidence of convexity in the costs of inflation. As a result,
it is hard to compare quantitatively the benefits of low inflation with the benefits of stable inflation.” (pp. 9-10).
The assumed quadratic welfare loss function is given by:
Social Welfare Loss = α ( Output Gap ) 2 + β ( Inflation ) 2

(3)

Di Tella et al (2001) do not detect non-linear effects of inflation using life satisfaction surveys.
Wolfers (2003) presents a full set of tests for the presence of non-linearities on both macro
variables. He finds that convexities exist with respect to unemployment but are “less easy to
detect” with respect to inflation. Consequently his paper finds that “eliminating unemployment
volatility would raise well-being by an amount roughly equal to that from lowering the average level of
unemployment by a quarter of a percentage point” (see pg 1).
Table 4 explores the evidence on non-linearities by extending the basic estimates using squared
terms. We find evidence of a non-linearity with respect to unemployment but not with respect to
inflation. However, unlike the Euro-Barometer data, no evidence of a non-linearity with respect
to unemployment is found using World Values Survey data, although given the informal nature
24

of the labor market in some of the countries in the (cross-sectionally) larger data set,
unemployment may not be the best indicator of the state of the economy. 25
Note that non-linearities could be coming from a quirk in the reporting function. Although we
may estimate a Life Satisfaction regression that appears to be non-linear in unemployment, this
implies that there is a non-linear relationship between unemployment and true internal utility only
given the (sufficient) condition that the mapping between internal utility and an individual’s selfreported satisfaction is linear. However, when the mapping, g, is non-linear:
Life Satisfaction=g(True Internal Utility)=g(α Unemployment + β Inflation)= α(Unemployment)2 + β (Inflation)

then the (true) linear relationship between internal utility and unemployment will not be detected
in our Life Satisfaction regression. Evidence on the form of the reporting function is limited and
may also pose problems when undertaking interpersonal comparisons of contentment,
particularly when there is habituation (see below).
Finally, it is possible to use the data to explore the question of adaptation to high inflation and
high unemployment. We test for the presence of these effects by including a lagged term. Then
we can calculate the long-term effect of a shock in, say, unemployment, by adding the current
and lagged coefficients. Table 5 illustrates and finds adaptation to unemployment while little
adaptation to inflation. The long run coefficient on unemployment is only 34% of the short run
estimate {0.34=(-4.4+2.9)/-4.4}. One complication in the interpretation of these effects is that
the issue of causality becomes particularly relevant. Indeed, positive theories of inflation predict
that Central Banks may be more tempted to inflate to reduce unemployment when the costs of
unemployment are higher or the costs of inflation are lower. What could give rise to these
differences? One simple answer is the historical experience (which trains the mind to deal with
such uncertainties) and the institutions designed by societies to deal with such shocks. For
example, differences in the strength of informal insurance networks, or differences in the welfare
state may affect the costs of falling unemployed. Or differences in mental training under high
inflation or historical experience with indexation institutions may affect the costs of inflation.
25 There were no episodes of deflation in the sample so there is no dummy variable defined to capture this state.
However conceptually we should be able to measure whether there are asymmetric costs to deflations versus
inflations using contentment data.

25

The appendix develops an example. Note that if humans design these institutions to deal with
macro policy, then societies might benefit from the joint design of monetary policy and (say) the
welfare state and indexation laws.
Di Tella and MacCulloch (2004) provide evidence of a negative relationship between inflation
and the welfare state using a panel of 20 OECD countries over the period 1961-92, controlling
for country and time fixed effects, country specific time trends, other co-variates and using
different measures of benefit generosity (for example the length of time over which unemployed
people can claim benefits).
A recent paper by Becchetti et al (2006) studies employment protection legislation and the age
structure of the population with the objective of separating countries with different well being
costs of macrofluctuations. They find that the relative cost of unemployment is higher in
intermediate age cohorts and in low job protection countries. They point out that this might
explain the difference in objectives for the US Federal Reserve (price stability and employment)
versus the European Central Bank (price stability only) and their actual experiences with inflation.
IV. Which Emotion Should a Central Bank Target?
Economists build their models of monetary policy around the concept of utility. Perhaps the role
of this concept is instrumental (allowing researchers to structure their thoughts) rather than
descriptive. But two natural questions that arise are:
1. Is there an emotion that is in fact close to utility?
2. Is this the correct emotion to target?
On the first question, psychologists have described several positive emotions, including
happiness and contentment. Two survey measures seem particularly relevant: the answers to the
questions “Are you happy?” and to “Are you satisfied with your life?”. The evidence that we
presented in Section II.d suggests that the former may better capture instantaneous mood
whereas the latter has a larger intertemporal component. If we take the plausible position that
contentment captures, to some degree, the future, then life satisfaction may be our best available
proxy for an overall measure of welfare. Importantly there are large samples of people that have
26

been asked about their satisfaction with life. Validation studies, in particular involving smiles and
fMri data briefly discussed in section I.b., suggest that they are indeed related to the economist’s
concept of utility, so the answer to the first question is yes. Before proceeding, we note that a
separate question on which psychologists and economists do not agree is whether any of these
two measures can in fact be considered a summary of other emotions, or they are themselves a
component of utility.
The second question is harder to answer. In brief, we believe that it is reasonable to target
contentment (for example, as captured in the answer to a life satisfaction question). This is
relatively uncontroversial for the implausible case that other emotions are constant. How can we
oppose policies that will lead to the “good life”? The complication is that contentment can be
quite stable while happiness may be going down in many realistic settings. It is likely that
politicians that target contentment will be forced out of office by those that propose policies that
raise happiness. The success of populist platforms is one indicator of their appeal.
A more serious problem is that many actors appear to be actively managing other emotions. One
example is voters controlling their anger after observing a corrupt privatization (see Di Tella and
MacCulloch, 2002). Another example, closer to the issues of concern to Central Banks, concerns
asset bubbles. Indeed, investors often enter markets that have experienced large increases in
prices, even when fundamentals do not appear to be changing (in a positive direction). For
example, people kept on buying houses in the US even though negative news kept coming in
(about the existence of a war and the deterioration of the current account, etc). One possible
explanation is that investors in this market are also trying to minimize regret, as in Rotemberg
(this volume). Thus, they enter the market after price increases because the likelihood of “missing
out” on the boom and the cost of experiencing regret at the lost opportunity looms larger in their
minds than the fear of losing money in a collapse of the bubble. One likely contributor to this
asymmetry is the fact that when missing out on the opportunity, the misfortune is experienced in
solitude (while the rest are happy). In contrast, when the bubble collapses, the misery is
collectively experienced. One hesitates to add that inferences about one’s own ability/identity are
harsher in the first scenario than if one can convince one-self that the problems were so tough
that even a large collection of people made the same mistake. A Central Bank focusing on
contentment may leave interest rates unchanged while asset prices rise with the justification that
27

contentment had not moved, making economists who worry about bubbles less impressed with
contentment as a target for policy.
In summary, a question for future research is to discover which emotion is the most relevant one
for economists, in terms of whether it affects market prices and whether it affects (or should
affect) government policy choices.

VI. Conclusion
We show that direct data on contentment, measured as self-reported overall satisfaction with life
for over 600,000 Europeans, are negatively correlated with the unemployment rate and the
inflation rate. There are several possible uses of this result. Our preferred interpretation is that
they show that an emotion that is close to utility is affected by macroeconomic fluctuations. This
can be a powerful complement to studies restricted to look at revealed preference. Even if one
takes the view that contentment is just one of many emotions that need to be studied, it seems
that it is also possible to construct direct empirical measures of these other emotions.
We discuss two broad applications of our results. They may help central banks understand what
the tradeoffs are that the public is willing to accept in terms of unemployment for inflation, at
least in terms of keeping the average level of one particular emotion (contentment) constant. Of
course we will need more work in terms of making sure that we are identifying the causal effects
of these variables on emotions, but we believe that the idea of central banks focusing their
research efforts on direct measures of emotions as an outcome variable is justified. An alternative
use of these data is to study the channels through which macroeconomics affects emotions.
Finally, economists who are attached to the models typically used in the design of monetary
policy might see the results presented as an initial step at obtaining the weights in a social loss
function that they can compare with those obtained in more traditional models that dominate the
design of monetary policy (e.g., Eichenbaum, 1992; Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997). Some of
the assumptions that have to be made for using our results in this context (representative agent, a

28

summary measure of emotions akin to utility in fact exists and individuals only care about income
and leisure) will not sound extreme to those trained in this area.
The approach we discuss has limitations, but we suspect that several of them arise because so few
researchers with experience in macroeconomic policy have studied these data, and because so
few resources have gone into perfecting the measures. For example, we still do not know if the
contentment data that we have available for large samples of individuals refer to instantaneous
utility or it is an intertemporal measure (although several results appear similar when we use data
on happiness -which is arguably closer to an instantaneous measure). The problem, however,
does not seem insurmountable as it can be addressed by developing better measures of
contentment.

29

Figure 1: Distribution of Life Satisfaction in three scenarios.

.4

.3

.2

.1

50th percentile
(median)
43rd percentile

45th percentile

0
Unemployment and Inflation at average level
Unemployment at average level and Inflation +10%
Unemployment+10% and Inflation at average level

30

Figure 2A: Life Satisfaction Effect of an Unexpected Job Loss Shock Due to a Factory
Closing: Four Years Before and After

7.5

7

6.5

6
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

Years Before & After

N=210

Figure 2B: Life Satisfaction Effect of an Expected Job Loss Shock Due to
Retirement:

8

7.5

7

6.5
-4

N=989

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Years Before & After

31

3

4

Figure 3: The three FAC (Facial Action Coding) units in the brow area and their combinations are
illustrated. AU 1 (action of inner frontalis) raises the inner corners of the eyebrows, forming wrinkles in
the medial part of the brow. AU 2 (action of the outer frontalis) raises the outer portion of the eyebrows,
forming wrinkles In the lateral part of the brow. AU 4 (action of procerus, corrugators, and depressor
supercilii) pulls the eyebrows down and together, forming vertical wrinkles between them and horizontal
wrinkles near the nasion. The combinations of AUS show how these AUs can act together to form
composites of the appearances each produces separately.

Figure 4: Ekman’s six expressions: Happy, Sad, Anger, Fear, Disgust and Surprise.

Happy

Sad

Anger

Fear

32

Disgust

Surprise

Table 1: How Life Satisfaction Scores Vary with Inflation & Unemployment,
16 OECD Countries, 1973 to 2002.
Dependent variable:

Life Satisfaction

Life Satisfaction

Life Satisfaction

Life Satisfaction

-1.6

-2.3

-1.2

-1.1

(0.4)

(0.6)

(0.4)

(0.4)

-1.2

-1.9

-1.9

-2.0

(0.3)

(0.5)

(0.4)

(0.4)

0.09

0.07

(0.02)

(0.04)

Macroeconomic Variables
Unemployment rate

Inflation rate

GDP per capita

Hours

-0.03
(0.01)

Personal Characteristics

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country & Year Dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Country Specific Time Trends

No

Yes

No

No

Unemployment Inflation
Trade-off (standard error)

1.3
(0.4)

1.2
(0.4)

0.7
(0.2)

0.6
(0.2)

No. of Observations

609,243

609,243

607,467

607,467

Country-year clusters

309

309

306

306

Pseudo R2

0.09

0.09

0.09

0.09

Note: All regressions include controls for personal characteristics, including employment status
(including self employed, retired, keeping home or in school), income, marital status, education, gender,
age and age squared. Ordered probit regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
the country year level. The regressions use as dependent variable the answer to the Euro-barometer
question, “On the whole, are you satisfied with the life you lead?”. The four possible answers are: “not at all
satisfied”; “not very satisfied”; “fairly satisfied”; “very satisfied”. GDP per capita is real GDP per capita in the
country, measured in US dollars. Hours is the average weekly hours worked per capita.

33

Table 2: How Life Satisfaction & Happiness Scores Vary with Current + Future
Inflation & Unemployment Rates, 16 OECD Countries, 1973 to 1986.
Life Satisfaction

Happiness

-2.2

-2.2

(1.3)

(1.6)

-3.1

0.8

(1.2)

(1.3)

0.4

0.4

(0.5)

(0.5)

-3.4

-3.3

(0.5)

(0.5)

Yes

Yes

Country and Year

Country and Year

No. of Observations

128,722

128,722

Country-year clusters

99

99

0.08

0.08

Dependent variable:
Macroeconomic Variables
Unemployment rate

Unemployment rate t + 1

Inflation rate

Inflation rate t + 1

Personal Characteristics
Dummy Variables

Pseudo R2

Note: Ordered probit regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country
year level. Personal characteristics include employment status (including self employed, retired, keeping
home or in school), income, marital status, education, gender, age and age squared. The dependent
variable in column (1) is the answer to the Euro-barometer question, “On the whole, are you satisfied with the
life you lead?” The four possible answers are: “not at all satisfied”; “not very satisfied”; “fairly satisfied”; “very
satisfied”. The dependent variable in column (2) is the response to the Euro-barometer question, “Taking
all things together, how would you say things are these days -would you say you’re very happy, fairly happy, or not too
happy these days?” (1=“not too happy”, 2=“fairly happy” and 3=“very happy”). Unemployment rate t+1 and
Inflation rate t+1 are the unemployment and inflation rates one year into the future.

34

Table 3: The Determinants of Life Satisfaction, Interacting Unemployment & Inflation
Rates with Personal Characteristics, 16 OECD Countries, 1973 to 2002.
Dependent variable:
Life Satisfaction
Unemployment rate
Inflation rate
Unemployed
Self-employed
Retired
Keep Home
In school
Male
Age
Age Squared
Income 2
Income 3
Income 4 (top)
Education 15-18 years old
Education >18 years old
Married
Divorced
Separated
Widow
No. of Observations
Pseudo R2

(1)
Coefficient
-2.0
(0.4)
-2.1
(0.8)
-0.5
(0.02)
-0.001
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.01)
0.1
(0.01)
-0.08
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.001)
2.9e-4
(1.5e-5)
0.05
(0.01)
0.2
(0.01)
0.3
(0.01)
0.07
(0.01)
0.2
(0.01)
0.2
(0.01)
-0.2
(0.02)
-0.3
(0.03)
-0.1
(0.01)
609,243
0.09

* Inflation

Coefficient

0.3
(0.3)
0.3
(0.1)
0.2
(0.2)
0.6
(0.1)
-0.01
(0.2)
0.3
(0.1)
-0.03
(0.02)
2.9e-4
(2.0e-4)
0.1
(0.2)
0.1
(0.2)
0.2
(0.2)
0.4
(0.1)
0.2
(0.1)
-0.3
(0.2)
-0.8
(0.3)
-0.5
(0.6)
-0.3
(0.2)

-3.2
(1.5)
-1.0
(0.4)
-0.4
(0.04)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.03)
0.008
(0.02)
0.1
(0.02)
-0.07
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.002)
2.1e-4
(2.5e-5)
0.07
(0.02)
0.2
(0.02)
0.4
(0.02)
0.05
(0.02)
0.09
(0.02)
0.2
(0.02)
-0.2
(0.04)
-0.3
(0.05)
-0.2
(0.02)

(2)
*Unemployment

-1.2
(0.5)
0.08
(0.2)
0.5
(0.3)
-0.02
(0.2)
-0.3
(0.2)
0.06
(0.2)
-0.1
(0.03)
0.001
(2.4e-4)
-0.09
(0.2)
-0.5
(0.2)
-0.6
(0.3)
0.5
(0.2)
1.1
(0.2)
-0.6
(0.2)
-0.2
(0.5)
-0.5
(0.6)
0.2
(0.3)
609,243
0.09

Note: Ordered probit regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country
year level (309 clusters), including country and year dummies. Dependent variable is the answer to the
Euro-barometer question: “On the whole, are you satisfied with the life you lead?”. The four possible answers are:
“not at all satisfied”; “not very satisfied”; “fairly satisfied”; “very satisfied”.

35

Table 4: How Life Satisfaction Scores Vary with Inflation &
Unemployment, Testing for Non-Linearities, 16 OECD Countries,
1973 to 2002.
Dependent variable:

Life Satisfaction

Macroeconomic Variables
Unemployment rate

0.8
(1.0)

( Unemployment rate ) 2

-12.4
(4.6)

Inflation rate

-1.8
(0.7)

( Inflation rate ) 2

3.1
(3.2)

Personal Characteristics

Yes

Dummy Variables

Country and Year

No. of Observations

609,243

Country-year clusters

309

Pseudo R2

0.09

Note: Ordered probit regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered at the country year level. Personal characteristics include employment
status (including self employed, retired, keeping home or in school), income,
marital status, education, gender, age and age squared. The dependent variable is
the answer to the Euro-barometer question, “On the whole, are you satisfied with the life
you lead?”. The four possible answers are “not at all satisfied”; “not very satisfied”; “fairly
satisfied”; “very satisfied”.

36

Table 5: Adaptation in Macroeconomics- How Life Satisfaction Scores Vary with
Current and Past Inflation and Unemployment Rates, 16 OECD Countries, 19732002.
Dependent variable:

Life Satisfaction

Macroeconomic Variables
Unemployment rate

-4.4
(0.9)

Unemployment rate t - 1

2.9
(0.9)

Inflation rate

-0.4
(0.6)

Inflation rate t – 1

-1.0
(0.5)

Personal Characteristics

Yes

Dummy Variables

Country and Year

No. of Observations

597,433

Country-year clusters

302

Pseudo R2

0.09

Note: Ordered probit regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
country year level. Personal characteristics include employment status (including self
employed, retired, keeping home or in school), income, marital status, education, gender, age
and age squared. The dependent variable is the answer to the Euro-barometer question, “On
the whole, are you satisfied with the life you lead?”. The four possible answers are: “not at all satisfied”;
“not very satisfied”; “fairly satisfied”; “very satisfied. Unemployment rate t-1 and Inflation rate t-1 are the
unemployment and inflation rates lagged one year into the past.

37

References
Akerlof, George and Yellen, Janet, (1990) “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and
Unemployment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, vol. 105(2), pp. 255-83.
Akerlof, George (2007) “The Missing Motivation in Macroeconomics”, Presidential Address,
American Economic Association.
Alesina, Alberto (1987) “Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated Game”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, pp. 651-678.
Alesina, Alberto, Rafael Di Tella and Robert MacCulloch (2004) “Inequality and happiness: are
Europeans and Americans different?”, Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88(9), pp. 2009-42.
Alesina Alberto, Edward Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote (2001) “Why Doesn’t the United States
Have a European Style Welfare State?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (Fall), pp.
187-278.
Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann (2004) “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Cost of
Business Cycles", Journal of Political Economy, 112(6), pp. 1223-56.
Atkeson, Andrew and Christopher Phelan (1994) “Reconsidering the Costs of Business Cycles
with Incomplete Markets”, in Stanley Fischer and Julio Rotemberg (eds.), NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press.
Barro, Robert and David Gordon (1983) “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model”, Journal of Political Economy, 91(4), pp. 589-610.
Becchetti, Leonardo, Castriota and Osea Giuntella (2006) “The Effects of Age and Job
Protection on the Welfare Costs of Inflation and Unemployment: A source of antiinflation bias?”, University of Rome Tor Vergata mimeo.
Benabou, Roland and Robert Gertner (1993) “Search with Learning from Prices: Does Increased
Inflationary Uncertainty Lead to Higher Markups?”, Review of Economic Studies, 60, pp. 6995.
Blanchard, Olivier and Stanley Fischer (1989) Lectures on Macroeconomics, MIT Press,
Cambridge.
Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald (2004) “Well-being over time in Britain and the United
States”, Journal of Public Economics, 88, Issues 7-8, pp. 1359-1386.
Blanchflower, David and Andrew Oswald (2007) “Hypertension and Happiness across
Countries”, NBER 12934, forthcoming Journal of Health Economics.
Boes, Stefan, Markus Lipp and Rainer Winkelmann (2007) “Money Illusion Under Test”,
Economics Letters, 94(3), pp. 332-337.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1992) “Current Real Business Cycle Theory and
Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 82, pp. 430–50.
Clark, Andrew and Andrew Oswald (1994) “Unhappiness and Unemployment”, Economic Journal,
104, pp. 648-59.
Clark, Andrew (2003) “Unemployment as a Social Norm: Psychological Evidence from Panel
Data.” Journal of Labor Economics. April, 21, pp. 323–51.
Clark, Andrew, Frijters, Paul and Shields, Michael (2007) “Relative Income, Happiness and
Utility: An Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles”, Journal of Economic
Literature, forthcoming.
Deaton, Angus (2007) “Income, aging, health and wellbeing around the world: Evidence from
the Gallup World Poll”, Princeton university mimeo.
Diener, Ed (1984) “Subjective Well-Being”, Psychological Bulletin, 93, pp 542-75.
Diener, Ed, Suh, Eunkook, Lucas, Richard and Heidi Smith (1999) “Subjective Well-Being:
Three Decades of Progress”, Psychological Bulletin, 125 (2), pp 276-303.

38

Di Tella, Rafael, Robert MacCulloch and Andrew Oswald (2001) “Preferences over Inflation and
Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness”, American Economic Review, 91(1),
pp. 335-41.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2002) “Why Doesn’t Capitalism Flow to Poor
Countries?”, mimeo.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert MacCulloch and Andrew Oswald (2003) “The Macroeconomics of
Happiness”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), pp. 809-27.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2004) “Unemployment Benefits as a Substitute for a
Conservative Central Banker”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, pp. 911-22.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2005) “Partisan Social Happiness”, Review of Economic
Studies, 72, pp. 367-393.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2006a) “Some Uses of Happiness Data in Economics”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, pp. 25-46.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2006b) “Europe vs America: Institutional Hysteresis in
a Simple Normative Model”, Journal of Public Economics, 90(12), pp. 2161-86.
Di Tella, Rafael, John Haisken-de-New and Robert MacCulloch (2006) “Happiness Adaptation
to Income and to Status in an Individual Panel”, NBER working paper number no.
13159.
Eichenbaum, Martin (1992) “Liquidity Effects and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism”, The
American Economic Review, 82(2), pp. 346-353.
Ekman, P., Sorenson, E. R., & Friesen, W. V. (1969) “Pan-cultural elements in facial displays of
emotions”, Science, 164 (3875), pp. 86-88.
Elster, J., and G. Loewenstein, “Utility from Memory and from Anticipation,” in Choice over
Time, G. Loewenstein and J. Elster, eds. (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1992).
Feldstein, Martin (1997) “The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price
Stability”, in Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, edited by Christine Romer and
David Romer, NBER Studies in Business Cycles, 30, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Fischer, S., and Modigliani, F. (1978) “Towards an Understanding of the Real Effects and Costs
of Inflation”, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 114, pp. 810-33.
Gali, Jordi (2002) Stabilization and Monetary Policy: the International Experience, Banco de
México, México D.F.
Gali, Jordi and Tomasso Monacelli (2005) “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
Small Open Economy”, Review of Economic Studies, 72, pp. 707-734.
Gilbert, Daniel T., Elizabeth C. Pinel, Timothy, D. Wilson, Stephen J. Blumberg and Thalia
Wheatley (1998) “Immune Neglect: A Source of Durability Bias in Affective
Forecasting.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 75(3), pp. 617–38.
Gilbert, Daniel (2006) Stumbling on Happiness, Alfred Knopf, New York.
Greene, Joshua D., R. Brian Sommerville, Leigh E. Nystrom, John M. Darley, Jonathan D.
Cohen (2001) “An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment”,
Science, Vol 293, 14 September, pp. 2105-8.
Hager Joseph and Paul Ekman (1983) “The Inner and Outer Meanings of Facial Expressions”,
Chapter 10 in J. T. Cacioppo & R. E. Petty (Eds.) Social Psychophysiology: A
Sourcebook, New York: The Guilford Press.
Helliwell, John F. (2003) “How's Life? Combining Individual And National Variables To Explain
Subjective Well-Being,” Economic Modelling, v20 (2), pp. 331-360.
Helliwell, John F. and R.D. Putnam (2004) ‘The social context of well-being’ Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, vol. 359, pp. 1435-46.
39

Helliwell, John F. and H. Huang (2005b) ‘How’s your government? International evidence
linking good government and well-being’, mimeo UBC.
Hibbs, Douglas (1987) The American Political Economy: Macroeconomics and Electoral Politics
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Hsee, C. K. and Tang, J. (2007) “Sun and Water: On a Modulus-based Measurement of
Happiness”, Emotion, 7, pp. 213-218.
Kahneman, D., Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. A. (2004) “A Survey
Method for Characterizing Daily Life Experience: The Day Reconstruction Method
(DRM)”, Science (3 December), pp. 1776-1780.
Kahneman, Daniel and Alan B. Krueger (2006) “Developments in the Measurement of
Subjective Well-Being”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 20, Number 1, Winter, pp.
3–24.
Kimball, Miles and Robert Willis (2006) “Happiness and Utility”, mimeo.
King, Gary, Christopher J.R. Murray, Joshua A. Salomon, and Ajay Tandon (2003) “Enhancing
the Validity and Cross-Cultural Comparability of Measurement in Survey Research.”
American Political Science Review vol 97(4), pp. 567-83.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1981) “Discussion of: Stanley Fischer, 'Towards an Understanding of the
Costs of Inflation: II”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 15, pp.
43-52.
Lucas, Robert (2003) “Macroeconomic Priorities,” American Economic Review 93:1, 1–14.
Lüchinger, Simon Alois Stutzer and Rainer Winkelmann (2007) “The Happiness Gains From
Sorting and Matching in the Labor Market” WWZ Discussion Paper No. 0107,
University of Basel.
Mankiw, Gregory (2001) “US Monetary Policy During the 1990s”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper no. 8471, September.
Myers, D. and Ed Diener (1994) “Who is Happy?” Psychological Science, 6, pp. 10-19.
Oderberg, David (2000) “Is there a Right to be Worng?”, Philosphy, 75, pp. 517-37.
Rudebusch, Glenn and Lars Svensson (1999) “Policy Rules for Inflation targeting” in J.B. Taylor,
Editor, Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 203–246.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997) “An Optimization-Based Econometric Model
for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, pp. 297-346.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford (1999), “Interest Rate Rules in An Estimated Sticky
Price Model,” in Monetary Policy Rules, John B. Taylor (ed.), The University of Chicago
Press, pp. 57-119.
Rotemberg, Julio (2005) “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency of Price
Adjustment and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, May, pp. 829-852.
Rotemberg, Julio (2007) “Behavioural Aspects of Price Setting, and their Policy Implications”,
Paper prepared for the Federal Reserve of Boston, ‘Behavioural Policy Conference’,
September 2007.
Seligman, Martin (2004) “Can Happiness be Taught?”, Daedalus.
Shafir, E., Diamond, Peter and Tversky, Amos (1997) “Money Illusion”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112, pp. 341-374.
Shiller, Robert (1997) “Why Do People Dislike Inflation?” In Reducing Inflation: Motivation and
Strategy, Romer, Christine and Romer, David, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2006) “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
Laws and Family Distress”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), February.
Stutzer, Alois and Rafael Lalive (2004). "The Role of Social Work Norms in Job Searching and
Subjective Well-Being," Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 2(4), pp. 696-719.
40

Svensson, Lars (2002) Discussion of Justin Wolfers, “Is Business Cycle Volatility Costly?
Evidence from Surveys of Subjective Well-Being”, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper no. 9619. Presented at the Council on Foreign Relations/International
Finance conference, “Stabilizing the Economy”, New York, July 11, 2002.
Taylor, Dean (1989) “Stopping Inflation in the Dornbusch Model: Optimal Monetary Policies
with Alternate Price-Adjustment Equations”, Journal of Macroeconomics, Spring, pp. 199216.
The Economist (2002) “Survey: The World Economy: A Necessary Evil”, September 26th,
includes discussion of Justin Wolfers, “Is Business Cycle Volatility Costly? Evidence from
Surveys of Subjective Well-Being”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no.
9619.
Tyran, Jean and Ernst Fehr (2006) “Money Illusion and Coordination Failure”, Games and
Economic Behaviour, forthcoming.
Urry, H. L.; Nitschke, J. B.; Dolski, I.; Jackson, D. C.; Dalton, K. M.; Mueller, C. J.; Rosenkranz,
M. A.; Ryff, C. D.; Singer, B. H. and Davidson, R. J. (2004) “Making a Life Worth
Living: Neural Correlates of Well-being.” Psychological Science, vol 15 (6), pp. 367-72.
Watson, D. and A. Tellegen (1985) “Toward a Consensual Structure of Mood”, Psychological
Bulletin, 98, pp. 219-35.
Williams, John C. (2003) “Simple Rules for Monetary Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Review, pp. 1–12.
Winkelmann, Liliana and Rainer Winkelmann (1998) “Why are the Unemployed so Unhappy?
Evidence from Panel Data”, Economica, 65 (257), pp 1-15.
Woodford, Michael (2001) “Inflation Stabilization and Welfare”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper no. 8071.
Woodford, Michael (2001) “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy”, American Economic
Review, 91, pp. 232-37.
Wolfers, Justin (2003) “Is Business Cycle Volatily Costly? Evidence from Surveys of Subjective
Well-Being”, International Finance, 6(1), pp. 1-31.

41

