NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PASS-THROUGH OF EXCHANGE RATES AND COMPETITION BETWEEN FLOATERS
AND FIXERS
Paul R. Bergin
Robert C. Feenstra
Working Paper 13620
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13620

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

We thank Colin Cameron, Linda Goldberg, Oscar Jorda, Guido Kursteiner, and Robert Vigfusson
for helpful comments. We thank Benjamin Mandel for superb research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Paul R. Bergin and Robert C. Feenstra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Pass-through of Exchange Rates and Competition Between Floaters and Fixers
Paul R. Bergin and Robert C. Feenstra
NBER Working Paper No. 13620
November 2007
JEL No. F4
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how a rise in China's share of U.S. imports could lower pass-through of exchange
rates to U.S. import prices. We develop a theoretical model with variable markups showing that the
presence of exports from a country with a fixed exchange rate could alter the competitive environment
in the U.S. market. In particular, this encourages exporters from other countries to lower markups
in response to a U.S. depreciation, thereby moderating the pass-through to import prices. Free entry
is found to further moderate the pass-through, in that a U.S. depreciation encourages entry of exporters
whose costs are shielded by the fixed exchange rate, which further intensifies the competitive pressure
on other exporters. The model predicts that certain conditions are necessary to facilitate this 'China
explanation' for falling pass-through, including a 'North America bias' in U.S. preferences. The model
also produces a log-linear structural equation for pass-through regressions indicating how to include
the China share. Panel regressions over 1993–1999 support the prediction that a high China share in
imports lowers pass-through to U.S. import prices.

Paul R. Bergin
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu
Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
Exchange rate movements have several potentially important implications for the
domestic macroeconomy, including inflation variability, monetary policy effectiveness, and
current account adjustment. But the importance of these implications depends in part on how
much of the exchange rate movements are passed through to changes in import prices. A number
of recent papers have found evidence indicating a decline in exchange rate pass-through to
import prices in the U.S. While there appears to be agreement within the literature surveyed in
Goldberg and Knetter (1997) that the pass through in the 1980s was around 0.5, several papers
find much lower estimates for recent years. Marazzi et al (2005) estimate that the pass-through
coefficient for U.S. imports has declined gradually from 0.5 to around 0.2, and similar results are
found in Olivei (2002) and Gust et al (2006). It is less clear how this decline in pass through
applies to other countries, and how it applies to prices at the consumer level.1
Several potential explanations have been proposed for how pass-through might decline.
Taylor (2000) suggested that and environment of lower inflation might discourage firms from
adjusting import prices. Campa and Goldberg (2005) suggest and find evidence in support of the
idea that the composition of imports has shifted toward goods that are less sensitive to exchange
rates, that is, away from energy and toward manufactures. Others have suggested that the
competitive environment for imports has changed. Included in this group are Gust et al (2006),
which propose that increased trade integration has made exports more responsive to the prices of
their competitors. They develop a dynamic model with endogenous entry decisions and markups

1

Ihrig et al, (2006) document a fall in pass-through in other G-7 countries, and Marazzi et al (2005) for Japan and
less strongly for Germany. Campa and Goldberg (2005) find that the decline in pass through is statistically
significant in only 4 of the 23 OECD countries they study, and in particular for the U.S. they do not find a
significant decline. Campa and Goldberg (2006) find evidence that the pass through to retail prices may have
increased over the past decade, even in cases where import prices at the dock might be experiencing falling passthrough.

2
that respond endogenously to entry. Also in this category would be the proposition by Marazzi et
al (2005) that the increased role of China as a source of U.S. imports has lowered pass-through,
both due to the direct effect of its stable exchange rate against the dollar, and by inducing a
competitive response in the exporters of other countries.
Evidence varies regarding which of these types of channels is relevant. Campa and
Goldberg (2005) find in their multi-country study that pass-through tends to be stable within
industry categories, but that the change in composition can account for much of any overall fall
in aggregate pass-through. While the evidence in Marazzi et al (2005) agrees that a falling share
of oil imports plays a role, nonetheless, evidence is found that pass-through has fallen across a
wide range of goods. Further, they also find a correlation between industries that experienced a
fall in pass-through and those that experienced the strongest increase in Chinese imports.
The primary purpose of this paper is to provide a theoretical framework for exploring
how the rise of China as a supplier to the U.S. could have altered the competitive environment
for U.S. imports, and thereby generate time-variation in pass-through. The theory draws upon
recent developments in trade theory to shed light on this issue, including endogenous entry and
markup decisions by firms. The explanation we develop is similar in spirit to that in Dornbusch
(1987), in that the market share of the fixed-exchange rate country in our model affects passthrough in the same manner as the market share of domestic firms does in Dornbusch’s model.2
Gust et al (2006) also draws similar inspiration from trade literature in its study of pass-through.
We differ from both of these papers in our use of translog preferences to generate time-variation
in markups and pass-through. In fact, we regard the extension of translog expenditure function

2

Dornbusch was the first to show how market share influences the degree of pass-through, using a model of
Cournot competition. Our model instead uses monopolistic competition, but allows market share to affects passthrough by using a utility form that is not CES. Note that our translog expenditure form is not a special case of the
demand structures studied by Dornbusch.

3
found in our paper’s several propositions to be a theoretical contribution that could be of use in
studying a range of other issues. Finally, we also note that the lessons developed in our model
are not restricted to China, but are relevant for understanding the effects of changing market
share more broadly of all trading partners with fixed exchange rates.
We consider a three-country model with the United States, Mexico and China. We
eliminate any role for U.S. competing firms to affect the pass-though of exchange rates by
supposing that the United States only sells a homogeneous exported good. Our focus is on the
interplay of Mexican and Chinese exporters to the U.S., both of whom sell a differentiated good.
The peso is treated as floating, of course, while the yuan (or renminbi) is fixed. In section 2 we
give a basic outline of the monetary model, which features wages that are fixed in the short-run.
Beyond the simple distinction between the short-run (with fixed wages) and the long-run (with
flexible wages), we do not introduce any further dynamics into the model.
In section 3, we analyze the pricing decisions of Mexican and Chinese exporters to the
U.S. market. We use a translog expenditure function to model U.S. demand. As previously
analyzed by Bergin and Feenstra (2000, 2001), this expenditure function allows for endogenous
markups that vary with the exchange rate, thereby leading to incomplete pass-through. In
addition, this expenditure function can be used even when the number of firms varies due to free
entry under monopolistic competition (Bergin and Feenstra, 2006). In that case, it is necessary to
solve for the reservation prices of goods that are not available (i.e. prices when demand is zero).
In this paper we extend the results of Feenstra (2003) in solving for reservation prices, obtaining
a reduced-form expenditure function that allows for a taste bias in favor of some goods. In
particular, we shall suppose that U.S. buyers have a taste bias in favor of Mexican goods, due to
its proximity, common border and NAFTA.

4
In section 4, we analyze the pass-through of exchange rates treating the number of firms
as fixed. Competition from China diminishes the pass-through of the peso exchange rate to the
price of U.S. imports from Mexico. We show that when we aggregate up to multilateral import
prices and exchange rates – by aggregating over Mexico and China – then pass-through is still
incomplete (even though we have assumed no competing U.S. firms). The incomplete passthrough is related to our assumed taste bias in favor of Mexico, and becomes more pronounced
as the number of competing Chinese exporters grows. So competition between China and
Mexico – in the presence of a U.S. taste bias – results in incomplete pass-through.
In section 5, we examine the empirical implication using disaggregate U.S. import data
from the 1990s. Like Marazzi et al (2005, pp. 21-23), we test whether having more competition
from China results in lower pass-through coefficients at an industry level, and find support for
this hypothesis.3 Section 6 extends the model by allowing for the free entry of firms, which can
occur in response to monetary and exchange rates shocks. In that case we simulate the model,
and find a further reason for incomplete pass-through: a monetary expansion in the U.S. leads to
greater entry of firms in China, creating an extra competitive effect that leads to lower import
prices. So the free entry of firms lowers the pass-through of the dollar further. Conclusions are
provided in section 7, and the proofs of Proposition are gathered in the Appendix.

2. Countries, Commodities and Currencies
There are three countries: Mexico (denoted by x) , China (denoted y for yuan), and the
Untied States (denoted by z). The U.S. produces the z good, which can be thought of as an

3

Our empirical investigation differs from Marazzi et al (2005) in several respects. Foremost, we develop a
theoretical justification for including the China share as a structural component of a pass-through regression. In
terms of estimation differences, we run a pooled panel pass-through regression across industries and time, rather
than running pass through regressions for two sub-samples of time and comparing changes in pass through to

5
homogeneous good (e.g. agriculture), and exports it to both Mexico and China. One unit of labor
produces one unit of the z good, so the price of the U.S. good equals the wage, wz. China and
Mexico produce a differentiated good that is sold back to the United States. Their prices are px
(in pesos) and py (in yuan), which are common across all the varieties sold by each country. The
$/peso exchange rate is ex, so the $ price of imports from Mexico is expx, and the $/yuan
exchange rate is e y , so the $ price of imports from China is e y p y . Note that e y is a fixed

exchange rate, whereas ex is flexible.
We model the cash-in-advance constraint as in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000). Each
government provides a money transfer of Mi, i = x, y, z to home residents at the beginning of the
period, and imposes an identical tax at the end of the period after all transactions are made.
Money will then serve as a unit of account in each country, but does not have any distortionary
effect by itself. We presume that expenditure in each country equals the money supply from the
cash-in-advance constraints. Under balanced trade, expenditure in turn equals the value of
output. With labor as the only factor of production, and with zero profits (due to free entry,
discussed in section 6), the money supply in each country therefore equals wage income:
M i = w i Li ,

i = x, y, z.

(1)

Each country spends a fraction β of wage income on its own, homogeneous good. In the
United States, the remaining fraction (1–β) of expenditure is spent on the differentiated good,
imported from either China or Mexico. For Mexico and China, the remaining (1–β) of income is
spent on the U.S. homogeneous good. For example, Mexican spending on the U.S. good is

changes in China share across industries. Our data also differ, in that exchange rate and tariff measures (from
Feenstra et al, 2007) are constructed to be consistent with the theoretical price index we use.

6
(1 − β) w x L x = (1 − β) M x . The peso price of the U.S. good equals the $ price wz (since one unit

of labor produces one unit of output) divided by the peso exchange rate ex :
Mexican demand for U.S. good =

(1 − β) M x
(1 − β) M x
= ex
.
wz / ex
wz

Likewise, Chinese demand is:
Chinese demand for U.S. good =

(1 − β) M y
w z / ey

= ey

(1 − β) M y
wz

,

where the yuan exchange rate, e y , is fixed. Finally, U.S. demand for its own good is:
U.S. demand for U.S. good =

βM z
.
wz

Summing all the demands we get the U.S. equilibrium condition,
ex

(1 − β) M y βM z
(1 − β) M x
+ ey
+
= Lz .
wz
wz
wz

(2)

While (2) has been derived as the goods market equilibrium condition for the U.S., it can
also be interpreted as asset market equilibrium condition for dollars. Multiplying both sides of
the equation by wz, the right of (2) is the U.S. money supply Mz. On the left, the first term is the
U.S. dollars that Mexican consumers would need to purchase from the U.S.; the second term is
the dollars that Chinese consumers would need; and the third term is the dollars that U.S.
consumers need to purchase their local good. So under the assumption that consumers use the
currency of the selling country, (2) can be interpreted as the asset market equilibrium condition
for dollars.

7
We assume that wages are fixed at the beginning of the period, and that labor supply is
demand determined. We can model the specifics of the wage-setting mechanism as in Obstfeld
and Rogoff (2000), which leads to a nominal wage w i that is fixed in the short-run. 4
Determining the Mexican exchange rate

In the short-run wages are fixed, so using (1) we write (2) as:
ex

(1 − β) M c βM z
(1 − β) M x
M
= Lz = z
+ ey
+
wz
wz
wz
wz
⇒ e x M x + ey M y = M z .

(3)

A 1% increase in the U.S. money supply can be accommodated by a 1% increase in ex (a
depreciation of the dollar) and a 1% increase in the Chinese money supply (to keep e y fixed). In
the background, there is 1% more of the U.S. good produced, which is consumed both in the
U.S. (due to increased expenditure), in China (due to increased expenditure) and in Mexico (due
to an appreciation of the peso and lower prices there).
Notice that if China does not accommodate the U.S. monetary expansion by increasing its
money supply in the same proportion, then the peso will appreciate by a different amount. In
general, given some assumption on the responsiveness of My to Mz, then (3) is enough to
determine the peso exchange ex in the short-run. In sections 3 and 4, we will not need to make

ε

4

We can follow Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) in specifying expected utility for agent h as E[ln C( h ) − ( a / ε ) L ( h ) ] ,
where C is the Cobb-Douglas consumption index over home and foreign goods with home share β described in the
text above. Due to the fact that the consumption sub-index over foreign varieties for the U.S. is only implicitly
defined under our translog preferences to follow, we apply the derivation of Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) only for the
cases of Mexico and China. Fortunately, solving for pass-through in our model requires us to find wage levels and
hence costs for these two countries only (and we omit the country subscript). Consumers choose consumption and
their own wage w(h) to maximize utility subject to their budget constraint and the demand for labor type h,
L( h ) = [ w ( h ) / w ]

−φ

L , where w and L are CES indexes over the wages w(h) and labor demands L(h). Then it can be

shown that optimal wage setting by each agent leads to the aggregate wage w = −[ φ /( φ − 1)]E[ LU ' L ] / E[ LU ' C / P ] ,
where P is the price index of consumption goods. For suitable choices of the various parameters ε, a, and φ>1,

8
any particular assumption on the responsiveness of My to Mz, and hence on the movement in the
peso rate ex. In section 6, however, we will use the asset market equilibrium condition for yuan
to show how the Chinese money supply My changes in response to the U.S. money supply Mz,
and therefore solve the equilibrium change in the peso rate ex.

3. Translog Expenditure Function

A fraction (1-β) of expenditure in the U.S. is spent on imported differentiated goods,
produced by Mexico and China. Since the work of Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), a common choice
for the utility function defined over the differentiated products has been the constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) form. Despite its tractability, this functional form has serious drawbacks for
the analysis of firm’s pricing. Since optimal prices are a constant markup over marginal costs,
there is no strategic interaction between the firms.
This special feature of the CES need not carry over to other choices of the sub-utility
function. We will consider a sub-utility function defined by the dual expenditure function which
is assumed to have a translog form. That is, given nominal expenditure E, the sub-utility from
consumption of the differentiated products 1,…,N is u = E/e(p), where the unit-expenditure
function e(p) is defined by:
~
N

lne( p) = α 0 + ∑ α i ln p i +
i =1

1
2

~ ~
N N

∑∑ γ ij ln pi ln p j ,

(4)

i =1 j =1

~
with γ ij = γ ji . The parameter N is the maximum number of possible products, but many of these
might not be produced: the prices used for products not available should equal their reservation
prices (where demand is zero). Notice that in the CES case the reservation prices are infinite, so

conditional on the means, variances , means and covariances of consumption, labor, and price, we can obtain any

9
these prices drop out of the CES expenditure function (where the infinite prices are raised to a
negative power). But in the translog case we need to explicitly solve for the reservation prices.
In order for the translog expenditure function to be homogeneous of degree one, we need
to impose the conditions,
~
N

~
N

i =1

i =1

∑ α i = 1 , and ∑ γ ij = 0 .

(5)

We will further require that all goods enter “symmetrically” in the γij coefficients, and impose
that additional restrictions that:
~
⎛ N − 1⎞
γ
~
γ ii = − γ ⎜⎜ ~ ⎟⎟, and γ ij = ~ for i ≠ j, with i, j = 1,…, N .
N
⎝ N ⎠

(6)

Notice that we do not restrict the αi coefficients beyond the restriction in (5). That is in contrast
~
to Feenstra (2003), who added the further restriction that α i = 1 / N.
We now show how the symmetry restrictions in (6) allow us to solve for the reservation
prices for goods not available, substitute these back into the expenditure function in (4), and
obtain a reduced-form expenditure function that is very convenient to work with. In particular,
this reduced-form expenditure function remains valid even as the number of available products –
which we denote by N – varies. The following Proposition generalizes the result in Feenstra
(2003), by allowing for αi terms that are not symmetric:

Proposition 1

Suppose that the symmetry restriction (6), with γ > 0, are imposed on the expenditure function
(4). In addition, suppose that only the goods i=1,…,N are available, so that the reservation prices
~
~
p j for j=N+1,…, N are used. Then the expenditure function becomes:

desired value for the optimal preset wage.

10
N

lne( p) = a 0 + ∑ a i ln p i +
i =1

1
2

N N

∑∑ c ij ln pi ln p j .

(7)

i =1 j =1

where,

c ii = − γ ( N − 1) / N, and c ij = γ / N for i ≠ j with i, j = 1,…,N,
a i = αi +

1
N

(1 − ∑

N
α
i =1 i

),

for i = 1,…,N,

2⎫
~
⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎧ N~
N
⎛1⎞
a 0 = α 0 + ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ ⎨∑i = N +1 α i2 + ⎜ ⎟⎛⎜ ∑i = N +1 α i ⎞⎟ ⎬ ,
⎠ ⎭
⎝ N ⎠⎝
⎝ 2γ ⎠⎩

(8)
(9)

(10)

Notice that the expenditure function in (7) looks like a conventional translog function, but
now defined over the available goods i=1,…,N, while the symmetry restrictions in (6) continue
to hold on the coefficients cij. To interpret (9), it implies each of the coefficients αi is increased
by the same amount to ensure that the coefficients ai sum to unity over i=1,…,N. The term a0 in
(10) incorporates the coefficients αi of the unavailable products. If the number of available
products N rises, then a0 falls, indicating a welfare gain from increasing the number of products.
With this Proposition, we can work with the expenditure function in (7), knowing that
the reservation prices for unavailable goods are being solved for in the background. We can
differentiate the unit-expenditure function to obtain the expenditure shares,
N

s i = a i + ∑ c ijp j .

(11)

j =1

The parameters cij in (11) are symmetric over goods sold by Mexico and China, indicating equal
substitution between these goods. We shall put further structure on the taste ai parameters by
supposing that the United States has a bias towards goods made in Mexico, due to its proximity,
common border and NAFTA. That is, we shall assume ax for any Mexican good exceeds ay for

11
any variety from China. From (9) we see that the assumption a x > a y is equivalent to α x > α y ,
but that the ax and ay parameters also depend on the number of available goods N.
For products from Mexico, the U.S. dollar price is p i = p x e x , and for products from
China the U.S. dollar price is p i = p y e y . We assume that these prices are common across the
firms from each country (due to identical costs), and denoting the number of Mexican varieties
by Nx and the number of Chinese varieties by Ny, with N x + N y = N . Then using (8), the share
equations are simplified as:
sx = a x −
sy = a y −

γN y
N

[ln(e x p x ) − ln( ey p y )] ,

(12a)

[

(12b)

]

γN x
ln( e y p y ) − ln(e x p x ) .
N

Using these demand equations, we next solve for the firm’s optimal prices, and then the passthrough of the exchange rate.

4. Pass-though of Exchange Rates with Fixed Number of Firms

From the perspective of a firm selling one of the differentiated products, the elasticity of
demand for the input is computed from (11) as ηi = 1 −

c
∂ ln s i
γ ( N − 1)
= 1 − ii = 1 +
, γ > 0.
∂ ln p i
si
si N

We will ignore uncertainty about the exchange rate, and suppose that firms set prices (in their
own currencies) after knowing the exchange rate. One unit of production uses one unit of labor
in either country. Then each firm will optimally choose its price as,
⎛ η ⎞
⎛
si N ⎞
p i = w i ⎜⎜ i ⎟⎟ = w i ⎜⎜1 +
⎟.
γ ( N − 1) ⎟⎠
⎝
⎝ ηi − 1 ⎠

(13)

12
The expenditure share can be substituted from (12) to obtain an expression for the
optimal price in (13), in terms of its marginal cost and the prices of its competitors. However,
this expression is nonlinear (involving the level of prices on the left, and the log of prices on the
right), and cannot be solved explicitly for the optimal price. So instead, we will consider taking
an approximation to (13) that will allow us to obtain a simple solution for the price. Taking logs
of both sides of (13) and using ln[1 + s i N / γ ( N − 1)] ≈ s i N / γ ( N − 1) which is valid for si small,
we obtain:
ln p x ≈ ln w x +

ln p y ≈ ln w y +

[

]

(14a)

[

]

(14b)

Ny
axN
−
ln(e x p x ) − ln( ey p y ) ,
γ ( N − 1) ( N − 1)
ayN
γ ( N − 1)

−

Nx
ln( e y p y ) − ln(e x p x ) .
( N − 1)

These are two equations to solve for the two prices – of Mexican and Chinese goods –
depending on the peso exchange rate (since the yuan exchange rate is fixed). Expressing the
prices on the left of (14) in dollars, we can re-write this system in matrix form as:
Ny
Ny ⎤
⎡
⎢1 + ( N −1) − ( N −1) ⎥
⎢
Nx
Nx ⎥
⎢⎣ − ( N −1) 1 + ( N −1) ⎥⎦

⎡
⎡ln(e x p x )⎤ ⎢ln(e x w x ) +
⎢ln( e p ) ⎥ = ⎢
y y ⎦
⎣
⎢⎣ln( e y w y ) +

The determinant of the matrix above is: Δ ≡ ⎡⎢1 +
⎣

axN ⎤
γ ( N −1) ⎥
ayN ⎥

.

γ ( N −1) ⎥
⎦

N ⎤
Nx ⎤ ⎡
1 + N −y1 ⎥
N −1 ⎥ ⎢

⎦⎣

2 N −1
N
N
− ⎛⎜ N −x1 ⎞⎟⎛⎜ N −y1 ⎞⎟ = ⎛⎜ N −1 ⎞⎟ .
⎠ ⎝
⎠
⎠⎝
⎦ ⎝

It follows that we can solve for the $ import prices by inverting the above matrix, and after some
simplification using (9) we obtain:

and

ln(e x p x ) =

Ny A
1
+ ln(e x w x ) +
,
( 2 N − 1) γ
γ ( N − 1)

(15a)

ln( e y p y ) =

Nx A
1
,
+ ln( e y w y ) −
γ ( N − 1)
( 2 N − 1) γ

(15b)

13
where,

A ≡ [( α x − α y ) − γ[ln(e x w x ) − ln( e y w y )] .

(15c)

Holding wages fixed, we solve for the effect of a dollar depreciation – as reflected in the peso
rate – on the $ prices of Mexican and Chinese goods:
Ny
d ln(e x p x )
= 1−
> 0,
d ln e x
( 2 N − 1)
d ln( e y p y )

and,

d ln e x

=

Nx
> 0.
( 2 N − 1)

(16a)

(16b)

We see that the dollar depreciation will raise the $ price of Mexican goods, but by an
amount less than unity. The greater is the number of Chinese varieties – reflecting more
competition from China – the smaller is the pass-through coefficient in (16a). The rise in the $
price of Mexican goods will also induce a rise in the $ price of Chinese goods in (16b), but by an
amount that becomes small as the number of Mexican varieties shrinks.

Pass-through of the multilateral exchange rate

The above equations (16) show the pass-through of the peso rate to dollar prices of
Mexican and Chinese goods. In practice, pass-through is often measured using multilateral
(aggregate) import prices and exchange rates. To achieve that here, define and import price and
multilateral exchange rate:
ln Pm ≡ (s x N x ) ln(e x p x ) + (s y N y ) ln( e y p y ) ,

(17a)

ln E m ≡ (s x N x ) ln(e x ) + (s y N y ) ln( e y ) .

(17b)

The weights using in these aggregates reflect the import shares of each firm selling from Mexico
and China, sx and sy, respectively, times the number of firms, Nx and Ny. So sxNx is the share of
U.S. imports coming from Mexico, and syNy is the share of imports coming from China, with

14
(sxNx + syNy) = 1. We shall treat these shares as constant when differentiating the aggregates (as
they would be in any price index), obtaining:
d ln Pm = (s x N x )d ln(e x p x ) + (s y N y )d ln( ey p y ) ,

(18a)

d ln E m = (s x N x )d ln(e x ),

(18b)

where in (18b) we make use of the fact that the yuan exchange rate is fixed. Then multiplying
(16a) by sxNx and (16b) by syNy and summing these equations, we obtain:
N y ⎛ sx − sy ⎞
d ln Pm
⎜
⎟ < 1 iff (s x − s y ) > 0.
= 1−
( 2 N − 1) ⎜⎝ s x ⎟⎠
d ln E m

(19)

Thus, pass-through of the multilateral exchange rate is incomplete provided that the perfirm (or per-product) share of Mexico exports to the U.S. exceeds that for China, (s x − s y ) > 0.
The intuition for this result is as follows. Equation (16a) shows that Mexican pass-through is
lowered by a high number of competing Chinese firms. But for Chinese prices, equation (16b)
shows that there is some price rise even though there is no movement in China’s bilateral
exchange rate. As a result, when computing the multilateral exchange rate and multilateral pass
through as averages over the two countries, a high weight on China tends to raise rather than
lower pass-through in (19). So pass through is lowered by having a large number of Chinese
firms while at the same time not having a large overall China share; this combination is possible
only if the per-firm share for Chinese firms is small. In short, the main lesson is that passthrough is reduced by having a large number of Chinese firms active in the U.S. market, rather
than by a large Chinese market share per se.
The condition of a smaller per-firm share for Chinese firms is likely to hold given our
earlier assumption that the United States has a taste bias for Mexican goods. Using (9), (12), and
(15) we solve for the shares:

15

sx =

1 Nx ⎛ N −1 ⎞
1 N y ⎛ N −1 ⎞
+
⎟ A , and s y = −
⎜
⎟A
⎜
N N ⎝ 2N − 1 ⎠
N N ⎝ 2N − 1 ⎠

(20)

where A ≡ [( α x − α y ) − γ[ln(e x w x ) − ln( e y w y )] , as in (15c). Provided that A > 0, then
(s x − s y ) > 0 and there is incomplete pass-through of the multilateral exchange rate:

Proposition 2

Provided that A > 0, then multilateral pass-through in (19) is less than unity and is decreasing in
Ny. If 0 < A < 1, then pass-through falls for any increase in Ny satisfying d ln N y > d ln N ≥ 0.

We see that provided the taste bias in favor of Mexico exceeds the wage differences
between the two countries, so that A > 0, then pass-through is incomplete. It is easy to show that
pass-through declines as the number of varieties coming from China grows, holding N fixed.
We further show in the Appendix that any increase in Ny exceeding the percentage increase in N,
d ln N y > d ln N ≥ 0 , will lower pass-through, using the mild additional restriction that A < 1.
The inequality d ln N y > d ln N ≥ 0 is satisfied, for example, by an increase in Ny holding Nx
fixed. So greater competition from China lowers the extent of pass-through.
It is worth reminding the reader that we have not considered competing U.S. firms in our
model, thereby ruling out the most obvious reason for incomplete pass-through, i.e. domestic
competition. What we have found is that the competition between Mexico and China, in the
presence of a U.S. taste bias towards Mexico – what we shall call a ‘North America bias’ – plays
much the same role as would domestic competition in dampening exchange rate pass-through.
Stately less formally, we are suggesting that the integration of the North American market
through NAFTA, combined with the rise of China as a major trading partner for the U.S., are a

16
potential explanation for the declining pass-though during the 1990s that has been observed for
the United States.

Estimating Equation

Using (15), (17) and (20), the import price index Pm is solved as:
ln Pm =

where:
and,

⎛ αx − αy ⎞
1
~
~
⎟⎟ B(s y N y )(s x N x ),
+ ln E m − B(s y N y )[ln E m − ln( e y w y )] + ⎜⎜
γ
γ ( N − 1)
⎝
⎠
~
ln E m ≡ [(s x N x ) ln(e x w x ) + (s y N y ) ln( e y w y )] ,
B≡

(s x − s y )
s x s y ( 2 N − 1)

> 0 provided that A > 0.

(21a)
(21b)
(21c)

Equation (21a) shows that the translog expenditure function leads to a log-linear equation for the
import price. The first term on the right of (21a), 1/γ(N – 1), reflects the monopoly markup. The
~
second term on the right, ln E m , equals the weighted exchange rate adjusted for wages in the
countries, or what we call multilateral labor costs. This term also appears in the third term on the
right of (21), but now it is specified as the difference between the multilateral labor costs and the
dollar wages paid in China. This third term is actually an interaction between the Chinese import
share, (s y N y ) , and the multilateral labor costs relative to the Chinese wage. An increase in the
~
Chinese share lowers U.S. import prices provided that ln E m > ln( e y w y ). The coefficient of this

interaction term is B, which depends on the Chinese and Mexican import shares for each variety
in (21c). While B is not a constant in theory, we shall treat it as constant over time (and across
industries) in our estimation.

17
In practice the real exchange rate is constructed as an index, and it is quite difficult to
meaningfully compare its level with the level of Chinese dollar wages. So when estimating (21)
we shall re-write it as:5
ln Pm =

1
~
+ [1 − B(s y N y )] ln E m + B(s y N y ) ln( e y w y )
( N − 1)
⎛ αx − αy ⎞
⎟⎟ B(s y N y )(1 − s y N y ).
+ ⎜⎜
γ
⎝
⎠

(22)

~
The multilateral labor costs ln E m now appears with a coefficient less than unity, in the second
term on the right. The magnitude of that coefficient depends on the Chinese import share, which
~
enters as an interaction with ln E m . An increase in the Chinese share reduces the extent of
exchange rate pass-through. The third term on the right of (22) is an interaction between the
Chinese import share and Chinese dollar wages. If wages where treated as constant over the
estimation period, then the third term is just the Chinese share itself, which can enter with a
positive or negative coefficient (depending on the sign of ln( ey w y ) ); alternatively, the Chinese
wages can be treated as a time trend. The final term on the right of (22) is another interaction
term arising from the translog specification, between the Chinese share and one minus that share,
which enters with a positive coefficient since ( α x − α y ) / γ > 0.

5. Pass-through in the United States

With these initial theoretical results, we turn to an empirical test of the model using data
for disaggregate U.S. imports. In particular, we test the hypothesis that having more competition

5

Since our model is structural, in principle we could back out the structural parameters from the reduced form
regressions. But since we only estimate one of these equations, the import price equation without the import demand
equation, it is not possible to identify the structural parameters.

18
from China results in lower pass-through coefficients during the 1990s. We first discuss the data
used, and then estimate the pricing equation.

International Data

We make use of a dataset constructed by Feenstra, Reinsdorf and Slaughter (2007). The
dataset uses detailed monthly price data gathered by the International Price Program (IPP) at the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to construct Törnqvist price indexes from September 1993 to
December 1999. The use of these indexes are preferred to the Laspeyres versions that are
published by BLS, and follow our definitions in (18) more closely.6 Feenstra, Reinsdorf and
Slaughter (2007) use these data to analyze the Information Technology Agreement (ITA), which
eliminated tariffs on all high-technology products beginning in 1997. Because their focus is on
the ITA products, which requires special treatment for tariffs, and few of these products were
supplied by China over the 1993-99 period, we focus here on non-ITA products.
Törnqvist price indices for import prices are constructed for each 5-digit Enduse industry
using annual trade weights. From month t-1 to t in import sector j, the Törnqvist price index is:
t −1, t
PMj

⎡
t ⎞⎤
⎛ p mi
t
⎢
⎜
= exp
w mi ln t −1 ⎟ ⎥ ,
⎜p ⎟⎥
⎢i∈I
⎝ mi ⎠ ⎦
⎣ j

∑

(23)

t
denotes the price for disaggregate import commodity i in month t;7 Ij is the set of
where: p mi

commodities included in a particular import or export 5-digit Enduse industry j; and the weights
t
w mi
denote the annual import shares for commodity i within industry j. 8

6

The Törnqvist price indexes were constructed for the study by Alterman, Diewert and C. Feenstra (1999), which
compared alternatives to the Laspeyres formula now used by IPP.
7
The disaggregate import and export prices that we start with are at the “classification group” level use by BLS,
which is similar to the HS 10-digit level.
8
Though a proper monthly price index would use monthly trade weights, at this level of disaggregation these
monthly weights are too volatile to be reliable, so the annual weights are used instead.

19
In addition to the import price index, we have constructed several other indexes: (i) the
t −1, t
price index of exports for each 5-digit Enduse industry, denoted PXj
, which uses the
t
in a Törnqvist formula like (23); (i) a price index of ad valorem
disaggregate export prices p xi

tariffs for each 5-digit Enduse industry, denoted by Tar jt −1, t , which uses disaggregate tariffs in a
Törnqvist formula like (23); (iii) and a weighted average of the exchange rate times the producer
price indexes (PPI) for U.S. trading partners, denoted by Exch_PPI tj−1, t . In this index we start
with nominal exchange rates times the PPI for each country, average these across source
countries for U.S. imports (using import country weights), and then aggregate these across
commodities again using the Törnqvist formula (with import commodity weights).
We gauge Chinese competition by the share of U.S. import purchases coming from China
plus Hong Kong, or what we simply call the Chinese import share, within each 5-digit Enduse
industry. These are measured from annual U.S. trade data from Feenstra, Romalis and Schott
(1989). The Chinese import shares in each broad Enduse sector are illustrated in Figure 1. For
the entire sample used in the regression analysis below, including capital goods, automobiles and
parts, consumer goods and chemicals, but excluding all products covered by the ITA, the average
share of Chinese imports grew steadily from 9% in 1993 to 14% in 1999.9 The highest Chinese
import share occurs in consumer goods, where the share rises from 16 to 24% over the course of
the sample. In contrast, the Chinese share of capital goods accounted for only 1 to 2.5% of U.S.
imports, and the Chinese share in ITA products fell from 7.5% to 5% over the period.
For comparison, in Figure 2 we illustrate the North American share of U.S. imports,
defined as the import share coming from Canada plus Mexico. For the total sample of non-ITA

9

The rise in China’s share came at the expense in part of other Asian exporters, some of which fixed their own
exchange rates during this period.

20
products, the North American share was relatively flat, growing from 20% in 1993 to 23.5% in
1999. For the ITA products, the North American share increased the most, from below 20% to
27%. The North America share of consumer goods grow modestly from an initial low of 12% to
16.5% in 1999, while capital goods (which exclude autos) had a higher share but were generally
flat and even declined over certain parts of the sample period.

Impact of Chinese Competition on Exchange Rate Pass-through
t
t
Cumulating the monthly indexes defined above, let PMj
, PXj
, Tar jt , and Exch * PPI tj

denote the cumulative indexes of import prices (tariff-inclusive), export prices, tariffs, and the
exchange rate times the PPI for trading partners, in each 5-digit Enduse industry. We shall
estimate the pass-through of exchange rates by pooling across a large subset of U.S. import data.
All of the regressions described in Table 1 draw on Enduse categories 2 (capital goods), 3
(automobiles and parts) and 4 (consumer goods excluding automobiles). We exclude agricultural
goods and most raw materials (Enduse 0 and 1). 10 But chemicals, Enduse 125, comprises several
large and important categories of goods and hence is included as well.
We initially consider the following price regression in Table 1:
t
ln PMj
= αj +

9

∑ β A Exch_PPI tj− A + γ ln PXjt + ε jt ,

(24)

A=0

where α j is a 5-digit Enduse fixed effect, and we include the current monthly value and 6 lags
of the effective exchange rate Exch_PPI tj− A . Generally, pass-through regressions should include
prices of goods that compete with the imports, such as domestic U.S. prices. Because these price

10

The agriculture and raw materials Enduse categories (0 and 1, respectively) do not always match imports and
exports, and hence our U.S. export prices cannot be used as a control in the import price equation. Also excluded are
all 5-digit Enduse industries that contain some products covered by the ITA. After these selections, the dataset
includes 41 5-digit Enduse categories, or roughly 40 percent of total trade value over the sample period.

21
indexes are not available on an Enduse basis for the U.S., we have instead included the U.S.
t
export prices PXj
in each 5-digit Enduse industry.

Panel (A) of Table 1 shows the results using the entire sample of non-agricultural, nonITA products. The fixed-effects ordinary least squares (FE-OLS) estimate of regression (1)
shows incomplete pass-through of exchange rates of 0.40, with a smaller coefficient on the
export price. The remaining specifications test the effect of Chinese competition on passthrough, by interacting the exchange rate with the share of Chinese imports in each Enduse
category:
t
ln PMj
= αj +

6

∑ β A Exch_PPI tj− A +

A=0

6

∑ δA [Exch_PPI tj− A × Share tjchina ]

A=0

(25)

t
+ γ ln PXj
+ θ' Z tj + ε jt .

The sum of the coefficients δA on the interaction term is the incremental pass-through due to
changing the China share from zero to one. The additional terms Z tj appearing in (25) are control
variables such as imports tariffs, the Chinese share of imports and other terms suggested by (22).
In regression (2) of Table 1(A), we include the interaction between the exchange rate and
the Chinese import share. The FE-OLS estimate of

∑A δ A

is positive but small. From the

structural equation in (22), however, we know that additional controls are needed: treating the
Chinese wage ln( ey w y ) as a constant, we should include the Chinese import share itself as a
control, as shown in regression (3). In that case, the interaction term of the exchange rate with
the Chinese share becomes negative, with a coefficient of –0.4, and statistically significant.
In regression (4) we further add other controls suggested by the structural equation (22):
by treating the Chinese wage ln( ey w y ) as a time trend, we should also include the interaction

22
between the Chinese share and time; and the final term in (22) is an interaction between the
Chinese share and one minus that share. We also include import tariffs; even though the import
prices are tariff-free, changes in the tariff levels will still affect import prices under imperfect
competition, as in our model. Including these additional controls more than doubles the
magnitude of OLS coefficient on the interaction term, from –0.4 to –0.95. To interpret the
estimate of –0.95, an increase in the Chinese share from 9% to 14%, as occurred during the
sample period, lowers pass-through by 0.95×0.05 = 0.047, or roughly 10% of its estimated
magnitude over our sample period 1993–1999.
The FE-OLS estimates discussed so far are consistent, but the standard errors are
incorrect if the data are nonstationary. In fact, we are unable to reject nonstationarity in the
logged series of import prices, export prices and effective exchange rate variables at the 5%
level, using the Im, Pesaran and Shin (IPS) panel unit root test, assuming individual effects and
trends. We further perform tests to determine whether these three variables are cointegrated.
Specifically, IPS panel unit root tests like those above are conducted on the residuals from
regression (4). We reject the unit root in the residuals at the 1% level, supporting a hypothesis of
cointegration. This result likely reflects the fact that we are using disaggregated industry-level
data rather than full national aggregate import prices, where the latter is the norm in the macro
literature. Aggregation bias, of the type demonstrated in Imbs et al (2005), is less likely to
contaminate our industry- level data.
Consequently, we estimate our pass-through regressions taking account of cointegration,
rather than estimating in first differences. Fortunately, a new estimator ‘pooled mean group’
(PMG) estimator is available in STATA, due to Pesaran, Shin and Smith (1997, 1999) and coded

23
by Blackburne and Frank (2007), which is maximum likelihood for cointegrated panels.11 To
explain this estimator, denote the right-hand side variables in (25) that have unit-roots by X tj ,
which includes the effective exchange rate Exch_PPI tj , its interaction with the Chinese share,
t
and the exports price ln PXj
. Denote the coefficients of these lagged variables by the vector

η jA = (β jA , δ jA , γ jA )' , A = 0,..., q, where we assume the same lag length q for all variables but

allow the coefficients to vary across Enduse categories j. Further add the auto-regressive term
t -1
onto the right of (25).12 Then the resulting equation can be equivalently written in the
ρ j ln PMj

error-correction form as:
t
Δ ln PMj
= αj +

t -1
− η' X tj −1 ) + ε jt ,
∑ η' jA ΔX tj− A + θ' j ΔZ tj + φ j (ln PMj
q -1

(26)

A=0

where φ j = −(1 − ρ j ) < 0 indicates the speed of adjustment to the long run, and we assume that
η= −

∑A = 0 η jA / φ j . That is, the PMG estimator allows for differing short-run coefficients ηjA
q

and θ jA across Enduse categories, but assumes that the long-run coefficients η appearing within
the error-correction vector are identical. This assumption allows us to pool across Enduse
categories to obtain the maximum likelihood long-run estimates.
In the remaining columns of Table 1 we show the PMG estimates. In specification (5)
using only the effective exchange rate and the export price, we obtain exactly the same passthrough estimates of 0.4 as in the OLS estimates. Adding the interaction with the China import
share in specification (6), the coefficient is tightly estimated at –0.6, and remains about the same
when the import tariffs are added into the long-run relationship in specification (7). Note that the

11

This estimator is also discussed by Breitung and Pesaran (2005, p. 37), and is invoked by the xtpmg command.

24
PMG estimator does not rely on using the China share as a control, or the China share times one
minus the share, because these variables are omitted from estimation. This occurs because the
China share is measured on an annual basis, so in first-differences it varies only in January of
each year. STATA omits this variable from estimation within the first-differenced variables
ΔX tj− A in (26), and hence, does not accept it into the error-correction term either.

A final coefficient reported in Table 1 is the estimate of the adjustment parameters φ j ,
which are averaged across the Enduse categories. The averaged estimate is –0.17 or –0.18, and is
significantly difference from zero. If the panel was not cointegrated, then we would expect this
coefficient to be zero, so its estimate further supports the cointegration of the panel.
A greater impact of the rising Chinese share is obtained from the subset of the data for
consumer goods, in Table l panel (B), in which Chinese competition is strong and rising. The
FE-OLS specification in regression (4) has a coefficient on the interaction between the Chinese
share and exchange rate of –1.16, along with a pass-through coefficient of –0.54. For this sector,
the Chinese share shown in Figure 1 has increase from about 16% to 24% over 1993-1999,
which lowers pass-through by 1.16×0.08 = 0.09, or 17% of its estimated magnitude. In the PMG
estimates in specification (7), the interaction term becomes –0.73, along with a pass-through
coefficient of –0.47. In this case, the rising Chinese import share lowers pass-through by
0.73×0.08 = 0.06, or 12% of its estimated magnitude. So according to either estimate, the impact
of Chinese competition on reducing pass-through is greater for consumer goods than for the total
sample of consumer goods, capital goods, autos and chemicals.
We have also examined the other major Enduse sectors within the total sample of nonITA commodities (i.e. capital goods, autos and chemicals), as well as the Enduse categories that
12

Actually, the xtpmg estimator allows for autoregressive lags of the dependent variable up to length p, where

25
include imports covered by the ITA. The results are sensitive to the estimator (FE-OLS versus
PMG), as well as to the controls that are included in the specification. Sometimes the interaction
of the China import share with the exchange rate has a negative coefficient, as implied by our
theory, but in other specifications with the same Enduse category, the interaction term can
become positive. The common feature of all these Enduse categories is that they have a small
share of imports from China during the sample period. In contrast, consumer goods shown in
Table 1(B) have a large and rising import share from China. So we conclude, not surprisingly,
that the impact of Chinese competition on pass-through can be reliably estimated only for goods
where the imports from China are substantial.

6. Free Entry of Firms

In the previous section we solved for the multilateral pass-through in (19) while treating
the number of products sold by Mexico and China as fixed. But as suggested by Proposition 2,
an increase in the number of products sold into the U.S. can dampen pass-through. We now
explore the impact of free entry by firms. We begin by computing the full short-run equilibrium
of the model, with fixed wages but allowing for free entry; we also determine the change in the
Chinese money supply needed to sustain the fixed exchange rate. Allowing for free entry and the
endogenous Chinese money supply results in a five equation system to determine equilibrium,
which we will analyze by simulation.
With expenditure in the United States equal to Mz (from the cash-in-advance constraint),
and the fraction (1–β) spent on the differentiated good, the expenditure on each Mexican and
Chinese good sold in the U.S. is s x (1 − β) M z and s y (1 − β) M z , respectively. From the firstorder condition (13), we readily calculate that profits (before deducting fixed costs) are then
both p and q are chosen by the program.

26
π i = s i (1 − β) M z / ηi . The free-entry or zero-profit condition in Mexico and China ensures that

profits equal fixed costs s i (1 − β) M z / ηi = e i w i f i . Using the formula for the elasticity of
demand, the free-entry condition can be written as:
⎡ (1 − β) M z ⎤
⎛ N − 1⎞
s i2 ⎢
− si − γ⎜
⎟ = 0,
⎥
⎝ N ⎠
⎣ ei w ifi ⎦

i = x, y.

(27)

This condition along with (20) provides 4 equations in 4 unknowns: si and Ni, i = x,y.
A solution to this system is not guaranteed, however. For example, if A = 0 then it is
readily apparent that Nx and Ny do not appear at all in the system: we have s i = 1 / N from (20),
and then we solve for N from (27) provided that e x w x f x = e y w y f y . In that case we solve for
the total number of products sold in the U.S. but with an indeterminate number coming from
each country. Conversely, if e x w x f x ≠ e y w y f y then we would obtain a boundary solution
where either all products come from Mexico or all come from China. These situations also apply
to a model with CES demand and two exporting countries, where it is most likely that zeroprofits are obtained in only one exporting country (with negative profits in the other); or, if zeroprofits hold in both exporting countries because costs are identical, then we could not solve for
the number of products exported from each but only the total number of products exported.
When A > 0, however, then it is becomes possible to find a solution for Nx and Ny both
positive and zero profits in both countries, as shown by the following result:

Proposition 3

Let Bi ≡ (1 − β)( M z / e i w i f i ) denote the U.S. expenditure on the differentiated good as
compared to the fixed costs of producing a new variety in each country, i = x,y. When A > 0 and
γ = 1, a solution to (20) and (27) exists with N i > 0, i = x,y, and N > 2 provided that:

27
(a) By > Bx > 4;
(b) A∈(Ay, Ax), where the interval (Ay, Ax) ⊂ R+ is non-empty.

When A > 0 then to obtain a zero-profit solution we also need to have By > Bx as shown
by (a), which means that the Mexican fixed costs must be higher than the Chinese fixed costs,
e x w x f x > e y w y f y . The further condition that By > Bx > 4 ensures that the equilibrium number

of product N exceeds 2, so that at least one product can be produced in each country.13 Condition
(b) states the U.S. taste bias towards Mexican varieties must exceed a lower bound Ay > 0, but
also less than an upper-bound Ax. The interval (Ay, Ax) is defined by the values of Bx and By, as
shown in the Appendix. Provided that these conditions are met then there exists a zero-profit
equilibrium with varieties exported to the U.S. by both Mexico and China.
Having established the existence of a zero-profit equilibrium, we should also close the
model to show how the Chinese money supply My and the peso exchange rate ex are established.
Recall from section 2 that with the cash-in-advance constraints, the goods market equilibrium
condition for the U.S. can also be interpreted as the asset market equilibrium condition for
dollars. That gave use one equilibrium condition to determine My and ex. The other equilibrium
condition comes from examining the goods market equilibrium in either China or Mexico, which
will be equivalent to the asset market equilibrium for that currency.14
Focusing on China, one unit of the differentiated good is produced with one unit of labor.
Then the labor used to produce exports to the U.S. is:

13

It turns out that the equilibrium number of products satisfies

Bx < N <

By , which generalizes the “square

root rule” for the equilibrium number of products found by Bergin, Feenstra and Hanson (2007).
14
By Walras' law, goods/asset market equilibrium in any two countries will imply that that the equilibrium condition
holds in the third country.

28

Labor demand from Chinese exports to U.S. =

N y s y (1 − β) M z
ey p y

+ N yf y ,

where the first term is the labor used in production, and the second is labor used in fixed costs.
We assume that the differentiated good is only demanded by the United States, and that China
does not export anything to Mexico. The Chinese consumers devote β of their expenditure to a
locally-produced homogeneous good. Then the labor used to produce local goods in China is:
Labor demand from Chinese local consumption =

βM y
wy

.

It follows that the labor market equilibrium condition in China is:
s y N y (1 − β) M z
ey p y

+ N yf y +

βM y
wy

= Ly .

(28)

We can simplify this condition by using the zero-profit condition in China, which is
s y (1 − β) M z / ηy = e y w y f y , and also noting that p y = w y ηy /(ηy − 1) . Using both these
conditions, as well as the short-run cash-in-advance constraint for China, w y L y = M y , then we
can multiply both sides of (28) by the Chinese wage and simplify to obtain:
s y N y (1 − β) M z
ey

+ βM y = M y .

(28')

The first term on the right of (28') is the yuan used to purchase the Chinese exports to the U.S.,
and the second term is the yuan used by Chinese consumers to purchase their local good, so these
must equal the available currency, My. It follows from (28') that the equilibrium Chinese money
supply is: M y = s y N y M z / e y . Substituting this back into (3), we obtain:
ex M x = sx N x M z .

(29)

29
Holding fixed the Mexican money supply Mx, then (29) gives us the equilibrium peso exchange
rate ex that is implied by the U.S. money supply; in the background, we are also solving for the
Chinese money supply from (28'). Notice that (sxNx) is interpreted as the share of the
differentiated-goods market in the U.S. that is devoted to Mexican varieties, and we could expect
this share to fall with peso appreciation. If that is the case, then an expansion in the U.S. money
supply will lead to a smaller equilibrium appreciation of the peso.
The full set of short-run equilibrium conditions are (20), (27) and (29), which are five
equations in five unknowns: the shares sx and sy, the number of products Nx and Ny, and the
equilibrium peso exchange rate ex in (29). We shall use simulations to perform the comparative
statics on this system of equations. There are several properties that we find hold consistently in
the simulations, and can be used to suggest the results that we should expect. Specifically, we
find that an increase in the U.S. money supply leads to:
Mz rises

⇒

ex , Ny and N all rise, with ΔlnNy > ΔlnN.

(30)

It is intuitive that the increase in the U.S. money supply leads to an appreciation of the peso and
a rise in the number of varieties exported from China and in total; we find the greatest relative
increase in the number of Chinese varieties.
With this result, the change in the multilateral index Pm due to entry can also be
examined. As before, we consider the change in (17a) holding its weights constant, which is
(18a). Using (15a), the change in the import prices arising only from the increase in export
variety (i.e. from the change in Nx, Ny and N) is:
d ln(e x p x ) =

2 N y dN ⎤ A
⎡ dN y
+
−
⎢
⎥ ,
γ ( N − 1) 2 ⎣ ( 2 N − 1) ( 2 N − 1) 2 ⎦ γ
− dN

(31a)

30

d ln( ey p y ) =

and

⎡ dN x
2 N x dN ⎤ A
−
−
⎢
⎥ .
γ ( N − 1) 2 ⎣ ( 2 N − 1) ( 2 N − 1) 2 ⎦ γ
− dN

(31b)

Combining (31) and (18a), we see that the multilateral index changes by:
d ln Pm = (s x N x )d ln(e x p x ) + (s y N y )d ln( e y p y )

=

⎡ (dN y N x s x − dN x N y s y ) 2(s x − s y ) N x N y dN ⎤ A
+
−
⎢
⎥ .
( 2 N − 1)
γ ( N − 1) 2 ⎣
( 2 N − 1) 2
⎦ γ
− dN

(32)

The first terms and the third terms on the right of (32) are negative, since sx > sy , A > 0, and
total variety N is growing due to the U.S. monetary expansion. This expansion in variety reduces
markups and prices because of a competitive effect of having more varieties sold. The second
term on the right of (26) depends on the relative growth of Chinese versus Mexican export
varieties, and will tend to be positive when Chinese varieties grow more. So the overall impact of
free entry on the multilateral price index is ambiguous in general, but will be negative whenever
the first the third terms on the right of (32) dominate the second term.
Given that closed form solution is not possible when the number of varieties is
endogenous, we use numerical solution to study the equilibrium. We choose values for the
parameters and exogenous variables as follows. Fixed costs of entry for export firms from
Mexico are set to ensure that the number of firms and hence competition are sufficient to imply a
markup of 20% over cost ( f x =0.5). The entry cost in China is set so that the number of entrants
implies that Chinese firms represent about a 24% share of the U.S. imported goods market
(fy=0.005), reflecting the Chinese share in the U.S. consumer goods market at the end of our data
sample. We conjecture a strong bias in U.S. preferences toward Mexican goods (αx = 0.9/20 and
αy = 0.1/20, where 20 is the maximum number of differentiated products) and will consider

31
robustness checks to alternative calibrations. We assume no other home bias in preferences (β =
0.5), and we start with the standard translog case of γ = 1. For simplicity, exogenous money
supplies are set to imply steady state wages of unity for both countries, and a unitary steady sate
exchange rate for China.
Table 2 reports pass-through levels for the benchmark as well as several alternative
calibrations. The experiment is defined as a 10% rise in U.S. money, which in this calibration of
the model generates a 1% depreciation of the dollar in the trade-weighted effective exchange rate
defined above. The benchmark calibration indicates that it is possible to achieve a level of passthrough at or below the level of 0.3 found in our empirical estimates, and near the level of 0.2
observed in some recent empirical studies. Much of this drop in pass-through comes from free
entry of new firms and the competitive effect noted above. Without free entry, while passthrough in this model is still well below unity, it is still well above the empirical estimates. The
table confirms the conjecture above that a dollar depreciation would induce a rise in the total
number of firms through new entry from China; there is exit among the Mexican firms, since
their costs are rising relative to their Chinese competitors. Entry contributes to the low passthrough in multiple ways. First, the rise in competition forces all firms to lower their markups,
corresponding to the first term in equation (32) above. This is a direct implication of the translog
preferences, and is not dependent on China. However, since the entry here is composed of
Chinese firms, the rise in the China share reduces the willingness of the remaining Mexican
firms to raise their prices with rising costs, which is an additional effect lowering pass-through.
Given that our results arise from a very strong and instantaneous entry response, results would
likely be dampened if we incorporated entry lags or sunk costs into the model.

32
Sensitivity analysis indicates that for this calibration of the model the level of home bias
(β) and the bias in U.S. import preferences toward Mexico (αx), have only moderate effects on
the degree of pass-through. But the translog parameter γ has larger effects, especially working
through the competitiveness channel. In fact, for a value of γ = 5, the model shows that passthrough can easily become negative.
Next, we explore the role of the Chinese share by simulating a case where Chinese firms
are fixed at a share of zero. In this case there is full pass-through of the dollar depreciation to
import prices. Without the need to compete against firms shielded by a fixed exchange rate,
Mexican firms are free to raise their prices to reflect their rising costs. Further, the pure
competitive effect described above also disappears, because rising Mexican costs completely
offset the rise in sales in the U.S. due to the monetary expansion, so there is no new entry to raise
competition.
Finally, we use the simulation model to study the implications of China allowing greater
exchange rate flexibility. Suppose a monetary policy rule that balances exchange rate stability
against monetary stability, with a weight 1-ψ on exchange rate movements:

(

)

(

)

Ψ log M y − log M y = (1 − Ψ ) log e y − log ey ,

0 ≤ Ψ ≤ 1.

(33)

Table 3 shows how progressively higher values of ψ imply a greater yuan appreciation in our
experiment, where column 2 shows Chinese currency appreciation as a ratio to currency
appreciation for Mexico. As Chinese exchange rate flexibility approaches that of Mexico, the
pass through gradually rises until it becomes complete. Given that China appears in reality to be
on a path of greater exchange rate flexibility relative to the dollar, this simulation would seem to
indicate we should expect pressure for pass through coefficients to rise, possibly reversing the
recent trend of falling pass-through observed in data.

33

7. Conclusion

This paper studies how the upward trend in China’s share of U.S. imports could lower
pass-through of exchange rates to U.S. import prices. It develops a theoretical model showing
that the presence of exports from a country with a fixed exchange rate could alter the competitive
environment in the U.S. market; in particular, it induces exporters from other countries to reduce
their markups in the face of U.S. depreciations. This effect is amplified when the model allows
free entry of new exporters, as a U.S. depreciation tends to encourage exit of exporters with
flexible exchange rates, and hence further raises endogenously the share of suppliers with fixed
exchange rates like those from China. The model predicts that certain conditions are needed to
make such a ‘China explanation’ for falling pass-through work. Prominent among these
conditions is that Chinese exports in a given industry involve a larger number of varieties with a
smaller average market share per variety than is true for exporters from other competing
countries. The model indicates that this condition’s validity depends on country biases in U.S.
preferences. The model also produces a log-linear structural equation for pass-through
regressions involving the china share of imports. Panel regressions support the role of a rising
China share in lowering pass-through in the U.S.
Viewed more broadly, the results developed in this paper need not be restricted to the
case of China, but are relevant for all trading partners with a fixed exchange rate. Hence, the
model predicts that pass-through could fall further if the market share of trading partners with
fixed exchange rates were to rise; likewise, pass-through could begin to rise if the share of
exchange rate fixers were to fall over time.

34
In conclusion, we address a criticism in Marazzi et al (2005) that a China-based
explanation works better for the case of dollar depreciation, such as that in the mid 2000s, than it
does a dollar appreciation, as that experienced in the late 1990s. To the contrary, our model
implies that pass-through is low, regardless of the direction of the exchange rate movement.
Since pass-through is a matter of changes in price level relative to some previous period rather
than an absolute level, it is not important to our theoretical argument that the absolute levels of
Chinese prices tend to be lower on average than prices of other exporters. What matters is that
the change in costs and hence prices of Chinese firms tend to be less in response to exchange rate
movements, and this makes exporters from competing countries reluctant to change their prices.
This effect applies equally well if exchange rates and hence costs are rising or falling.

35
Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1:

Write (4) in matrix form as:
ln e( p) = α0 + α' ln p + 12 ln p' Γ ln p ,

(A1)

where α is the column vector ( α1 ,..., α N~ )' ; ln p is the column vector (ln p1 ,..., ln p N~ )' ; and Γ is
the symmetric matrix with elements γij. The share equations are obtained by differentiating (A1),
obtaining:
s = α + Γ ln p t ,

(A2)

Using the share equation (A2), we can rewrite the expenditure function as,
ln e( p) = α0 + 12 ( α + s)' ln p .

(A3)

We partition the share vector as s1 = (s1 ,..., s N )' > 0, and s 2t = (s N +1 ,..., s N~ )' = 0 . We
partition the price vectors p 1 and p 2 in the same way, and the vector α and the matrix Γ:
⎡ α1 ⎤
⎡ Γ11 Γ12 ⎤
α = ⎢ 2 ⎥ , and Γ = ⎢ 21
⎥.
Γ 22 ⎦
⎣α ⎦
⎣Γ

(A4)

~ ~
The diagonal elements of Γ are Γ11 = −( γ / N )[ N I N − L NxN ] , where L MxN denotes an MxN
~ ~
matrix with all elements unity, Γ 22 = −( γ / N )[ N I ( N~ − N ) − L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) ] , and the off-diagonal
~
~
elements are Γ12 = ( γ / N ) L Nx ( N~ − N ) , and Γ 21 = ( γ / N ) L ( N~ − N ) xN .
p 2 as:
Then the share equations can be rewritten using the reservation prices ~
s1 = α1 + Γ11 ln p1 + Γ12 ln ~
p 2 + β1 ln( Y / P) ,

(A5)

0 = α 2 + Γ 21 ln p1 + Γ 22 ln ~
p 2 + β 2 ln( Y / P) .

(A6)

36

Using (A6), we can solve for the reservation prices as:
ln ~
p 2 = −( Γ 22 ) −1 ( α 2 + Γ 21 ln p1 ) .

(A7)
2

Substituting these reservations prices into the expenditure function (A3) using s = 0, to obtain:
ln e( p) = α 0 + 12 ( α1 + s1 )' ln p1 + 12 α 2 ' ln ~
p2
= α 0 + 12 ( α1 + s1 )' ln p1 + 12 α 2 ' ( Γ 22 ) −1 ( α 2 + Γ 21 ln p1 )
= a 0 + 12 (a 1 + s1 )' ln p1 ,

(A8)

where the last line is obtained by defining:
a1 ≡ α1 − Γ12 ( Γ22 ) −1 α2 ,

(A9)

a 0 ≡ α 0 − (1 / 2)α 2 ' ( Γ 22 ) −1 α 2 .

(A10)

where we have used the symmetry of Γ so that Γ 21 ' = Γ12 .
Likewise solving for s1 from (A6), we obtain:
s1 = α1 + Γ11 ln p1 − Γ12 ( Γ 22 ) −1 ( α 2 + Γ 21 ln p1 )
= a1 + C11 ln p1 ,

where the final line is obtained by defining:
C11 ≡ Γ11 − Γ12 ( Γ 22 ) −1 Γ 21 .

(A11)

Substituting (A12) back into the expenditure function (A8):
ln e( p) = a 0 + 12 ln p1 ' C11 ln p1 .

(A12)

To complete the proof, we need to show that the parameters in (A9)-(A11) satisfy (8)-(10), once
we make use of the original symmetry restrictions in (6).

37
11

11

11

Consider the definition of C in (A11). Notice that from (6) we can express Γ as Γ =
~
~
~
( γ / N )[− N I N + L NxN ] , and Γ12 = ( γ / N )[ L Nx ( N~ − N ) ] . Substituting these into (A11):

~
11
⎛γ⎞ ~
⎛γ⎞
C = ⎜ ~ ⎟[ − N I N + L NxN ] + ⎜ ~ ⎟ L Nx ( N~ − N ) [ N I ( N~ − N ) − L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) ] −1 L ( N~ − N ) xN .
⎝N⎠
⎝N⎠
~
Notice that the matrix [ N I ( N~ − N ) − L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) ] has an eigenvector of L ( N~ − N ) x1 (i.e. a column

vector of unity), with the associated eigenvalue of N. Therefore, its inverse also has an
eigenvector of L ( N~ − N ) x1 , with the eigenvalue of 1/N. It follows that,
~
~
~
11
C = ( γ / N )[− N I N + L NxN ] + ( γ / NN )L Nx ( N~ − N ) L ( N~ − N ) xN
~
~
~
~
= ( γ / N )[− N I N + L NxN ] + [ γ ( N − N ) / NN )]L NxN

= − γ I N + ( γ / N)L NxN ,
where the second line again follows by matrix multiplication and the third line by arithmetic.
This establishes that (8) holds.
22

To establish (9), substitute Γ and Γ12 into (A9) to evaluate:
a1 = [α1 − Γ12 ( Γ 22 ) −1 α 2 ]
~
= α1 + L Nx ( N~ − N ) [ N I ( N~ − N ) − L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) ]−1 α 2
⎛1⎞
= α1 + ⎜ ⎟ L Nx ( N~ − N ) α 2
⎝N⎠
~

⎡ N
α⎤
∑
i = N +1 i ⎥
⎢
⎛1⎞
= α1 + ⎜ ⎟ ⎢ ~ #
⎥.
⎝ N ⎠⎢ N
⎥
αi
∑
⎣⎢ i = N +1 ⎦⎥
~
where the third line uses the eigenvalue properties definition of [ N I ( N~ − N ) − L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) ]−1 .
Notice that

~
N

∑ i = N +1 α i

equals 1 − ∑i =1 α i , which gives us (9).
N

38
22

To establish (10), substitute Γ into (A11) to evaluate:

a 0 = α 0 − (1 / 2)α 2 ' ( Γ 22 ) −1 α 2
−1

⎛ 1 ⎞
⎡
⎤
⎛1⎞
= α0 + ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟α 2 ' ⎢I ( N~ − N ) − ⎜ ~ ⎟ L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) ⎥ α 2
⎝N⎠
⎣
⎦
⎝ 2γ ⎠
−1

⎡
⎤
⎛ 1 ⎞
⎛ 1 ⎞
⎛1⎞
= α 0 + ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟α 2 ' ⎢ I ( N~ − N ) + ⎜ ~ ⎟ L ( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) + ⎜ ~ 2 ⎟ L2( N~ − N ) x ( N~ − N ) + ...⎥ α 2 .
⎝N⎠
⎝N ⎠
⎝ 2γ ⎠
⎣
⎦
2
~
~
⎧
2⎡
~
⎛ N − N ⎞ ⎛ N − N ⎞ ⎤ ⎫⎪
⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎪ N~
N
2 ⎛ 1 ⎞⎛
⎞
= α 0 + ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ ⎨∑i = N +1 α i + ⎜ ~ ⎟⎜ ∑i = N +1 α i ⎟ ⎢1 + ⎜⎜ ~ ⎟⎟ + ⎜⎜ ~ ⎟⎟ ...⎥ ⎬
⎠ ⎢ ⎝ N ⎠ ⎝ N ⎠ ⎥⎪
⎝ N ⎠⎝
⎝ 2 γ ⎠ ⎪⎩
⎣
⎦⎭
2⎫
~
⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎧ N~
N
2 ⎛ 1 ⎞⎛
⎞
= α 0 + ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ ⎨∑i = N +1 α i + ⎜ ⎟⎜ ∑i = N +1 α i ⎟ ⎬ ,
⎠ ⎭
⎝ N ⎠⎝
⎝ 2γ ⎠⎩

which completes the proof. QED

Proof of Proposition 2

⎛ sx ⎞
Ny
1
⎟=
. It follows that:
Using (20), we obtain: ⎜
+
⎜ s x − s y ⎟ N (s x − s y ) N
⎝
⎠
⎡
⎤
N y ⎛ sx − sy ⎞
d ln Pm
N
1
⎜⎜
⎟⎟ = 1 −
+ 1⎥
= 1−
⎢
( 2 N − 1) ⎣⎢ N y (s x − s y ) ⎦⎥
d ln E m
( 2 N − 1) ⎝ s x ⎠

−1

.

(A13)

⎛ N −1 ⎞
From (20), the difference in shares is (s x − s y ) = ⎜
⎟A . This difference does not vary with
⎝ 2N − 1 ⎠
Ny, for fixed N, so it follows that (A13) is decreasing in Ny, for given N.
More generally, substitute (s x − s y ) in (A13) to obtain:
⎡ ( 2 N − 1) 2 1
d ln Pm
1⎤
= 1− ⎢
+2− ⎥
d ln E m
N ⎥⎦
⎢⎣ N ( N − 1) AN y

−1

≡ 1 − C.

(A14)

An equi-proportional increase in Ny and N, satisfying d ln N y = d ln N = λ > 0 , affects C by:

39
⎛ ∂C
∂C ⎞⎟
∂C
∂C
+
dC = ⎜
λ=
N yλ +
Nλ .
⎜ ∂ ln N y ∂ ln N ⎟
∂
lN
∂
N
y
⎝
⎠
Careful inspection of the derivatives of C shows that dC > 0 provided that A < 1. It follows that
an equi-proportional increase Ny and N lowers pass-through. Since pass-through is decreasing in
Ny for given N, we conclude that any change in Ny and N satisfying d ln N y > d ln N ≥ 0 will
lower pass-through. QED

Proof of Proposition 3

To determine whether such a solution exists, we first solve the quadratic equations (27) to obtain
the expenditure shares on the products of each country:
si =

[

1
1 + 1 + 4 Bi γ
2 Bi

(NN−1 )],

⎛ βM z ⎞
⎟⎟ ,
where Bi ≡ ⎜⎜
⎝ ei w ifi ⎠

i = x, y.

(A15)

Notice that si is decreasing in Bi. Since A > 0 implies that sx > sy from (20), this will imply that
Bx < By from (A15), which is (a). Given that condition, we evaluate the difference of the shares
(sx – sy) from (A15) and the shares (sx – sy) from (20), as:

f ( N) ≡

[

1
1 + 1 + 4Bx γ
2Bx

(NN−1 )]− 2B1

y

[1 +

1 + 4By γ

(NN−1 )]− ⎛⎜ 2NN−−11 ⎞⎟A .
⎝

⎠

(A16)

The solution for N occurs where f(N*) = 0. To establish this solution, we simplify the
problem by assuming γ = 1. We compare the values of f ( B x ) and f ( B y ) . Writing these out,
we find that f ( B x ) > 0 and f ( B y ) < 0 provided that A < Ax and A > Ay, defined by:
⎛ 2 Bi − 1 ⎞ ⎧⎪ 1
⎟
Ai = ⎜
⎜ B − 1 ⎟ ⎨⎪ 2 B x
i
⎝
⎠⎩

⎡
⎛
⎢1 + 1 + 4 B x γ ⎜
⎝
⎣

Bi −1 ⎞ ⎤
Bi

1
⎟⎥ −
⎠ ⎦ 2B y

⎡
⎛
⎢1 + 1 + 4 B y γ ⎜
⎝
⎣

Bi −1 ⎞ ⎤ ⎫
⎪
Bi

⎟ ⎥ ⎬ > 0,
⎠ ⎦ ⎪⎭

40
for i = x,y. By careful inspection of the derivative with respect to Bi, it can be shown that this
expression is decreasing in Bi, which implies that Ay < Ax so the interval (Ay, Ax) is non-empty.
By construction, for A∈(Ay, Ax) we have f ( B x ) > 0 and f ( B y ) < 0. It follows by continuity
B x < N* < B y satisfying f(N*) = 0.

that there exists N* with

Given N*, use (A13) to solve for the shares s*i , and then (20) to solve for N *i , i = x,y:
N *y

N *x ⎛ 1
1 ⎞ ⎛ N * −1 ⎞
⎞ ⎛ N * −1 ⎞
⎛ *
=⎜
− s*y ⎟ ⎜
= ⎜sx −
⎟A .
⎟ ⎜
⎟ A , and
N ⎝ N*
N* ⎝
N * ⎠ ⎝ 2 N * −1 ⎠
⎠ ⎝ 2 N * −1 ⎠

(A17)

We need to confirm that these solution for N *i are both positive. Using γ = 1, the quadratic
equation (20) becomes:

[

]

s*i = (s*i ) 2 Bi − 1 +
⎧ 1
=⎨
⎩ 4 Bi

1
N*

⎡1 + 1 + 4 B
i
⎢⎣

(NN**−1 )⎤⎥⎦

2

⎫ 1
− 1⎬ +
⎭ N*

To ensure s*x > 1 / N* > s*y we must have:
⎡1 + 1 + 4 B
x
⎢⎣

(NN**−1 )⎤⎥⎦ > 2

B x and ⎡1 + 1 + 4 B y
⎢⎣

(NN**−1 )⎤⎥⎦ < 2

By

which holds if and only if,

(

)

(

)

2
2
1 ⎡
1 ⎡
⎛ N * −1 ⎞
⎛ N * −1 ⎞
<
2 B y − 1 − 1⎤ .
2 B x − 1 − 1⎤ and ⎜
⎟
⎟>
⎜
⎢
⎥⎦
⎦⎥
⎝ N * ⎠ 4By ⎣
⎝ N * ⎠ 4 B x ⎢⎣

It is readily verified that

B x < N* < B y ensures that both the above inequalities hold, so that

s*x > 1 / N* > s*y . It follows from (A15) that N *i > 0 , i = x,y. QED

41
References

Alterman, William, W. Erwin Diewert and Robert C. Feenstra. (1999). International Trade Price
Indexes and Seasonal Commodities. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Washington, D.C.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. (2000). “Does Exchange-Rate Stability Increase
Trade and Welfare?” American Economic Review 90, 1093-1109.
Bergin, Paul R. and Robert C. Feenstra. (2000). “Staggered Price Setting and Endogenous
Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 657-680.
Bergin, Paul R. and Robert C. Feenstra (2001). “Pricing to Market, Staggered Contracts, and
Real Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics 54, 333-359.
Bergin, Paul R., Robert C. Feenstra, and Gordon H. Hanson. (2007). “Outsourcing and
Volatility,” NBER working paper no. 13144.
Blackburne, Edward F. and Mark W. Frank. (2007). “Estimation of Nonstationary
Heterogeneous Panels,” The STATA Journal, 7(2), 197-208.
Breitung, Jorg and M. Hashem Pesaran. (2005). “Unit Roots and Cointegration in Panels,”
University of Bonn and Cambridge University.
Campa, José Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg. (2005). “Exchange Rate Pass Through into Import
Prices, Review of Economics and Statistics 87, 679-690.
Campa, José Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg. (2006). "Pass-Through of Exchange Rates to
Consumption Prices: What Has Changed and Why?" in Takatoshi Ito and Andrew K. Rose,
eds., International Financial Issues in the Pacific Rim: Global Imbalances, Financial
Liberalization, and Exchange Rate Policy. East Asia Seminar on Economics 17. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. (1987). “Exchange rates and prices,” American Economic Review 77, 93106.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. (1977). “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
Product Diversity,” American Economic Review 67, 298-308.
Feenstra, Robert C. (2003). “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition
Models, Without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economic Letters 78, 79-86.
Feenstra, Robert C., Marshall B. Reinsdorf and Matthew J. Slaughter. (2007). “Effects of Terms
of Trade Changes and Trade Liberalization on the Measurement of U.S. Productivity
Growth,” in process.

42
Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter Schott. (2002). “U.S. Imports, Exports and Tariff
Data, 1989-2001,” NBER Working Paper no. 9387.
Goldberg, Penelope and Michael Knetter. (1997). “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1243-1272.
Gust, Christopher, Sylvain Leduc and Robert J. Vigfusson. (2006). “Trade Integration,
Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through,” Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion Paper #864.
Ihrig, Jane E., Mario Marazzi and Alexander D. Rothenberg. (2006). “Exchange-Rate PassThrough in the G-7 Countries,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Paper #851.
Im, Kyung So, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Yongcheol Shin. (2003). “Testing for Unit Roots in
Heterogeneous Panels,” Journal of Econometrics, 115, 53-74.
Imbs, Jean, H. Mumtaz, Morten Ravn and Helene Rey. (2005). “PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation
and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70, 1-43.
Marazzi, Mario, Nathan Sheets, Robert J. Vigfusson, Jon Faust, Joseph E. Gagnon, Jaime
Marquez, Robert F. Martin, Trevor A. Reeve and John H. Rogers. (2005). “Exchange
Rate Pass-through to U.S. Import Prices: Some New Evidence,” Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion Paper #833.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. (2000). “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy
Models,” Journal of International Economics 50, 117-153.
Olivei, G. (2002). “Exchange Rates and the Prices of Manufacturing Products Imported into the
United States,” New England Economic Review, First Quarter, 3-18.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, Yongcheol Shin and Ron P. Smith. (1997). “Estimating Long-run
Relationships in Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels, DAE Working Papers Amalgamated
Series 9721.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, Yongcheol Shin and Ron P. Smith. (1999). “Pooled Mean Group
Estimation of Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels, Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 94, 621-634.
Taylor, John. (2000). “Low Inflation, Pass-through, and the Pricing Power of Firms,“ European
Economic Review 44, 1389-1408.

43

Figure 1: China Share of Imports
30%

Mean China Import Share

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1993

1994
All (non-ITA)

1995
ITA only

1996
Capital Goods (non-ITA)

1997

1998

1999

Consumer Goods (non-ITA)

Figure 2: North America Share of Imports
30%

Mean North America Import Share

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1993

1994
All (non-ITA)

1995
ITA only

1996
Capital Goods (non-ITA)

1997

1998

Consumer Goods (non-ITA)

1999

44

Table 1: Dependent Variable – Import Price Index
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

A. Consumer goods, capital goods, autos and chemicals (Enduse 1-4)

FE-OLS

PMG

Exchange rate

0.400**
(0.02)

0.416**
(0.02)

0.448** 0.480** 0.400**
(0.02) (0.02)
(0.01)

0.430**
(0.01)

0.427**
(0.02)

Export price

0.337**
(0.02)

0.328**
(0.02)

0.330** 0.324** 0.195**
(0.02) (0.02)
(0.03)

0.206**
(0.03)

0.212**
(0.03)

0.025**
(0.01)

-0.401** -0.945**
(0.12) (0.16)

-0.598**
(0.13)

-0.618**
(0.15)

China share
*Exch. rate

1.87**
(0.55)

China share

4.01**
(0.68)

Import tariff

-0.187
(0.12)

China share
*time

-0.017
(0.016)

China share
*(1-China share)

0.712**
(0.17)

-0.159
(0.11)

Observations
R2 or φ

2,905
2,905
2,905
2,905
2,634
2,634
2,634
0.641
0.642
0.644
0.647 φ=-0.17** φ=-0.18** φ=-0.18**
B. Consumer goods only (Enduse 4)

Exchange rate

0.331**
(0.03)

0.363** 0.476** 0.536** 0.350**
(0.03)
(0.04) (0.02)
(0.02)

0.465**
(0.04)

0.466**
(0.04)

Export Price

0.088**
(0.03)

0.078*
(0.03)

0.172**
(0.04)

0.172**
(0.04)

-0.730**
(0.17)

-0.730**
(0.17)

FE-OLS

0.024*
(0.01)

China share
*Exch. rate

0.073* 0.086** 0.136**
(0.03) (0.03)
(0.04)
-0.583** -1.16**
(0.17) (0.20)
2.68**
(0.73)

China share

PMG

4.81**
(0.86)

Import tariff

-0.544**
(0.17)

China share
*time

0.006
(0.017)

China share
*(1-China share)

0.958**
(0.20)

Observations
R2 or φ

1,371
0.628

1,371
0.632

1,371
0.635

0.002
(0.12)

1,371
1,242
1,242
1,242
0.645 φ=-0.20** φ=-0.21** φ=-0.21**

Notes: * significant at 5%, ** significant at 1%; standard errors are in parentheses.
Regressions are run over 41 5-digit Enduse categories where no imports are covered by the Information
Technology Agreement, from September 1993 – December 1999. OLS is estimated with 6 lags of the
exchange rate, while ‘pooled mean group’ (PMG) is the maximum likelihood estimator for cointegrated
panels, and chooses the lag length. All regressions include fixed effects for 5-digit Enduse categories.

45

Table 2: Numerical Simulation Results
(experiment: 10% rise in U.S. money supply, causing dollar depreciation)
Mexican firms
Nx
%ΔNx

Chinese firms
Ny
%ΔNy

Pass-through
under free entry

Pass-through
under no entry

0.258

0.649

4.07

-4.1%

13.09

27.9%

β = 0.85

0.268

0.605

1.89

-3.4%

11.54

14.9%

γ=2

0.129

0.669

3.11

-4.8%

7.36

37.6%

γ=5

-0.149

0.700

2.19

-6.4%

3.39

55.9%

αx = 0.7/20, αy = 0.3/20

0.266

0.646

4.03

-4.1%

13.70

26.5%

Zero China share:

1.000

1.000

5.00

0%

0

-

Benchmark case*
Sensitivity analysis:

* Benchmark calibration: β = 0.5, γ = 1, fx = 0.5, fy = 0.005, αx = 0.9/20, αy = 0.1/20, where 20 is the
maximum number of differentiated products, wx = 1, wy = 1, which implies a China share equal to 0.25.

Table 3: Numerical Simulation of Alternative Chinese Exchange Rate Rules
(experiment: 10% rise in U.S. money supply, causing dollar depreciation)
Monetary policy
parameter, ψ
0

%Δ ey/%Δ ex
0

Pass-through
(free entry)
0.258

0.01

0.171

0.418

0.05

0.519

0.693

0.10

0.695

0.813

0.25

0.874

0.924

0.50

0.954

0.972

1.00

1.000

1.000

* Calibration: β = 0.5, γ = 1, fx = 0.5, fy = 0.005, αx = 0.9/20, αy = 0.1/20, where 20 is the maximum
number of differentiated products, wx = 1, wy = 1, which implies a China share equal to 0.25.

