                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WHEN DOES A MUTUAL FUND'S TRADE REVEAL ITS SKILL?

                                              Zhi Da
                                           Pengjie Gao
                                         Ravi Jagannathan

                                       Working Paper 13625
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13625


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2007




We thank Robert Battalio, Roger Edelen, Craig Holden, Paul Irvine, Tim Loughran, Rick Mendenhall,
David Musto, Lubos Pástor, Paul Schultz, Clemens Sialm, Laura Starks, Sheridan Titman, Charles
Trzcinka, Lance Young and seminar participants at Barclays Global Investors, FRA 2007 Annual Meeting,
IU/ND/Purdue Finance Symposium, Northwestern University, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
University of Michigan, Tilburg University, and the 4th Vienna Symposium on Asset Management
for comments. An earlier version of this paper was titled .Informed Trading, Liquidity Provision and
Stock Selection by Mutual Funds. Patricia Andersen provides excellent editorial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Zhi Da, Pengjie Gao, and Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
When Does a Mutual Fund's Trade Reveal its Skill?
Zhi Da, Pengjie Gao, and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 13625
November 2007, Revised April 2008
JEL No. G1,G11,G12,G14,G23

                                             ABSTRACT

We conjecture that a mutual fund manager with superior stock selection ability is more likely to benefit
from trading in stocks affected by information-events. Taking the probability of informed trading (PIN,
Easley, Kiefer, O'Hara, and Paperman, 1996) to measure the amount of informed trading in a stock,
and inferring mutual fund trades from a large sample of mutual fund holdings, we provide empirical
support for the conjecture. Funds trading high-PIN stocks exhibit superior performance on average,
and superior performance that is more likely to persist. The findings are not due to price momentum
or the higher returns earned by high-PIN stocks on average. Conclusions remain the same after testing
for alternative measures for the amount of informed trading. Decomposing a fund's stock selection
ability into "informed trading" and "liquidity provision" adds further insight into fund's underlying
strengths. Impatient informed trading is a significant source of alpha for funds trading high-PIN stocks,
while liquidity provision is more important as a source of alpha for funds trading low-PIN stocks.


Zhi Da                                              Ravi Jagannathan
University of Notre Dame                            J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
239 Mendoza College of Business                     2001 Sheridan Road
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646                      Leverone/Anderson Complex
zda@nd.edu                                          Evanston, IL 60208-2001
                                                    and NBER
Pengjie Gao                                         rjaganna@northwestern.edu
Department of Finance
Mendoza College of Business
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
pgao@nd.edu
   As of 2006, US mutual funds collectively managed $10 trillion, and almost $6 trillion of that in

equity funds. A signi…cant portion of this amount is actively managed. According to a survey by

the Mutual Fund Institute, in 2006 alone, US mutual funds bought and sold common stocks worth

over $6 trillion. Over 1980 to 2006, investors paid at least 0:67 percent of portfolio value per year to

the active portfolio managers (French, 2008). Naturally, investors want to identify fund managers

with superior skills and to understand how these managers add su¢ cient value to justify their

fees. Ultimately, an active mutual fund manager’s success derives from his or her superior skill in

processing valuation-relevant information about a stock, a skill that should allow the identi…cation

of potential mispricing. Thus, it is reasonable to expect such skills to be more valuable when stocks

the manager can invest in are a¤ected by more value-relevant information events. To the extent

that rational managers have the option not to trade such stocks when they know that they do not

have an advantage in analyzing the information a¤ecting a stock, we should expect to …nd that

managers who choose to trade in this case earn higher returns on average.

   To examine this conjecture we need (1) a measure of the number of information events a¤ecting

a stock during a given period; and (2) information that facilitates identifying a manager’s trades in

those stocks during those periods. We use the probability of informed trading (P IN ) - proposed

by Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman (1996) - to proxy for the extent of information events

a¤ecting a stock. We infer a mutual fund’s trades by comparing its quarter-end holdings with its

holdings at the end of the quarter before.

   Using quarterly holdings data from 1983 to 2004 for a large sample of US active equity mutual

funds, we …nd that funds trading high-P IN stocks indeed outperform those trading low-P IN

stocks. That is, if we sort funds according to the average P IN of stocks they trade during quarter

t (de…ned as trade_P IN ), funds in the top trade_P IN decile outperform those in the bottom

decile by more than 50 basis points per quarter on a risk-adjusted basis during quarter t + 1. The

risk-adjusted performance does not depend on whether we adjust for risk using a factor model or

a holding-based characteristics model.

   Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) document that high-P IN stocks earn higher returns –for

convenience we will refer to this phenomenon as compensation for P IN risk. Our …ndings, however,

are not driven by this phenomenon for the several reasons. First, we obtain very similar results

after we control for P IN risk when we examine risk adjusted-returns. Second, our conclusions do

                                                   1
not change when we replace P IN with several alternative measures of the amount of information

a¤ecting a stock. To account for the illiquidity associated with high-P IN stocks, we examine the

information asymmetry component of the P IN (adjP IN ; see Duarte and Young, 2007). To ensure

that our results are not driven by the correlation between trading volume and P IN , we directly

examine abnormal turnover in stock trading (aturn; see Chordia, Huh, and Subrahmanyam, 2006).

We also consider the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread (theta; see Madhavan,

Richardson and Roomans, 1997) which captures the impact of information events on stock price.

Third, stocks recently bought by mutual funds outperform those sold by mutual funds, although

they have very similar P IN measures.

   We …nd that the ability of trade_P IN to predict future mutual fund performance is not

driven by its correlation with other fund characteristics. In a cross-sectional regression framework,

trade_P IN provides additional explanatory power on the next-quarter risk-adjusted mutual fund

return even in the presence of many other fund level characteristics. We show that such predictabil-

ity is not due to potential momentum trading by mutual funds.

   While fund managers who choose to trade high-P IN stocks on average outperform the rest,

we would expect outperformance to be concentrated among managers who in fact have superior

skills. Using a four-factor-adjusted fund return or alpha as a proxy for manager skill, we provide

supporting evidence for such conjecture. Sorting on trade_P IN variable generates signi…cant

spreads in future fund performance only among funds with large alpha. In particular, amongst

funds associated with high alphas, only those that also trade high-P IN stocks during quarter t

produce positive and signi…cant alpha of 33 basis points during quarter t + 1 after accounting for

fees and expenses. Moreover, to the extent that a manager’s skills are likely to persist for some time,

past superior performance is more likely to be an indication of future performance for a manager

who attained that performance by trading high-P IN stocks. Consistent with this conjecture, we

…nd that sorting on fund alphas in quarter t within funds with high trade_P IN generates a much

wider spread in fund risk-adjusted returns in quarter t + 1 (91 basis points on average). Controlling

for P IN risk does not alter our results in any signi…cant way.

   We also investigate the speci…c channels through which a fund manager’s trades add value. In

general, how a manager with superior skill trades to add value will depend on how long it takes for

the market to realize that the manager is correct. Based on how long the informational advantage

                                                  2
lasts, a manager’s trades can be classi…ed into three types: long-term value investing, medium-term

informed trading, and short-term liquidity provision. Medium-term informed trading, in contrast to

long-term value investing and short-term liquidity provision, is likely to demand liquidity because

the value of information erodes quickly and the timely execution becomes important.

    To attribute mutual fund performance to these di¤erent styles of investment, we use a characteristics-

based performance measure, characteristic selectivity (CS), proposed by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman,

and Wermers (DGTW, 1997).1 CS, computed using quarterly reported stock holdings by mutual

funds, measures the extent to which managers can select stocks that outperform the average stocks

with similar characteristics. Because mutual fund stock holdings data are available only at in-

frequent intervals (quarterly in most cases), it is di¢ cult to assess a manager’s skills when that

manager trades actively in between two holding reporting dates.2 We …nd nevertheless that a mu-

tual fund’s recent trades inferred from its quarterly holdings changes still reveals useful information

about how a manager adds value.

    We decompose the CS measure for a given quarter into three components: (1) an old component

that captures value-added from the fund’s (previous) investments prior to the preceding quarter;

(2) a trade component that captures the value-added from the fund’s trades during the previous

quarter; and (3) a small adjustment component that results from preceding quarter’s net fund ‡ow.

The trade component can then be decomposed further into an informed trading component and a

liquidity provision component. This latter decomposition is motivated by the evidence that stock-

level aggregate order imbalance serves as a good measure of the direction of liquidity needs on the

underlying stock (see Chordia and Subrahmanyam, 2004, among others). When managers trade

in the same direction as the aggregate market order imbalance on a stock, they demand liquidity.

Such trades are therefore likely to be driven by information and are classi…ed as informed trading.

When fund managers trade in the opposite direction of the aggregate market order imbalance,

they e¤ectively supply liquidity, and such trades are classi…ed as liquidity provision. We validate
   1
      We abstract away from measuring the market timing ability of mutual funds in this paper. See Ferson and
Schadt (1996), and Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2007) for the discussion on empirical methods to detect mutual
fund market timing.
    2
      For instance, Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007) and Elton, et al. (2006) show that “unobservable”actions (or
high-frequency turnovers) by mutual funds could be signi…cant for some funds. Campbell, Ramadorai and Schwartz
(2007) attempts to infer institutional transactions within a given quarter by selecting trade sizes that best match
quarterly holdings changes. Relying on a unique regulation governing mutual fund trade disclosure in Canada,
Christo¤ersen, Keim and Musto (2006) investigate essentially all trades of 210 Canadian mutual funds between 2001
and 2003.


                                                        3
our decomposition approach by applying it to two speci…c cases before applying it to portfolios of

active mutual funds sorted by the trade_P IN variable.

   We …nd that a greater proportion of the CS measure for high trade_P IN funds (50 basis

points) comes from positions taken through trades made during the previous quarter; the trade

component is 31:2 basis points (t-value of 2:83). We also …nd that the stocks a fund bought as

well the stocks it sold had similar P IN values and both added value in the next quarter. Further,

we document that informed trading is more likely to add value when the fund is trading stocks

associated with more information events. The informed trading component in general increases

with trade_P IN , and is positive and signi…cant (20:4 basis points with t-value of 2:25) only for

funds in the top trade_P IN decile. Liquidity provision, however, is more likely to be detected

when the fund is trading stocks associated with fewer information events. The liquidity provision

component is positive and signi…cant (16:2 basis points with t-value of 2:57) only for funds in the

bottom trade_P IN decile, where the risk of adverse selection in trading is low.

   Our results are relevant for two important strands of literature in …nance: the literature on mu-

tual fund performance, and the literature on market microstructure. The early literature on mutual

fund performance evaluation …nds that most managed portfolios earn close to zero or negative risk-

adjusted returns, especially after taking fees into account.3 This is consistent with Berk and Green’s

(2004) observation that competition among investors for a given supply of managerial talents of

fund managers will drive after-fee, risk adjusted performance to zero. More recent studies that use

of quarterly reports of mutual fund stock holdings …nd that active managers possess considerable

stock-picking abilities.4 On average, after adjusting for stock characteristics but before deducting

fees and expenses, stocks held by actively managed mutual funds outperform their benchmarks, and

stocks bought by mutual funds tend to outperform those sold by mutual funds. Further, several

mutual fund holding characteristics appear to correlate with better fund performance, including

funds that follow aggressive growth and growth styles (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers,

1997); funds that hold the stocks of …rms whose headquarters are located geographically close to the

fund’s headquarters (Coval and Moskowitz, 2001); funds that have greater industry concentration

in their holdings (Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng, 2005); funds that have less diversi…cation in their
   3
    See Jensen (1968), Brown and Goetzmann (1995), Gruber (1996), and Carhart (1997).
   4
    See Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997), Wermers (1999), Chen,
Jegadeesh, and Wermers (2000), Sias, Starks and Titman (2006), and Schultz (2007)


                                                      4
holdings (Baks, Busse, and Green, 2006); funds that show greater deviations from passive indexes

or greater proportions of “active shares” (Cremers and Petajisto, 2006); and funds that have less

dependency on analyst recommendations (Kacperczyk and Seru, 2007).                 In addition, funds that

are smaller in size perform better after controlling for fund family size (Chen, Hong, Huang, and

Kubik, 2004).

    We contribute to the literature by building on the insights in the market microstructure litera-

ture that trades reveal information associated with a stock, and that such information can help to

di¤erentiate various trading motives and ultimately identify skillful managers. Moreover, as provid-

ing liquidity requires specialization and may well require a particular type of talent, we decompose

fund managers’stock selection ability into a liquidity-demanding informed trading component and

a liquidity provision component. We believe that such a decomposition will help us better under-

stand the strengths of an active portfolio manager, and the extent to which such strengths will

continue to be of value in the future.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe our data sources and the sample

in section 1. We provide evidence that the amount of information events associated with stocks

traded by fund managers reveals their skills in section 2. We then show how to decompose the

stock selection ability of a mutual fund manager into its informed trading, liquidity provision, and

residual components in section 3. We conclude in section 4. Appendix A contain brief descriptions

on the various measures of information events we use. Appendix B illustrates our decomposition

approach with a numerical example and validates the approach empirically.



1    Data and Sample Construction

We use data from several sources. The mutual fund holding data are from the CDA/Spectrum S12

mutual fund holding database, which collects holding information from N30-D …lings with the US

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). A detailed description of this database can be found in

Wermers (1999). We exclude index funds from most of our analysis.5 Between 1983 and 2004, there

were about 11 domestic equity only index funds identi…ed each quarter on average in the holding

database. Following the standard practice in the mutual fund literature, we also exclude all closed-
   5
     Speci…cally, we exclude a fund if its name contains any of the following: “INDEX”, “INDE”, “INDX”, “S&P”,
“DOW JONES”, “MSCI” or “ISHARE”.


                                                      5
end funds, international funds, sector funds, bond funds, and domestic hybrid funds (including

life-cycle and life-style funds), based on self-reported fund style in the CDA/Spectrum database.

Thus, we retain only those funds that self-report as aggressive growth (AGG), growth (GRO), or

growth and income (GNI). To ensure that the funds we examine are reasonably active, we examine

funds that traded at least ten stocks with a turnover of at least ten percent of its holdings during

the previous quarter. This …lter eliminates about ten percent of all fund/quarter observations.

Finally, we include only those fund/quarter observations for which the fund holdings at the end of

the previous two quarters are available, so that holding changes can be computed over consecutive

quarters. We obtain information on after-fee performance and other fund characteristics from the

Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) Survivor-Bias Free US Mutual Fund database.

   The CDA/Spectrum mutual fund holding data are matched to the CRSP Mutual Fund data

using the MFLINKS database developed by the Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS) and Pro-

fessor Russ Wermers. An appealing feature of the MFLINKS database is that it allows mapping dif-

ferent share classes of the same fund, which are recorded as distinct funds in the CRSP Mutual Fund

database, to the corresponding mutual fund holdings data in the CDA/Spectrum database. For

multiple share classes in CRSP that correspond to the same fund in the CDA/Spectrum database,

we aggregate returns of those share classes into one large portfolio’s return by equal-weighting or

value-weighting (using total net asset values). The results for equal-weighting and value-weighting

are similar, so we report the results for the former for brevity.

   Stock data are from the CRSP. We include all common stocks (CRSP share codes 10 and 11)

traded on the NYSE, the AMEX, and the Nasdaq (CRSP exchange code 1, 2 and 3). Accounting

information is from the COMPUSTAT database. To link COMPUSTAT and CRSP, we use CRSP-

LINK produced by CRSP. The tick-by-tick stock transaction data are from the ISSM (1983 - 1992)

and TAQ (1993 - 2004) databases.

   Overall, there are 4; 654 distinct funds in our sample for the period 1983 through 2004. On

average, there are 701 distinct funds every quarter. The number of funds per quarter increases

from 134 in 1983 to about 1; 700 toward the end of the sample, as shown in Figure 1. About 61%

of the funds in our sample are self-reported as growth funds; about 26% are reported as growth

and income (GNI); and the remaining 13% are reported as aggressive growth (AGG).

   We collect two groups of fund-level characteristics for every quarter. First, we obtain common

                                                  6
fund characteristics from the CRSP mutual fund database. These characteristics include: age (age

of the fund in months since inception, in terms of percentile rank in the cross section); turnover

(turnover rate of the fund); expense (expense ratio of the fund); T N A (total net assets under

management by the fund in millions US$); and pct_f low (net fund ‡ows in percent, de…ned as
T N A(t) T N A(t 1) [1+Ret(t 1;t)] 6
            T N A(t 1)            ).

    Second, we aggregate stock characteristics at the fund level by value-weighting them for stocks

held by the fund using the quarter-end dollar values of the holdings. These characteristics include:

f und_holding (average percentage of total number of shares outstanding of stocks held by the

fund); f und_size (average market capitalization of stocks held by the fund, in billions of dollars);

f und_bm (average book-to-market ratio of stocks held by the fund); f und_mom (average past

one-year return on stocks held by the fund); and f und_amihud (average Amihud (2002) illiquidity

measure, in terms of percentile rank in the cross section, of stocks held by the fund).7

    To evaluate mutual fund performance, we use both factor-adjusted returns and holding-based

characteristics-adjusted returns performance.           Our …rst performance measure is based on the

Carhart (1997) four-factor model, which adds to the Fama-French three-factor model (1993) a

momentum factor. In particular, for each mutual fund each month, we estimate the following

rolling-window regression using monthly data from month (t                36) to (t     1):


               Ri;t   Rrf;t =    +     1 M KT RFt   +   2 SM Bt   +   3 HM Lt   +     4 U M Dt   +   i;t       (1)


where Ri is the mutual fund i’s return after fees and expenses; Rrf is the risk-free rate; M KT RF is

the CRSP value-weighted market excess return over the risk-free rate; SM B is the small-minus-big

(SMB) factor; HM L is the high-minus-low (HML) factor; M OM is the momentum factor.8

    To ensure our estimation is relatively precise, we impose the constraint that there must be at

least 24 months’worth of mutual fund return data available for estimation prior to month (t). That

is, we require the fund must have survived at least two years before we estimate the regression.
   6
      We use percentile age ranks to remove a time-series (increasing) trend in the age variable.
   7
      The Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure is de…ned as the average ratio between absolute daily return and daily
dollar volume. We use percentile Amihud ranking for two reasons. First, there is a time-series (downward) trend in
the Amihud measure due to an increase in trading volume; and second, the Amihud measure may be extreme and
subject to outliers. Using percentile ranking alleviates these issues.
    8
      The     return      factors      are     taken       from      the    Kenneth       French’s   Web      site:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data Library.



                                                        7
For month (t), we use the estimated factor loadings in the prior 36-month rolling window and the

current factor realizations to adjust the mutual fund excess return over the risk-free rate and obtain

the four-factor adjusted-alpha, or:

                                        h                                                       i
              b i;t = (Ri;t   Rrf;t )       b M KT RFt + b SM Bt + b HM Lt + b U M Dt                       (2)
                                             1            2         3         4



We sum across the four-factor adjusted-alphas within a quarter to obtain the mutual fund’s quar-

terly four-factor adjusted-return.9

    Our second performance measure is based on the mutual fund holdings. Daniel, Grinblatt,

Titman and Wermers (DGTW, 1997) and Wermers (2004) develop a characteristic selectivity (CS)

measure to detect whether managers are able to select stocks that outperform average stocks with

similar characteristics. We examine the actual stock holdings of the mutual fund and compute its

CS measure during quarter t + n as:

                                              X
                                 CSt+n =           wj;t [Rj;t+n   BRt+n (j; t)]                             (3)
                                               j


where Rj;t+n is the return on stock j during quarter t + n; wj;t is the dollar value weight of stock j

held by the mutual fund at the end of quarter t; and BRt+n (j; t) is the benchmark portfolio return

during quarter t + n matching stock j at the end of quarter t according to its size, book-to-market

equity ratio, and past 12-month return.



2    Information Events and Mutual Fund Performance

An active mutual fund manager will be successful if he or she has superior skill in processing

valuation-relevant information on a stock, which helps the manager identify potential mispricing.

It is reasonable to expect that such skills add more value when stocks the manager can invest in

are a¤ected by many value-relevant information events. Because rational managers can choose not

to trade such stocks if they do not have an advantage in analyzing information, we should expect
    9
      We obtain the quarterly risk-adjusted return by aggregating the monthly risk-adjusted returns because the
regressions over quarterly return using the past three years of data have only 12 data points, making estimation
imprecise. This is also the approach used widely in the asset management industry (see, the Style Advisor’s User
Guide developed by Zephyr’s Associates).




                                                         8
those managers who choose to trade them to earn superior returns on average.

    To identify the occurrence of information events, we …rst make use of the Probability of Informed

Trading measure (P IN ), which is a market microstructure-based measure developed by Easley,

Kiefer, O’Hara and Paperman (1996), and Easley, Kiefer and O’Hara (1997). In this model, there

are two types of traders: informed traders and uninformed traders. In the absence of information

events, only uninformed traders trade (primarily for liquidity reasons), and the order is equally

likely to be a buy or a sell, resulting in an order imbalance measure close to zero on average, and a

low P IN measure. On the other hand, when there are signi…cant information events and informed

traders also trade, there will be large amounts of buy orders or sell orders (depending on the nature

of the information), resulting in a large order imbalance and a high P IN measure.10 Empirically,

P IN decreases with trading volume, size and analyst coverage, but increases with bid-ask spread,

and insider and institutional ownership, consistent with it being a reasonable measure of private

information events.

    To estimate P IN , we use tick-by-tick transaction data for each quarter from 1983 to 2004,

employing the entire three-month data to ensure precision of the estimates. A breakdown of our

stock sample is provided in Panel A of Table 1. Overall, we have on average 4110 stocks with P IN

measures in a quarter. Due to data availability from ISSM, NASDAQ stocks enter the sample in

1987 and account for a large portion of the sample afterwards. The mean of P IN measures in

our sample is 25:8% with an associated standard deviation of 12:1%. The correlations between

P IN and other stock characteristics are tabulated in Panel B of Table 1. Consistent with Easley,

Hvidkjaer and O’Hara (2002), we …nd that high-P IN stocks are likely to be smaller and less liquid

stocks. There is also some positive correlation between P IN and book-to-market ratio.

    In each quarter and for each fund, we then compute a trade_P IN variable by value-weighting

the P IN of stocks traded by the fund during the quarter using the dollar value of the trade.

Speci…cally, we compute trade_P IN for the j-th mutual fund at the end of quarter t in our sample
  10
    A more detailed description of the P IN measure and its estimation procedure is contained in Appendix B.
Recently, the P IN measure has been widely used in the empirical …nance literature, for instance, in Brown, Hillegeist
and Lo (2004), Vega (2006), Bharath, Pasquariello and Wu (2006), and Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2006).




                                                          9
as:
                                                     N
                                                     X
                                                           P INi;t       di;j
                                                     i=1
                                   trade_P INj;t =          N
                                                                                                    (4)
                                                            X
                                                                  di;j
                                                            i=1

where P INi;t is the estimated P IN measure of the i-th stock traded by mutual fund j during

quarter t, and di;j is the absolute dollar value (using the stock price at the end of the quarter) of

the holding change during quarters t as reported by the mutual fund j. Intuitively, funds that buy

or sell more high-P IN stocks should have higher trade_P IN measures.

      At the end of each quarter over 1983 - 2004, we sort all mutual funds in the sample into deciles

according to their trade_P IN s and examine the four-factor adjusted and characteristics-adjusted

mutual fund portfolio return in the next four quarters after portfolio formation within each decile.

The results are summarized in Table 2.

      The central message in Table 2 is that funds trading more high-P IN stocks outperform the

funds trading low-P IN stocks. Using the four-factor model for risk adjustment, we …nd that

funds in the top trade_P IN decile outperform funds in the bottom trade_P IN decile by 48 basis

points in the next quarter with a t-value of 3:15. The return spread is 46 basis points in the

second quarter with a t-value of 2:98. Return spreads are 35 basis points in the third quarter

(t-value = 2:24) and 35 basis points in the fourth quarter (t-value = 2:26). Thus, within a one-year

horizon after portfolio formation, funds within the highest trade_P IN decile outperform the funds

within the lowest trade-PIN decile by roughly 1:6 percentage points. In general, we see a positive

relation between future risk-adjusted fund returns and the trade_P IN variable: the lowest …ve

trade-PIN decile portfolios usually have large negative and statistically signi…cant factor-adjusted

return during four quarters after portfolio formation; in contrast, the highest …ve trade-PIN decile

portfolios have small negative and in most cases statistically insigni…cant factor-adjusted returns.

      The results are similar for the characteristics-based risk adjustment. On average, the top trade-

PIN decile portfolio of funds outperform the bottom decile portfolio by 53 and 40 basis points per

quarter in the …rst and second quarter after portfolio formation. These di¤erences are signi…cant

at 1% signi…cance level. The return spreads between the top and bottom deciles attenuate to 19

to 9 basis points in the third and fourth quarter.



                                                   10
   The factor-adjusted mutual fund returns di¤er from the characteristics-adjusted mutual fund

returns in several important aspects. First, while the four-factor adjusted-returns are after fees and

expenses, the characteristic-adjusted returns are before fees and expenses. This di¤erence explains

why the characteristic-adjusted returns are largely positive while the factor-adjusted returns are

mostly negative. Second, the characteristics-adjusted returns are calculated from the reported

mutual fund stock holdings at portfolio formation. Therefore, they do not account for the fact

that mutual funds can change their stock holdings afterward. Perhaps the best way to interpret

our characteristics-adjusted returns is to ask when the “mispricing” at the stock portfolio level,

if any, dissipates. Interestingly, our evidence shows such dissipation occurs within two quarters.

Finally, unlike the factor-adjusted fund returns, the characteristics-adjusted fund returns ignore

possible cash, stock holdings below reporting threshold and other non-stock holdings of the mutual

fund. However, such holdings are usually small, accounting for less than 5% of the fund holdings

on average in our sample. In addition, factor-adjustment and characteristics-adjustment generate

similar return spreads between high trade_P IN fund and low trade_P IN fund deciles. These

results indicate that non-stock holdings by mutual funds are unlikely to introduce any systematic

biases.


2.1   Fund Characteristics

How can we tell which funds are more likely to trade high-P IN stocks? In Panel A of Table

3, we tabulate the average fund-level characteristics across trade_P IN -sorted fund deciles. All

characteristics are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to mitigate the e¤ect of outliers. We

…nd that high-trade_P IN funds are typically associated with smaller fund size, younger fund age,

higher expense ratio, and higher percentage fund in‡ow. High-trade_P IN funds tend to hold more

stocks, and a greater amount of smaller and less liquid stocks. Their stock holdings as a percentage

of total number of shares outstanding are also higher on average. Finally, their investment style

more likely belongs to the aggressive growth or growth funds categories, compared to the low

low-trade_P IN funds, which lean more toward the growth and income.

   Some fund characteristics have been documented as associated with superior fund performance.

For instance, Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004) show that smaller funds are more likely

to outperform. Schultz (2007) documents that small growth stocks held by mutual funds produce

                                                 11
abnormal returns on a characteristics-adjusted basis. The positive relation between the fund return

and the trade_P IN variable could be entirely driven by other correlated fund characteristics.

We examine this possibility in a cross-sectional regression framework. For each quarter in 1983 -

2004, we regress the next-quarter factor-adjusted or characteristics-adjusted fund returns on several

fund-level characteristics. All right-hand side variables (except the style dummies) are measured

as deviations from their corresponding cross-sectional means, standardized to have unit variance.

The regression intercept can be interpreted as the average e¤ect of the growth and income (GNI)

fund style. Finally, the regression coe¢ cients are averaged across time, and the associated t-

values are computed using Newey-West correction with lag terms of eight quarters to account for

autocorrelations in the error terms. The regression results are reported in Panel B of Table 3. We

…nd trade_P IN to be signi…cant even with the presence of other fund-level characteristics.


2.2   Robustness

We consider two alternative explanations for the empirical …ndings in the previous section, and we

discuss them in turn.

   PIN Risk?

   Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) document that high-P IN stocks earn higher returns in

order to compensate the agents (including mutual funds) for the risk of trading with informed

traders. Since high trade_P IN funds may also hold high-P IN stocks, the high returns they earn

might simply be due to higher risk that is not captured by the four-factor model or the DGTW

benchmark characteristics risk adjustment.

   To address this concern, we …rst directly control for P IN risk in the risk adjustment. In the

case of the factor-risk adjustment, we augment the benchmark four-factor model in (1) and (2) with

a PIN risk factor - P INt . Similar to Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2004), we construct the P IN

risk factor as the high-P IN decile portfolio return minus the low-P IN decile portfolio return. The

resulting …ve-factor-adjusted mutual fund return thus controls for any systematic P IN risk.

   In the case of characteristics-based risk adjustment, we construct characteristics benchmark

portfolios by matching along size, book-to-market, past return, and P IN characteristics simulta-

neously. At the end of each quarter, we sort all stocks into 81 portfolios using a 3 by 3 by 3 by

3 sequential sort based their sizes, book-to-market ratios, past 12 month returns and P IN mea-

                                                 12
sures (in that order). We then compute a new characteristics-adjusted fund return or characteristic

selectivity measure (CS ) using the 81 benchmark portfolio returns in (3).

   Both the …ve-factor-adjusted fund returns and the new characteristics-adjusted returns during

the next quarter in the trade_P IN sorted fund deciles are presented in the …rst two columns

of Panel A, Table 4. In general, the risk-adjusted fund returns increase with the trade_P IN

measure. Funds trading high-P IN stocks perform better than those trading low-P IN stocks, even

after directly controlling for P IN risk. The spread between the returns on the high-trade_P IN

funds and the low-trade_P IN funds, after directly controlling for P IN risk, narrows slightly but

remains positive and statistically signi…cant. The …ve-factor alpha spread is 45 basis points per

quarter with a t-value of 2:85, while the new characteristics-adjusted return spread is 43 basis points

per quarter with a t-value of 2:11.

   In a further check, we show that our results are robust to three alternative measures of the

number of information events. We describe these three alternative measures in Appendix A. The

…rst measure we consider is the asymmetric information component (adjP IN ) of the modi…ed P IN

measure proposed by Duarte and Young (2007), which removes the illiquidity component of the

original P IN measure. Duarte and Young (2007) show that the pricing of P IN risk is driven by

the illiquidity component, while adjP IN is not priced in the cross-section. The second measure

is the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread (theta) as proposed in Madhavan,

Richardson, and Roomans (1997). In addition to causing large order imbalance, informed-trading

will also force the market maker to increase the bid-ask spread which can be captured by a higher

theta measure. Finally, assuming that signi…cant information events usually lead to abnormal

trading in a stock, we use a measure of abnormal turnover (aturn) calculated following Chordia,

Huh and Subrahmanyam (2006).

   To measure the average number of information events associated with stocks traded by mutual

funds during a quarter, we compute trade_adjP IN , trade_theta, and trade_aturn in the same

fashion as trade_P IN by replacing P IN with adjP IN , theta, and aturn in (4) accordingly. The

results appear in Table 4, Panel A.

   We obtain very similar results for these alternative measures of the amount of information.

The next-quarter mutual fund risk-adjusted returns (using benchmark risk adjustment models) in

general increase with these alternative measures. In addition, funds trading stocks associated with

                                                  13
more information events outperform funds trading stocks associated with fewer information events

by about 48 basis points per quarter, similar to the results using the original P IN measure. These

risk-adjusted return spreads are highly signi…cant in the cases, and independent of whether we use

factor adjustment or characteristics adjustment to account for risk. The fact that we obtain very

similar results using adjP IN instead of P IN provides further support that P IN risk is not driving

our results.

   Momentum Trading?

   Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995) document that the majority of mutual funds use mo-

mentum as a stock selection criterion, so momentum e¤ects can signi…cantly in‡uence mutual fund

performance (see also Carhart, 1997). Panel B of Table 4 shows that funds trading high-P IN stocks

hold more recent winners than funds trading low-P IN stocks, resulting in a higher f und_mom on

average. A natural question arises: Could the di¤erence in the CS measures between funds trading

high- and low-P IN stocks be driven by the momentum e¤ect? We believe that the answer is no

for several reasons.

   First, factor-adjusted and characteristics-adjusted fund returns are computed throughout after

adjusting for momentum e¤ects. Second, when we regress the risk-adjusted fund returns on several

fund characteristics in a cross-sectional regression, we …nd f und_mom to be insigni…cant, while

trade_P IN is still highly signi…cant (see Panel B of Table 3), con…rming that the higher return

associated with funds trading high-P IN is not driven by the momentum e¤ect. Finally, we directly

examine the average past return characteristics of stocks bought, sold, and held by the funds

separately in Panel B of Table 4. In each quarter and for each fund, we …rst compute the value-

weighted average past one-year return of stocks in the “buy” portfolio (stocks recently bought by

the fund), the “sell” portfolio (stocks recently sold by the fund), and the hold portfolio (stocks

held by the fund throughout the quarter). These past returns are then averaged across funds in

the same trade_P IN decile and across time. Although high-trade_P IN funds seem to buy more

recent winners than low-trade_P IN funds (the average past one-year return in the “buy”portfolio

is 34.3% for high-trade_P IN funds vs. 20.9% for low-trade_P IN funds), high-trade_P IN funds

also sell more extreme recent winners at the same time (the average past one-year return in the

“sell” portfolio is 46.6% for high-trade_P IN funds); they thus are not momentum traders in the

traditional sense. In addition, funds in trade_P IN deciles 7 to 9 seem to buy or hold even more

                                                14
winners than funds in the top trade_P IN decile. If the momentum e¤ect drives the high CS

measure, we would expect funds in trade_P IN deciles 7 to 9 to have higher risk-adjusted returns

on average. This is clearly not the case.


2.3   PIN and Fund Manager Skill

While fund managers who choose to trade high-P IN stocks outperform the other managers on

average, we would expect outperformance to be concentrated among managers who in fact have

superior skills. To test this conjecture, we use the four-factor-adjusted fund return or alpha as

a proxy for manager skill. At the end of each quarter from 1983 through 2004, we …rst sort

all mutual funds in the sample into three portfolios according to their alpha during the quarter.

Within the high alpha fund portfolio (top one-third) and the low alpha fund portfolio (bottom

one-third), we then further sort funds according to their trade_P IN variables during the quarter

into three portfolios. The average next quarter four-factor-adjusted and characteristic-adjusted

mutual fund returns are presented in Table 5, Panel A. We observe that funds with higher alphas

this quarter continue to perform better in the next quarter. Both the factor-adjusted returns and

the characteristics-adjusted returns are higher than returns of funds with low-alphas this quarter.

   Perhaps more interestingly, sorting on the trade_P IN variable generates positive and signi…-

cant spreads in future fund performance measures only among funds with high past alphas. Among

the funds with high alphas, those trading high-P IN stocks outperform funds trading low-P IN

stocks both during the current quarter and the next quarter. Their risk-adjusted return spread is

48 basis points (t-value = 3:64) based on factor-adjusted returns and by 43 basis points (t-value =

2:43) based on characteristics-adjusted returns. Funds associated with high alphas that also trade

high-P IN stocks produce positive and signi…cant alpha of 33 basis points next quarter, even after

accounting for fees and expenses. In sharp contrast, among funds with low alphas, sorting on the

trade_P IN variable does not generate much dispersion in future fund performance measures at

all. In addition, during the current quarter, funds trading high-P IN stocks actually signi…cantly

underperform funds trading low-P IN stocks, re‡ecting the possibility that fund managers who are

overcon…dent have more to lose in trading high-P IN stocks. Overall, these results provide addi-

tional support for our main hypothesis that skillful managers who can better analyze value-relevant

information can add more value when trading stocks associated with more information events.

                                                15
     Panel B of Table 5 presents the results when we sort on trade_P IN …rst and fund alpha

second. We …nd that sorting on fund alphas this quarter for funds with high trade_P IN generates

a much wider spread in fund risk-adjusted returns during both this quarter and the next quarter

than within funds with low trade_P IN . Among funds that trade high-P IN stocks, funds that

earn higher quarter t alphas have higher quarter t + 1 alphas than funds that earn low quarter t

alphas (91basis points on average with t-value of 4:36), even after accounting for fees and expenses.

Among funds that trade low-P IN stocks, the quarter t + 1 alpha spread between funds in the high-

and low-quarter-t-alpha groups is only 38 basis points. The t-value of 2.43 is also much smaller,

although still very signi…cant. Results in Panel B suggest that past fund alpha does a better job

in separating talented managers from ordinary managers if we also examine the stocks they trade.

     Table 5 also presents the risk-adjusted mutual fund returns after directly controlling for P IN

risk, and the results are very similar. Overall, the results indicate that talented managers indeed

add more value by trading stocks associated with more information events. The implication of this

…nding is that analysis of the number of information events associated with stocks traded by the

managers helps us to identify the talented ones.



3        Decomposing Mutual Fund’s Stock Selection Skills

To better understand the channels through which talented fund managers can add value, we de-

compose the stock selection skill of a mutual fund. In general, how a manager with superior skill

trades to add value will depend on how long it takes for the market to realize that the manager is

correct. Analyzing how long the informational advantage lasts, a manager’s trades can be classi…ed

into the following three types:


    1. A manager can add value from long-term “value investing” by taking a position in a stock

         with the expectation that the market will eventually agree with his or her view in, say, a few

         years.11
    11
     Using fundamental analysis, Mario Gabelli, a money manager, realized that the stock of Hudson General Corp
(HGC) was heavily undervalued at around $25 in early 1994 and started to accumulate shares of HGC for his Gabelli
Funds (see Figure 2A). The investment paid o¤ after two years, when the stock price reached $40. The market
eventually agreed with Mr. Gabelli, after Lufthansa took over HGC at $76 per share. See Greenwald, Kahn, Sonkin
and Biema (2001) for details on this case.




                                                       16
      2. A manager can add value from medium-term informed trading by transacting in “mispriced”

        stocks, expecting the market to agree with his or her view within, say, a quarter or two.12

        In this case, the value of the information is likely to erode quickly, and successful and timely

        trade execution may require paying a substantial price concession.

      3. A fund manager can add value using short-term liquidity provision by taking the other side

        of a trade when liquidity is most needed.13 Since fund managers often hold an inventory

        of stocks in order to track their performance benchmarks, they have a natural advantage in

        making a market in those stocks. Superior knowledge about the stocks covered by a manager

        will help in any market-making activities by minimizing potential losses that would arise from

        trading with market participants with an information advantage.14


      To separate the value-added in these three di¤erent types of trading, we focus on the characteristics-

based performance measure, characteristic selectivity (CS). Recall that the CS measure of a mutual

fund during quarter t+1, based on its actual stock holdings at the end of quarter t, can be computed

as:
                                                X
                                     CSt+1 =          wj;t [Rj;t+1    BRt+1 (j; t)]
                                                  j

where Rj;t+1 is the return on stock j during quarter t + 1; wj;t is the dollar value weight of stock

j held by the mutual fund at the end of quarter t; and BRt+1 (j; t) is the benchmark portfolio
   12
      The year-to-year same store sales growth reported by Starbucks every month is a widely watched number, and
is considered about as important as the company’s quarterly earnings announcements for valuation purposes. For
January to September 2005, Starbucks’ reported sales growth rates were in the range of 7% to 9%. Most analysts
were of the view that a large part of that growth rate was attributable to the 3% sales price increase that took e¤ect
in October 2004, and that this price increase would not help with respect to same-month year-to-year sales growth
rates beginning with October 2005. That probably explains the much smaller anticipated growth rate (analyst
consensus was 3.6%). However, a careful analysis of sales breakdown would have indicated that the 3% price increase
in October 2004 explained little of the sales growth during January-September 2005. So, the October sales growth
…gure should be more like that for the early months of 2005. While most mutual funds decreased their holdings of
Starbucks stock during Q3 2005 in anticipation of an announcement of a drop in same-store sales growth for October,
Putnam Voyager Fund actually accumulated more shares (see Figure 2B). On November 3, 2005 Starbucks reported
unexpectedly strong sales growth of 7% for October, and its share price jumped. Details on this case can be found
in Blumenthal (2007).
   13
      It is well known that when index funds trade following index rebalancing, their trades tend to demand liquidity
from the market (see Blume and Edelen, 2004). Active fund managers taking the other side of those trades will
bene…t from liquidity provision.
   14
      Sometimes managers may not be directly motivated by the “liquidity provision”objective. For example, consider
a mutual fund with a policy of not investing more than a certain percentage of its assets in any one stock. The fund
may decrease its holdings of a stock that experiences a recent sharp price increase in order to satisfy its portfolio
weighting constraints. Such trades are likely to provide liquidity and will therefore be classi…ed as “liquidity provision”
even when liquidity provision was not the motivation behind the trade.



                                                           17
return during quarter t + 1 to which stock j is matched at the end of quarter t based on its size,

book-to-market equity ratio, and past 12-month return.

   We can further decompose CS measure. A numerical illustration of such decomposition is

provided in Appendix B. Suppose mutual funds rebalance only at discrete points in time, t = 1, 2,

3, ....,T . For convenience, we assume time periods are measured in quarters. Let Nt be a column

vector of mutual fund stock holdings (in number of shares, split-adjusted) at the end of quarter t.

By comparing Nt   1   and Nt , we can de…ne three stock portfolios:


  1. Hold portfolio, which has stock holdings:


                                           NtH = min (Nt        1 ; Nt )



     where the operator min() calculates the element-by-element minimum; and NtH captures

     holdings that appear in both quarters.

  2. Buy portfolio, which has stock holdings:


                                             NtB = Nt           NtH


     The buy portfolio holds stocks bought by the fund during quarter t.

  3. Sell portfolio, which has stock holdings:


                                            NtS = Nt        1   NtH


     The sell portfolio contains stocks sold by the fund during quarter t.


   Over time, the mutual fund stock holdings change as follows:


                                       Nt = Nt   1        NtS + NtB


   Let Pt be a column vector of corresponding stock prices at the end of quarter t. Let us denote

the market value of hold, buy and sell portfolios as Ht , Bt and St , respectively. Accordingly, we



                                                     18
have:


                                          Ht = Pt0 NtH

                                          Bt = Pt0 NtB

                                          St = Pt0 NtS


   At the end of quarter t, the mutual fund’s stock holdings are a combination of the hold portfolio

and the buy portfolio. The fund CS measure for quarter t + 1 is therefore the value-weighted

average of CS measures on the hold portfolio and buy portfolio for quarter t + 1:

                                      Ht                 Bt
                          CSt+1 =            CSH;t+1 +          CSB;t+1 ;
                                    Ht + B t           Ht + B t

where CSH;t+1 and CSB;t+1 denote CS measure on hold and buy portfolios for quarter t + 1.

   We then decompose the CS measure into three components:


                                   O       T       adj
                         CSt+1 = CSt+1 + CSt+1 + CSt+1                                            (5)
                           O             Ht                  St
                         CSt+1 =               CSH;t+1 +           CSS;t+1
                                      H t + St            H t + St
                           T             Bt                   St
                         CSt+1 =                CSB;t+1            CSS;t+1
                                      Ht + B t            H t + St
                           adj           H t St B t
                         CSt+1 =                        CSH;t+1
                                      H t + B t Ht + St

                                            O ), can be interpreted as the CS measure on the
   The …rst component, the old component (CSt+1

fund as if the fund did not balance its portfolio at all during quarter t. If nothing happens to the

fund during quarter t, its stock holdings would remain unchanged (Nt = Nt       1 ),   and thus would

be composed of stocks in the hold portfolio and sell portfolio. Consequently, the CS measure for

quarter t + 1 would be the value-weighted average of CS measures on the hold portfolio and sell

portfolios. Intuitively, this captures the value-added to the fund during quarter t + 1 from fund

investments prior to quarter t, and likely corresponds to the bene…t from long-term investment.
                                                T ), measures the characteristics-adjusted
   The second component, the trade component (CSt+1

returns on the most recent mutual fund stock trades during quarter t. Finally, the adjustment
             adj
component (CSt+1 ) represents a small adjustment term whenever St 6= Bt , which could happen


                                                19
whenever there is in‡ow or out‡ow to the fund.
                          T ) measures value-added from both medium-term informed trading
   The trade component (CSt+1

and short-term liquidity provision. Since mutual fund holdings are typically reported at quarterly

frequency at most, in order to make a reasonable attempt to separate them, we rely on a key

di¤erence between these two types of trades. Informed trading, unlike liquidity provision trade,

is likely to demand liquidity since the value of information erodes quickly over time, so timely

execution becomes important. Given this intuition, we can further decompose the trade component
  T
CSt+1 into two components by comparing the sign of quarterly mutual fund holding change and

the sign of market order imbalance for each stock traded by the fund (the stocks in the buy or

sell portfolios) during quarter t. The market order imbalance is de…ned as the total number of

buyer-initiated trades minus the total number of seller-initiated trades in the quarter.

   Following custom in the literature, we implement the trade classi…cation using the standard

algorithm in Lee and Ready (1991). We then classify stock trades where the two signs are identical

into one group, denoted by superscript “+”; and where the two signs are di¤erent into another

group, denoted by superscript “ ”. As a result, the characteristics-adjusted returns on trades from
                         T :
these groups sum up to CSt+1


                           T       inf     liq
                         CSt+1 = CSt+1 + CSt+1                                                  (6)
                           inf           Bt+     +          St+      +
                         CSt+1 =               CSB;t+1             CSS;t+1
                                      Ht + B t            H t + St
                           liq          Bt                   St
                         CSt+1 =               CSB;t+1             CSS;t+1
                                      Ht + B t            H t + St

   Given that the aggregate market order imbalance is a good measure of the direction of liquidity
                    inf
needs of a stock, CSt+1 measures the characteristics-adjusted return on mutual fund trades that

on average absorb market liquidity (see Chordia and Subrahmanyam, 2004). Such trades are likely
                                                                          liq
driven by information and are therefore classi…ed as “informed trading.”CSt+1 , on the other hand,

measures the characteristics-adjusted return on mutual fund trades that on average supply market

liquidity, and hence are classi…ed as “liquidity provision”. In the extreme case where the fund

manager trades only one stock and when the time interval is one minute rather than one quarter,
  liq
CSt+1 will closely resemble the realized spread of Huang and Stoll (1996), which measures the



                                                 20
reward to market makers’liquidity provision activities. To summarize, we decompose the fund CS

measure as:


                                        O       adj     T
                              CSt+1 = CSt+1 + CSt+1 + CSt+1 ;                                    (7)
                                T       inf     liq
                              CSt+1 = CSt+1 + CSt+1 :


3.1    Discussion of the Empirical Implementation

There are several potential empirical issues associated with the implementation of our decomposi-

tion procedure. First, because we use quarter-end mutual fund stock holdings for the decomposition

of stock holdings, we will miss high-frequency turnovers by mutual funds; see Kacperczyk, Sialm

and Zheng (2007) and Elton, Gruber, Krasny and Ozelge (2006). To the extent that short-term

liquidity provision occurs within a calendar quarter, by using quarter-end holdings only, we may

underestimate the bene…t from liquidity provision.

   Second, the division of informed trading and liquidity provision is imprecise. On the one hand,

not all informed trading is liquidity demanding, especially when the trader is very patient and

trades in small quantities over a relatively long period of time. In the trading of relatively large

quantities quickly to take advantage of the time value of information, however, it is extremely hard

not to absorb liquidity. As a result, liquidity-demanding trades are still likely information-driven

on average. On the other hand, not all liquidity-demanding trades are information driven. For

example, distress stocks sales by mutual funds (see Da and Gao, 2006) and assets …re-sales due to

extreme ‡ows (see Coval and Sta¤ord, 2007) are likely to absorb liquidity but have nothing to do

with mispricing trading motives. As distressed stocks are typically of small market capitalization,

the impact of transactions will be alleviated, as each component of the CS measure is computed

using the value-weighted average. When we leave out value-adding informed trading that is not

liquidity demanding and including value-destorying distressed trading that is liquidity demanding,

we are underestimating the bene…t of informed-trading, and overestimating the bene…t of liquidity

provision. Finally, our classi…cation of informed trading and liquidity provision depends on quar-

terly data, which could also be noisy. These noises may prevent us from …nding any signi…cant

results.



                                                21
    Recognizing these challenges in the empirical exercise, we have all the same made the …rst

attempt to bring both informed trading and liquidity provision into the evaluation of mutual fund’s

stock selectivity. In Appendix B, we examine several empirical properties of the decomposition

that lend support for its validity. First, we show that mutual funds are likely to provide liquidity

on average only when they reduce their holdings, consistent with our conjecture that it is easier

to provide liquidity on stocks that one currently owns. Second, we demonstrate the e¤ectiveness

of our decomposition methodology using two speci…c examples: (1) Dimensional Fund Advisors,

and (2) a group of domestic index funds. Third, we …nd that the informed trading component is

more important than the liquidity provision component in explaining cross-sectional variation in

the CS measures. In addition, informed trading becomes relatively more important for growth-

oriented funds while liquidity provision becomes relatively more important for income-oriented

funds, consistent with what one would expect.


3.2    Empirical Decomposition Results

We show for all US domestic active equity funds in the sample, the average size of each component

in the …rst line of Table 6. Overall, the active fund managers seem to have some stock selection skill

that requires trading with the order imbalance in the market. The average character selectivity

measure is 23.5 basis points per quarter (t-value = 1:91), indicating the stocks selected by fund

managers outperform stocks with similar characteristics. Of the 23.5 basis points, 13.9 basis points

come from the passive buy-and-hold strategy and 14.2 basis points come from stocks recently

traded by the funds. The adjustment component is small in absolute term (-1.8 basis points) but

signi…cant, potentially driven by fund ‡ow to managers with skills as empirically documented by

Chevalier and Ellison (1997), and Sirri and Tufano (1998), among others, and theoretically analyzed

by Berk and Green (2004).15 Finally, although both the informed trading component (CS inf ) and

the liquidity provision component (CS liq ) are positive, neither is signi…cant.

    Table 6 also shows the decomposition applied to the decile portfolios of funds sorted on trade_P IN .

This reveals interesting di¤erences in value-added between funds trading high-P IN stocks and funds

trading low-P IN stocks. For high-trade_P IN -funds, a large part of the character selectivity (CS)
  15
     When managers have skill (CS P is likely to be positive), fund in‡ow is more likely (B > S); when managers
have no skill (CS P is likely to be negative), fund out‡ow is more likely (S > B). Both e¤ects lead to a negative
CS adj as in equation (5).


                                                       22
measure comes from active trading during the previous quarter (CS T = 31:2 basis points with a

t-value of 2:83). We can con…rm that the stocks bought by mutual funds (the buy portfolio) and

the stocks sold by mutual funds (the sell portfolio) have very similar average P IN measures. The

trade component, measuring their return di¤erence, should be less subject to P IN risk. The fact

that it is positive and signi…cant indicates that we are not capturing just the P IN risk. Although

both the informed trading component (CS inf ) and the liquidity provision component (CS liq ) are

positive for high-trade_P IN -funds, only the informed trading component is signi…cant (20:4 basis

points with a t-value of 2.25), and it is twice the size of the liquidity provision component (10.4

basis points). This is consistent with our conjecture. When skillful managers absorb liquidity by

trading high-P IN stocks, they are likely to have valuation-relevant information, and thus make

money on informed trading. For them, there is less of an added cost of demanding immediacy

in the market than there is a bene…t from superior information, as Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)

would predict. In terms of liquidity provision, not all of them can perform well consistently. As

a result, although the liquidity provision component is positive on average, it is much smaller and

not signi…cant, perhaps because of the possibility of trading against informed traders and the noise

associated with identifying liquidity provision using quarterly mutual fund holdings data..

   The low-trade_P IN -funds, despite near zero stock selection skill on average, seem to possess

some skill in liquidity provision. The liquidity provision component (16.2 basis points) is signi…cant

(t-value = 2.57). This is because when fund managers trade low-P IN stocks, they are likely to

trade with uninformed traders. When they trade against market order imbalance, they are likely to

make money by providing the needed liquidity. Although the reward for liquidity provision on these

stocks is lower than that on the high-P IN stocks, the risk of adverse selection is also lower, making

liquidity provision more easily detected. The positive liquidity provision component is partly o¤set

by a negative informed trading component, resulting in a close-to-zero CS measure.

   To sum this up, the decomposition exercise reveals interesting patterns in how mutual fund’s

trades can add value. While informed trading is more likely to add value at times when the stock

traded are associated with information events, liquidity provision is more likely to add value (or be

easily detected in a statistical sense) when the stocks traded are associated with few information

events.



                                                 23
4    Conclusion

The folk wisdom is that portfolio managers can pro…tably take advantage of their talent when

the stocks they follow are a¤ected by information events. To the extent that economic conditions

that favor one type of talent over another tend to persist for a while, managers who were able to

generate value at a certain time will continue to do so for a while. It follows that the past superior

performance of a portfolio manager is less likely to be due to just plain luck when that superior

performance is attributable to trading in stocks that were most a¤ected by information events.

    We provide empirical support for this view. Funds that trade in stocks most a¤ected by infor-

mation events on average earned 50 basis points per quarter more after risk adjustment than funds

trading in stocks least a¤ected by information events. Among funds with a high positive alpha

in one quarter, only those that traded in stocks the most a¤ected by information events earned a

signi…cantly positive alpha (33 basis points per quarter on average) in the next quarter.

    When we decompose a manager’s stock selection ability further into di¤erent components,

we …nd that impatient informed trading is more important for alpha generation for the funds

trading stocks a¤ected most by information events. Liquidity provision, on the other hand, is

more important for the funds trading stocks a¤ected least by information events. Decomposition of

holding like this further facilitate the understanding of the strengths of an active portfolio manager

and the extent to which such strengths will persist into the future.




                                                 24
   Appendix A: Measures of Private Information Events

   Easley and O’Hara with several coauthors develop a measure - probability of informed trading

(P IN ) - to capture the probability of information-based trading. Let                                        denote the probability

that an information event occurs;            denote the low value of underlying asset, conditioning on the

occurrence of an information event;             the rate of informed trade arrivals;                            b   the arrival rate of

uninformed buy orders; and        s   the arrival rate of uninformed sell orders.

   Easley, Hvdkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) propose an maximal likelihood estimation of the parameter

vector      f ; ; b; s; g

                                                                       B                   S
                                                                       b           s       s
                         L ( jB; S) = (1                  )e       b
                                                                            e
                                                               S!      B!
                                                               B
                                                                ( + s )S
                                                + e b e ( + s) b
                                                                                                                                 (A-1)
                                                     B!           S!
                                                                      B                                  S
                                                        ( + s) ( + b)                                s   s
                                                + (1 )e                  e
                                                                  B!                                     S!

where B and S represent total buy trades and sell trades for the day. The probability of information-

based trade, P IN , is

                                               P IN =                                                                            (A-2)
                                                                   +       b   +       s

   With some independence assumptions across trading days, the likelihood function (A-1) becomes

                                                                       N
                                                                       Y
                                   L      j (Bi ; Si )i=N
                                                      i=1 =                    L ( jBi ; Si ) :                                  (A-3)
                                                                       i=1


   The problem with estimation of P IN measure is that numbers of buy and sell orders have risen

considerably since 2001, particularly for some Nasdaq stocks. One way to alleviate this problem,

as in Vega (2006), is to impose the constraint that the informed and uninformed orders arrive at

the same rate:

                                                      b   =    s       =                                                         (A-4)

   Then we estimate a modi…ed version of (A-1):


                              2
                                  B+S
                                                   ( +2 )
                                                              B   ( + )S                                 ( +2 )
                                                                                                                    S   ( + )B
   L ( jB; S) = (1       )e              +     e                         +                     (1   )e                           (A-5)
                                  B!S!                            B!S!                                                   B!S!



                                                            25
     The probability of informed trading, P IN , is


                                            P IN =                :                                (A-6)
                                                         +2

     Note that the probability that an information event occurs ( ) and the rate of informed trade

arrivals ( ) enter the P IN equation as a product term (                ). Although   and   are estimated

individually rather imprecisely, because the estimation errors in the two parameters are usually

strongly negatively correlated, the resulting P IN estimate is quite precise. Moreover, the variation

in    and    are o¤setting, making P IN a much stable measure bounded between 0 and 1.

     In the economy of Easley, Hvdkjaer, and O’Hara (2001), the total number of trades B + S and

the order imbalance B      S are related to parameters of the model. as:


                                     E [B + S] =             +2

                                     E [B     S] =           (1       2 )


     Since each day is either a good day ( = 0), a bad day ( = 1), or a no-event day ( = 0), the

expected daily absolute order imbalance (OIB) is then:


                                            E [jB    Sj] =


     Aktas, Bodt, Declerck, and Oppens (2007) and Kaul, Lei, and Sto¤man (2007) show that a

relative order imbalance measure rel_OIB = E [jB              Sj] =E [B + S] is a good approximation of

P IN . In fact, on a daily basis, rel_OIB is equivalent to P IN . In addition, the average cross-

sectional correlation between these two measures is above 0:75: rel_OIB is clearly a measure of

order ‡ow one-sidedness. Our results are almost identical when we replace P IN with rel_OIB.

     Durate and Young (2007) extend (A-1) to take into account large buy and sell volatilities, and

pervasive positive correlation between buy and sell orders. Their model allows the possibility of

order ‡ow shocks and di¤erent distributions of the number of the buyer-initiated informed trades

and the number of the seller-initiated informed trades. With such an extension, one may estimate




                                                    26
an adjusted version of the probability of informed trading (AdjPIN) as

                                                           [(1    )       b   +           s]
   AdjP IN =                                                                              0                                              (A-7)
                         [(1    )        b   +          s] + (   b+     s)                    + (1          )     +   b   +       s


where the additional parameter denotes the probability of symmetric order ‡ow shocks conditional
                                                                 0
on no arrival of private information event, and                       denotes the probability of symmetric order ‡ow

shocks conditional on the arrival of private information.                         b   and           s   denote the additional arrival

rate of buy orders and sell orders conditional on the arrival of the symmetric order ‡ow shocks.
                                                                                              0
   Durate and Young (2007) simplify (A-7) by restricting                              =           . The most important feature of

the model is the probability of symmetric order ‡ow shocks could be non-negative (                                                    0). Since

we estimate the AdjP IN measure quarterly using the daily trade imbalanced data aggregated from

the tick-by-tick transactions, to reduce the sheer volume of calculations, and to estimate a relatively

parsimonious model with fewer parameters, we further impose the constraints that                                              b   =      s   =

and     b   =   s   =   . According to Durate and Young (2007), the adjusted-PIN estimated with these

constraints generate similar results to their full-‡edged model.

   Thus, the adjusted-PIN measure we estimate is speci…ed as:


                                     AdjP IN =
                                                                 +2                   +2

   In addition to causing large order imbalance, informed trading will also force the market maker

to increase the bid-ask spread. In the structural model of intra-day trading costs proposed by

Madhavan et al. (1997), the price change can be captured by:


                                    pt       pt   1   = ( + )xt        ( +        )xt     1       + ut


where       is the market maker’s cost of supplying liquidity;                        captures the sensitivity of beliefs to

unexpected order ‡ows or the degree of private information; xt is the sign of the order ‡ow (1:

trade at ask, -1: trade at bid, 0: trade between bid and ask);                            is the autocorrelation of the order

‡ow. theta ( ) is thus known as the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread and

serves as an alternative measure of private information events.                           , , and           will be jointly estimated

with transaction-level data using the generalized method of moments (GMM) on a quarterly basis.


                                                                 27
   To the extent that signi…cant information events usually lead to abnormal trading in a stock,

our last alternative measure is a measure of abnormal turnover (aturn) calculated in a similar

fashion as in Chordia, Huh, and Subrahmanyam (2007). At the end of month t, for each stock, we

estimate a regression in a 36-month rolling window [t           35; t]:



                                                turn = a + bx + "

where turn is monthly stock turnover de…ned as the ratio between total number of shares traded

during the month and total number of shares outstanding, and x is a vector of adjustment regressors

including 11 monthly dummy variables for months (January - November) as well as the linear and

quadratic time-trend variables. The residual term for month t, "t , after standardization is the

measure of abnormal turnover (aturn).

   Appendix B: Decomposition of Mutual Fund Stock Selection Skill - A Numerical

Example and Empirical Validations

   B.1: A numerical example

   Assume there are six stocks (A, B, C, D, E, and F). A mutual fund’s holdings in these stocks

at the end of quarter t   1 (Nt    1)   and t (Nt ), stock prices at the end of quarter t (Pt ), and the

characteristics-adjusted stock returns during quarter t+1 [Rj;t+1          BRt+1 (j; t)] can be summarized

in the following table:


                           Stock    Nt      1    Nt   Pt    Rj;t+1 BRt+1 (j; t)

                             A          2         1   10              3%

                             B          2         0   15              2%

                             C          2         2   20              1%

                             D          2         2   25            1%

                             E          2         3   30            2%

                             F          0         2   35            3%




                                                       28
   The hold, buy and sell are then de…ned by the holdings NtH , NtB and NtS :


                 Stock   NtH = min (Nt     1 ; Nt )    NtB = N t N H
                                                                   t        NtS = N t     1   NH
                                                                                               t

                  A                  1                         0                      1

                  B                  0                         0                      2

                  C                  2                         0                      0

                  D                  2                         0                      0

                  E                  2                         1                      0

                  F                  0                         2                      0

                 Value         Ht = 160                     Bt = 100             St = 40


   The portfolio values Ht , Bt , and St are determined using the prices at the end of quarter t

(Pt ). Notice that Bt > St , and the di¤erence is likely …nanced by fund in‡ows, or a reduction in

cash position or the sale of other non-stock assets held by the fund. The hold, buy, and sell can

be treated as three separate funds whose CS measures can be computed using equation (3) and

holdings as:
                              Hold                       Buy                     Sell

                 CS      CS H;t+1 = 0:63%      CS B;t+1 = 2:70%          CS S;t+1 =       2:25%

   Given this information, equation (5) then decomposes the total CS measure into three compo-

nents:
                                CS t+1       CS O
                                                t+1      CS Tt+1       CS adj
                                                                          t+1

                                1:42%        0:05%       1:49%          0:12%

   If we further assume that the fund trades B and F in the same direction as the aggregate order

imbalance and trades A and E against the direction of aggregate order imbalance, equation (6)
                                          T ) into an informed trading component (CS inf )
further decomposes the trade component (CSt+1                                       t+1
                                       liq
and a liquidity provision component (CSt+1 ):


                                         CS Tt+1      CS inf
                                                         t+1   CS liq
                                                                  t+1

                                         1:49%        1:11%     0:38%


   B.2: Type of mutual fund trades and average order imbalances

                                                       29
   For active funds in our sample, we …rst examine their holding changes over two consecutive

quarters and categorize them into four groups: (1) open (holdings increase from zero to positive);

(2) close (holdings decrease from positive to zero); (3) increase (holdings increase but not from

zero) and (4) decrease (holdings decrease but not to zero). For each group, we then compute

the average dollar holding change as a percentage of the total dollar holding change of the fund

(computed using prices at quarter-end); and the average order imbalance measure. The average

order imbalance measure is de…ned as the di¤erence between total number of buyer-initiated shares

brought and total number of seller-initiated shares sold divided by total number of shares traded

during the quarter, the resulting number is then cross-sectionally demeaned. The associated t-value

is computed using the time-series average with Newey-West adjustment for autocorrelations.

   The results are provided in Panel A of Table 7. The average order imbalance measure for each

trade type tells us whether the trade is on average demanding liquidity. When fund managers open

new positions and close out standing positions, they are likely to absorb market liquidity. In this

case, these trades are likely motivated by considerable mispricing perceived by fund managers who

are willing to pay for the price of immediacy. When fund managers adjust their holdings, they

are likely to provide liquidity on average only when they reduce their holdings, consistent with our

conjecture that it is easier to provide liquidity on stocks a fund currently owns.

   B.3: Empirical decomposition examples

   We demonstrate the e¤ectiveness of our decomposition methodology using two speci…c examples:

(1) Dimensional Fund Advisors, and (2) a group of domestic index funds.

   Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA)

   Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA) is an asset management …rm founded in 1981. It is well

known that the …rm does not use fundamental analysis to pick stocks, but instead helps its clients

gain exposure to certain segments of the asset markets through passive indexing or enhanced

indexing. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a subset of the funds managed by DFA create value

by systematically providing liquidity to those who want to trade small stocks for non-information-

related reasons.16

   If this is the case, our decomposition procedure would allow us to …nd a positive liquidity pro-

vision component in DFA’s characteristic selectivity measure and an informed trading component
  16
       See the case studies by Keim (1999) and Cohen (2002).


                                                        30
close to zero. Of course, since we examine one speci…c fund over a limited time period, statistical

signi…cance could be rather weak.

   We examine the quarterly stock holdings of DFA’s ‡agship fund, US Micro Cap Portfolio, over

the period 1983 - 2004 and decompose its CS measure. The results are presented in Panel B of

Table 7. The overall CS measure for the fund is 36:1 basis points per quarter, but this is not

statistically signi…cant (t-value = 1:72), indicating that the fund does not seem to exhibit any

ability to select stocks that outperform those with similar characteristics. As expected, the largest

component of the overall CS measure results from liquidity provision (20:5 basis points per quarter),

which is signi…cant at the 10% level (t-value = 1:84). The informed trading component, however,

is very close to zero and statistically insigni…cant, which is consistent with the claims of the …rm’s

investment policy.

   Index funds

   The majority of index funds are formed to track a market index or other broad index with the

objective of minimizing tracking errors, so we would not expect them to have a high CS measure.

Index funds are most likely to trade during index rebalancing and to demand liquidity in those

trades (see Blume and Edelen, 2004). These trades would be incorrectly classi…ed as informed

trading within our decomposition framework, and the informed trading component, if di¤erent

from zero, is likely to be negative. It is of course not useful to apply the decomposition to index

funds. For that reason we focus only on actively managed funds in the text, but examining index

funds provides another way to test the validity of our decomposition approach.

   We identify index funds by their fund names as recorded in CDA/Spectrum S12 mutual fund

holdings database. Between1983 and 2004, there are an average of 11 domestic equity-only index

funds identi…ed each quarter, starting from one fund each quarter in 1983 to about 25 funds each

quarter after 2000. Using their stock holdings, we apply our decomposition to each fund and then

equal-weight the results across funds for every quarter. These results are in the second part of Panel

B, Table 7. The overall CS measure for index funds as a group is almost exactly zero. The index

fund group has a positive although not signi…cant CS O component of about 25 basis points per

quarter on average (t-value = 0.93), but this is not statistically signi…cant. In addition, the index

funds on average make some pro…t (although not signi…cant) from providing liquidity, as evident

from a positive CS liq component of about 6 basis points per quarter (t-value = 0.36). Interestingly,

                                                 31
the positive CS O and CS liq are o¤set by a negative informed trading component (CS inf = -35 basis

points), which is statistically signi…cant, indicating a sizable price for liquidity paid by the index

funds for trades that arise due to index rebalancing, new money ‡owing in, and redemptions.

   B.4: Variance decomposition results

   To examine the relative importance of each component of the total characteristic selectivity

measure, we carry out a variance decomposition exercise. We decompose the total characteristic

selectivity measure into four components:17


                                      CS = CS O + CS adj + CS inf + CS liq


Consequently, we have


             var(CS) = cov(CS; CS O ) + cov(CS; CS adj ) + cov(CS; CS inf ) + cov(CS; CS liq )


where var ( ) and cov ( ) are the cross-sectional variance and covariance, respectively. Dividing

both sides of this equation by var(CS) , we then have


                                            1=    O   +   adj   +   inf   +   liq .



   The term         ()   then measures the contribution of component ( ) to the cross-sectional variations

of CS. The sum of the contribution from the four components is equal to one by construction.

  can be measured by regression. For instance,                  O   is estimated by regressing CS O on CS cross-

sectionally.

   Empirically, we have a panel data of cross-sectionally demeaned CS, CS P , CS adj , CS inf and

CS liq . To estimate , we run a weighted least squares (WLS) regression. In practice, this means

de‡ating the data for each fund-quarter by the number of funds in the corresponding cross-section.

The variance decomposition delineates how much the cross-sectional variation in the total CS

measure can be attributed to the cross-sectional variation in each of its four components.

   The results are reported in Panel C of Table 7 for the full sample of all active US equity funds,

and across the three style subsamples. Overall, the old component (CS O ) explains about 57% of the
  17
       For simplicity of notation, we omit the time subscript t and fund superscript i.



                                                           32
total cross-sectional variation in the total CS measure. The informed trading component (CS inf )

explains about 37% of the total variation, more important than the liquidity provision component

(CS liq ), which explains slightly more than 8%. In addition, CS inf becomes more important for

growth-oriented funds, while CS liq becomes relatively more important for income-oriented funds.



References
 [1] Aktas, Nihat, Eric de Bodt, Fany Declerck, and Herve Van Oppens, 2007, The PIN anomaly
    around M&A announcements, Journal of Financial Markets 10, 169-191.

 [2] Amihud, Yahov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series E¤ects,
    Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.

 [3] Baks, Klass, Je¤rey A. Busse, and T. Clifton Green, 2006, Fund Managers Who Take Big
    Bets: Skilled or Overcon…dent, Working Paper, Emory University

 [4] Berk, Jonathan, and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund ‡ows and performance in rational
    markets, Journal of Political Economy 112(6), 1269–1295.

 [5] Bharath, Sreedhar, Paolo Pasquariello and Guojun Wu, 2006, Does asymmetric information
    drive capital structure decisions?, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

 [6] Blume, Marshall E., and Roger M. Edelen, 2004, On replicating the S&P 500 index, Working
    Paper, Wharton School.

 [7] Blumenthal, Karen, 2007, Grande expectations: A year in the life of Starbuck’s stock, Crown
    Publishing, …rst edition.

 [8] Brown, Stephen, and William Goetzmann, 1995, Performance persistence, Journal of Finance
    50(2), 679 - 698.

 [9] Brown, Stephen, Steve Hillegeist and Kin Lo, 2004, Conference calls and information asym-
    metry, Journal of Accounting and Economics 37, 343-366.

[10] Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Allie Schwartz, 2007, Caught On Tape:Institutional
    Trading, Stock Returns, and Earnings Announcements, Working Paper, Harvard University.

[11] Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
    57–82.

[12] Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, An examination of the
    stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
    35, 343–368.

                                               33
[13] Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Je¤rey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode per-
    formance? Liquidity, organizational diseconomies and active money management, American
    Economic Review 94(5), 1276–1302.

[14] Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein and Wei Jiang, 2006, Price informativeness and investment sensitivity
    to stock prices, Review of Financial Studies 20, 619-650.

[15] Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
    incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.

[16] Chordia, Tarun, Sahn-Wook Huh, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2007, The cross-section of
    expected trading activity, Review of Financial Studies 20, 709-740.

[17] Chordia, Tarun and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2004, Order imbalance and individual stock
    returns: Theory and evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 485 - 518.

[18] Cohen, Randolph B., 2002, Dimensional fund advisors, Harvard Business School Case 294-025.

[19] Christo¤ersen, Susan Kerr, Donald B. Keim, and David K. Musto, 2006, Valuable information
    and costly liquidity: evidence from individual mutual fund trades, Working Paper, Wharton
    School.

[20] Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed
    trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109(4), 811–841.

[21] Coval, Joshua D., and Erik Sta¤ord, 2006, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets,
    Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

[22] Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2006, How Active is Your Fund Manager? a New Mea-
    sure that Predicts Performance, Working Paper, Yale School of Management, Yale University.

[23] Da, Zhi and Pengjie Gao, 2006, Clientele Change, Liquidity shock, and the Return on Finan-
    cially Distressed Stocks, Working Paper, University of Notre Dame.

[24] Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
    fund performance with characteristic based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.

[25] Duarte, Je¤erson, and Lance Young, 2007, Why is PIN priced? Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics, forthcoming.

[26] Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer, and Maureen O’Hara, 2002, Is information risk a determinant
    of asset returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 2185-2221.

[27] Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer, and Maureen O’Hara, 2004, Factoring information into re-
    turns, Working Paper, Cornell University.



                                                34
[28] Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, One day in the life of a very
    common stock, Review of Financial Studies 10, 805–835.

[29] Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, Maureen O’Hara, and Joseph Paperman, 1996, Liquidity,
    information, and less-frequently traded stocks, Journal of Finance 51, 1405–1436.

[30] Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Yoel Krasny and Sadi Ozelge, 2006, The e¤ect of the
    frequency of holding data on conclusions about mutual fund behavior, Journal of Financial
    and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

[31] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on bonds
    and stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

[32] Ferson, Wayne, and Richard Schadt. 1996. Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in
    Changing Economic Conditions, Journal of Finance 51(2), 425- 462.

[33] French, Kenneth, 2008, The cost of active investing, Working Paper, Dartmouth College.

[34] Greenwald, Bruce C.N., Judd Kahn, Paul.D.Sonkin, and Michael Biema, 2001, Value Investing:
    From Graham to Bu¤ett and Beyond, Wiley Publishing, …rst edition.

[35] Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strate-
    gies, portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American Eco-
    nomic Review 85, 1088-1105.

[36] Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informational e¢ cient markets,
    American Economic Review 70, 393-408.

[37] Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: the growth in actively managed mutual funds, ,
    Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 3, July 1996.

[38] Huang, Roger. and Hans R. Stoll, 1996, Dealer versus Auction markets: a paired comparison
    of execution costs on Nasdaq and the NYSE, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 313-358.

[39] Jensen, Michael, 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964, Journal of
    Finance 23, 389-416.

[40] Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Amit Seru, 2007, Fund Manager Use of Public Information: New
    Evidence on Managerial Skills, Journal of Finance 62, 485-528.

[41] Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
    actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983–2012.

[42] Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2007, Unobesrved actions of mutual funds,
    Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.



                                                35
[43] Kaul, Gauta, Qin Lei, and Noah Sto¤man, 2007, Information asymmetry or liquidity, Working
    Paper, University of Michigan.

[44] Keim, Donald B., 1999, An analysis of mutual fund design: the case of investing in small-cap
    stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 173-194.

[45] Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data,
    Journal of Finance 46, 733-746.

[46] Madhavan, Ananth, Matthew Richardson and Mark Roomans, 1997, Why do security prices
    change? A transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks, Review of Financial Studies 10, 1035-
    1064.

[47] Mamaysky, Harry, Matthew Spiegel, and Hong Zhang, 2007, Estimating the dynamic of mutual
    fund alphas and betas, Review of Financial Studies 21(1), 233 - 264.

[48] Sias, Richard W., Laura T. Starks, and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Changes in institutional
    ownership and stock returns: assessment and and methodology, Journal of Business 79(6),
    2869-2910.

[49] Schultz, Paul, 2007, When is stock picking by mutual funds successful?, Working Paper, Uni-
    versity of Notre Dame.

[50] Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of
    Finance 53, 1589-1622.

[51] Vega, Clara, 2006, Stock price reaction to Public and private information, Journal of Financial
    Economics 82, 103-133.

[52] Wermers, Russ, 1999, Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices, Journal of
    Finance 54, 581-622.




                                                36
              Figure 1: Mutual fund sample according to investment objective

Index funds, lifecycle mutual funds, bond funds, hybrid funds, sector funds, and international
funds are excluded. Only those funds that self-report as aggressive growth (AGG), growth
(GROWTH), or growth and income (GNI) are included. Fund/quarter observations with quarterly
turnover under 10% or under 10 stocks are excluded. Fund holdings at the end of the preceding
quarter must also be available in order to calculate holding changes over consecutive quarters.
The CDA/Spectrum mutual fund holding data are matched to CRSP Mutual Fund data via the
MFLINKS database.



                              Number of mutual funds per quarter

      2000

      1600

      1200

       800

       400

         0
             1983     1986       1989      1992      1995          1998     2001     2004

                                  All     AGG        GROWTH           GNI




                                              37
                                              Figure 2: Share price and mutual fund holdings

Pane A, Figure 1 plots the share price of Hudson General Corp (HGC) and Gabelli Fund’s
holdings of HGC (as a percentage of total number of shares outstanding) from September 1990 to
September 1998. Panel B, Figure 1 plots share prices of Starbucks (SBUX) from June to
December 2005 (price is normalized so that the end-of-July price is 1) and Putnam Voyager
Fund’s holdings of Starbucks (as a percentage of total number of shares outstanding) at the end of
June, September and December of 2005.

                                    A: Hudson General Corp (HGC) and Gabelli Holdings


                                                                                   HGC: Share price and Gabelli holdings


                               60                                                                                                                                                                 14.00%


                                                                                                                                                                                                  12.00%




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Gabelli holdings, % of shares outstanding
                               50


                                                                                                                                                                                                  10.00%
                               40
              Share price, $




                                                                                                                                                                                                  8.00%

                               30

                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.00%

                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                  4.00%


                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.00%

                                                                        Share price, $                          S&P500                      Gabelli holdings, %
                                0                                                                                                                                                                 0.00%
                                             Mar-91



                                                               Mar-92




                                                                                     Mar-93



                                                                                                       Mar-94



                                                                                                                          Mar-95



                                                                                                                                            Mar-96




                                                                                                                                                              Mar-97



                                                                                                                                                                                Mar-98
                                    Sep-90




                                                      Sep-91



                                                                          Sep-92



                                                                                              Sep-93



                                                                                                                 Sep-94



                                                                                                                                   Sep-95



                                                                                                                                                     Sep-96



                                                                                                                                                                       Sep-97




                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep-98




                                                                                                                38
                                       B: Starbuck and Putnam Voyager Fund Holdings

                                                    Starbucks, 2nd Half, 2005


Putnam holdings: % of shrout   0.62%                                                         1.2
                                                                                             1.15
                                                                                             1.1




                                                                                                    Sbux price
                                                                                             1.05
                               0.41%                                                         1
                                                                                             0.95
                                                                                             0.9
                                                                                             0.85
                               0.20%                                                         0.8
                                          6     7        8       9       10       11    12

                                                     Putnam's Holdings          price




                                                               39
                             Table 1: Descriptive statistics of PIN

Probability of informed trading (PIN) is estimated at quarterly frequency over 1983-2004 using
three-month trade and quote data from TAQ. Panel A describes the stock PIN sample over time.
Correlations among PIN and other stock characteristics are reported in Panel B.

Panel A: Summary statistics on PIN

                                            % of             % of
                        # of stocks
          Year                           NYSE/AMEX         NASNAQ          mean          std dev
                        per quarter
                                            stocks          stocks
          1983               1915          100.0%             0.0%         22.5%             10.2%
          1984               1747          100.0%             0.0%         25.2%             13.0%
          1985               1812          100.0%             0.0%         24.1%             11.8%
          1986               1828          100.0%             0.0%         23.4%             11.1%
          1987               3732          46.7%             53.3%         27.0%             12.1%
          1988               3399          50.0%             50.0%         28.1%             13.4%
          1989               3373          49.7%             50.3%         27.4%             13.3%
          1990               3321          49.4%             50.6%         27.7%             13.6%
          1991               3362          50.4%             49.6%         26.7%             12.7%
          1992               4117          43.4%             56.6%         27.2%             13.0%
          1993               4106          53.8%             46.2%         25.4%             12.0%
          1994               5258          36.3%             63.7%         27.4%             12.9%
          1995               5500          35.1%             64.9%         27.2%             12.5%
          1996               6028          33.7%             66.3%         26.6%             12.1%
          1997               6473          32.5%             67.5%         25.8%             11.8%
          1998               6453          32.6%             67.4%         25.6%             11.8%
          1999               5879          33.9%             66.1%         26.0%             12.1%
          2000               5526          33.1%             66.9%         26.3%             12.6%
          2001               4842          32.3%             67.7%         28.0%             13.6%
          2002               4476          36.4%             63.6%         25.3%             11.6%
          2003               3999          39.4%             60.6%         22.7%              9.8%
          2004               3727          42.0%             58.0%         21.1%              9.5%
           All               4130          51.3%             48.7%         25.8%             12.1%

Panel B: Cross-correlation

                                    PIN        log(Size)         log(BM)           Momentum
          log(Size)                   -0.536
          log(BM)                      0.169        -0.193
          Momentum                    -0.066        0.058            -0.148
          Amihud                       0.557        -0.872           0.190          -0.198




                                                40
                                   Table 2: Risk-adjusted quarterly fund returns across trade_PIN sorted fund deciles
In each quarter and for each fund, we compute a trade_PIN variable by value-weighing PIN of stocks traded by the fund during the quarter using the
dollar value of the trade. At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we sort all mutual funds in our sample into deciles according to their trade_PINs
and examine the risk-adjusted fund portfolio return in the next four quarters within each decile. We consider two methods for risk adjustment. The first
method uses the Four-factor model (Fama-French three factors augmented by Carhart's momentum factor). The factor loadings are computed in a
rolling window using fund returns during the past 36 months. The second method uses a characteristics-based risk adjustment. For each stock held by
the fund at the end of each quarter, we compute its future excess returns over the returns of a characteristics-based benchmark portfolio that is matched
to the stock along size, book-to-market and past return characteristics. These excess returns are then value-weighed across stocks at the fund level using
dollar value of the stock holding to arrive at a characteristics-adjusted pseudo fund return.

                         trade_PIN                   4-factor adj returns                           Char-adj returns (CS)
                           in Qtr t      Qtr t+1    Qtr t+2       Qtr t+3    Qtr t+4     Qtr t+1    Qtr t+2      Qtr t+3    Qtr t+4
                            Low          -0.0038    -0.0037        -0.0040   -0.0038     -0.0003    0.0004       -0.0002    0.0002
                                           -3.45      -3.51         -3.45     -3.75        -0.29     0.42          -0.22      0.25
                             2           -0.0040    -0.0039        -0.0044   -0.0033      0.0011    0.0015        0.0007    0.0005
                                           -4.01      -4.34         -4.25     -3.47         0.92     1.40           0.70      0.52
                             3           -0.0032    -0.0030        -0.0039   -0.0041      0.0012    0.0007        0.0007    -0.0003
                                           -2.87      -3.03         -4.46     -3.81         1.04     0.74           0.72     -0.32
                             4           -0.0031    -0.0036        -0.0037   -0.0037      0.0010    0.0012        0.0008    0.0000
                                           -3.09      -3.66         -4.31     -3.38         1.01     1.19           0.84      0.01
                             5           -0.0017    -0.0026        -0.0035   -0.0034      0.0029    0.0014        0.0006    0.0007
                                           -1.57      -2.39         -3.24     -3.21         2.17     1.15           0.51      0.64
                             6           -0.0027    -0.0017        -0.0019   -0.0031      0.0032    0.0023        0.0016    -0.0005
                                           -2.18      -1.33         -1.36     -2.68         2.07     1.58           1.26     -0.37
                             7           -0.0025    -0.0022        -0.0016   -0.0022      0.0028    0.0016        0.0016    0.0006
                                           -1.80      -1.67         -1.24     -1.58         1.52     1.04           1.19      0.41
                             8           -0.0019    -0.0003        -0.0008   -0.0018      0.0031    0.0024        0.0024    0.0014
                                           -1.16      -0.22         -0.52     -1.14         1.73     1.41           1.53      0.85
                             9           -0.0018    -0.0014        -0.0018   -0.0018      0.0035    0.0016        0.0006    -0.0004
                                           -1.06      -0.82         -1.11     -1.18         1.75     0.84           0.35     -0.21
                            High          0.0011     0.0009        -0.0005   -0.0003      0.0050    0.0044        0.0017    0.0011
                                           0.85       0.67          -0.36     -0.21         2.70     2.75          1.20       0.68
                         High-Low        0.0048     0.0046         0.0035    0.0035       0.0053    0.0040        0.0019    0.0009
                                           3.15       2.98           2.24      2.26         2.87     2.55          1.29       0.52




                                                                              41
                                       Table 3: Fund-level characteristics and cross sectional regressions

Panel A reports the average fund-level characteristics across the trade_PIN sorted deciles. Fund-level stock characteristics are computed by value-
weighing the stock characteristics of stocks held by the fund at quarter end using the dollar value of the holding. All characteristics are winsorized
at the 1st and 99th percentile to alleviate the effect of outliers.

Panel B reports the results of cross-sectional regressions. We regress the next quarter fund four-factor-adjusted return (alpha) or the
characteristics-adjusted return (CS) on several fund-level characteristics in each quarter from 1983 to 2004. trade_pin is the average PIN of stocks
recently traded by the funds; log_fund_size is the (log) average market cap of stocks held by the fund; log_fund_bm is the (log) average book-to-
market ratio of stocks held by the fund; fund_mom is the average past one-year returns on stocks held by the fund; fund_amihud is the average
Amihud illiquidity measure, in terms of percentile rank in the cross-section, of stocks held by the fund; log_ TNA is the (log) total net assets under
management by the fund; Age is the age of the fund since inception, in terms of percentile rank in the cross-section; expense is the expense ratio of
fund; turnover is the turnover rate of the fund; dummy_growth is a dummy variable which assumes a value of 1 if the self-reported investment
objective is “growth” and 0 otherwise; dummy_Agg is a dummy variable which assumes a value of 1 if the self-reported investment objective is
“AGG” and 0 otherwise. All explanatory variables (except for the style dummy variables) are cross-sectionally demeaned and standardized so the
corresponding coefficients can be interpreted as the impact on return of a one standard deviation change in the variable. Variables are winsorized
at the 1st and 99th percentiles to alleviate the effect of outliers. Finally, the regression coefficients are averaged across time and the associated t-
values are computed using Newey-West corrections with 8 lags to account for autocorrelations in the error terms. t-values associated with the
average measures are reported in italics. There are on average 320 funds in each cross-section.
Panel A: Average fund-level characteristics across trade_PIN sorted fund deciles

       Trade      num     trade     fund     fund    fund    fund     fund                                              pct    % of      % of     % of
                                                                                   age   turnover   expense   TNA
       _PIN      _stock   _PIN    _holding   _size   _bm    _mom    _amihud                                            _flow   AGG      Growth    GNI
         Low      64      11.2%    0.25%     32.9    0.56   0.232   4.5%       53.3%      0.680     1.14%     1020.9   2.74%    3.7%    50.9%     45.4%
          2       72      12.3%    0.26%     30.1    0.56   0.253   5.1%       55.3%      0.772     1.12%      972.5   2.11%    4.5%    54.1%    41.5%
          3       74      13.0%    0.27%     28.0    0.56   0.268   5.5%       55.9%      0.841     1.13%      848.4   1.98%    5.6%    54.9%    39.5%
          4       74      13.7%    0.28%     25.4    0.55   0.282   6.3%       54.2%      0.855     1.16%      740.8   1.95%    7.9%    60.4%    31.7%
          5       75      14.4%    0.32%     20.5    0.55   0.304   7.4%       53.8%      0.880     1.20%      719.1   1.82%   11.3%    61.5%    27.2%
          6       75      15.3%    0.37%     15.6    0.55   0.329   8.8%       50.8%      0.909     1.22%      636.8   2.42%   17.2%    59.7%    23.1%
          7       74      16.3%    0.44%     11.2    0.54   0.365   10.9%       48.1%     0.945     1.26%      557.5   3.23%   24.0%    59.8%    16.1%
          8       73      17.7%    0.54%      6.6    0.55   0.381   14.3%      45.3%      0.970     1.30%      404.4   2.85%   28.6%    59.6%    11.9%
          9       81      19.4%    0.63%      3.9    0.54   0.393   18.9%      42.6%      0.904     1.32%      353.9   3.92%   30.0%    61.8%     8.2%
        High      97      22.7%    0.91%      2.1    0.62   0.339   28.4%       37.6%     0.725     1.34%      295.1   5.29%   29.2%    64.9%     5.9%
         H-L      33      11.5%    0.66%     -30.8   0.06   0.107   24.0%      -15.7%     0.044     0.20%     -725.8   2.54%   25.5%    14.1%    -39.5%
       t-value   11.48    73.17    53.47     -9.76   3.05    6.19   47.36       -14.53     1.58     12.92     -14.94    4.59    13.74    7.50     -26.84




                                                                              42
Panel B: Cross-sectional regressions

                                        log_fund   log_fund    fund       fund                                              dummy     dummy    Average
               Intercept   trade_pin                                              log_TNA    Age      expenses   turnover
                                          _size      _bm      _mom      _amihud                                             _growth    _Agg      R2

   LHS = Four-factor alpha in Qtr t+1
     coeff     -0.0037       0.0026      0.0016    -0.0008    -0.0013   -0.0003   -0.0002   -0.0004   -0.0014    0.0003     0.0011    0.0017    0.18
    t-value      -2.92        3.97        1.66      -1.21      -1.14     -0.21     -0.71     -1.86     -3.89      0.51       1.07      1.18
   LHS = CS in Qtr t+1
     coeff      0.0018      0.0020       0.0014     0.0006    0.0016    -0.0002    0.0000   -0.0001   -0.0004    0.0003     0.0006    0.0036    0.20
    t-value      1.25        2.79         1.42       0.52      1.69      -0.22      0.12     -0.64     -0.95      0.60       0.67      3.05




                                                                             43
                                           Table 4: Robustness

Panel A first reports the next quarter PIN-risk-adjusted returns on decile portfolios of mutual funds sorted
on trade_PIN. To control for the systematic risk associated with high-PIN stocks, we compute a five-
factor-adjusted mutual fund return by augmenting the benchmark four-factor model with a PIN risk factor.
The PIN risk factor is constructed as the high-PIN decile portfolio return minus the low-PIN decile
portfolio return. To control for PIN characteristics risk, we construct characteristics benchmark portfolios
by matching along size, book-to-market, past return and PIN simultaneously.

Panel A also reports the next quarter risk-adjusted returns on decile portfolios of mutual funds constructed
using alternative measures of information events. These measures include: the information asymmetry
component of the PIN (adjPIN, Duarte and Young, 2007); the information asymmetry component of the
bid-ask spread (theta, Madhavan, Richardson and Roomans,1997) and the abnormal turnover in stock
trading (aturn, Chordia, Huh and Subrahmanyam, 2006). Trade_adjPIN, trade_theta and trade_aturn are
then computed in the same fashion as trade_PIN to measure the average amount of information events on
stocks traded by the mutual funds.

Panel B reports the average past one-year return of stocks bought / sold / held by mutual funds across
trade_PIN sorted deciles. For each fund, we compute the value-weighted average past one-year return of
stocks in the “Buy” portfolio (stocks recently bought by the fund), the “Sell” portfolio (stocks recently
sold by the fund) and the “Hold” portfolio (stocks held by the fund throughout the quarter). These past
returns are then averaged across funds and across time. t-values associated with the average measures are
reported in italics.




                                                    44
Panel A: PIN-risk-adjusted fund returns and alternative measure of information events

               Control for PIN risk                         Alternative measures of information events
                     Sorted on                     Sorted on                 Sorted on                    Sorted on
   Portfolio   trade_PIN in Qtr t          trade_adjPIN in Qtr t      trade_Theta in Qtr t          trade_aturn in Qtr t
               5f alpha      CS*             4f alpha        CS        4f alpha      CS             4f alpha      CS
               Qtr t+1     Qtr t+1          Qtr t+1     Qtr t+1        Qtr t+1      Qtr t+1         Qtr t+1     Qtr t+1
     Low       -0.0034     -0.0008          -0.0033     0.0010         -0.0035      0.0005          -0.0045     0.0003
                -2.97       -0.75            -3.20       0.79           -3.18        0.44            -3.46       0.20
      2        -0.0032     0.0010           -0.0034     0.0002         -0.0031      0.0022          -0.0031     0.0012
                -2.98        0.79            -3.09       0.13           -3.11        1.71            -3.10       0.92
      3        -0.0026     0.0006           -0.0038     0.0010         -0.0029      0.0016          -0.0032     0.0021
                -2.28        0.51            -3.44       0.79           -2.88        1.41            -3.18       1.78
      4        -0.0026     0.0014           -0.0035     0.0014         -0.0033      0.0011          -0.0035     0.0011
                -2.57        1.10            -2.85       1.05           -3.64        0.97            -3.95       1.03
      5        -0.0012     0.0021           -0.0022     0.0033         -0.0029      0.0013          -0.0030     0.0010
                -1.09        1.49            -1.86       2.26           -2.44        1.09            -2.82       0.85
      6        -0.0021     0.0028           -0.0011     0.0028         -0.0022      0.0020          -0.0024     0.0023
                -1.60        1.63            -0.88       1.81           -1.81        1.26            -1.98       1.55
      7        -0.0019     0.0032           -0.0019     0.0030         -0.0017      0.0030          -0.0026     0.0016
                -1.28        1.59            -1.33       1.85           -1.18        1.84            -1.76       0.99
      8        -0.0019     0.0022           -0.0015     0.0039         -0.0006      0.0049          -0.0007     0.0055
                -1.05        1.23            -1.02       2.05           -0.39        2.55            -0.53       2.97
      9        -0.0015     0.0019           -0.0012     0.0037         0.0002       0.0043          -0.0008     0.0031
                -0.86        0.88            -0.81       2.16            0.14        2.17            -0.50       1.60
    High       0.0011      0.0035           0.0015      0.0058         0.0006       0.0055          0.0004      0.0051
                 0.86        1.97             1.14       3.13            0.40        2.70             0.29       2.56
  High-Low     0.0045      0.0043           0.0048      0.0048         0.0041       0.0050          0.0049      0.0048
                 2.85        2.11             3.13       2.97            2.48        2.66             2.70       2.23

Panel B: Average past one-year return of stocks bought / sold / held by mutual funds across trade_PIN
sorted deciles

                                            Past One-year Return
                 trade_PIN
                                       Buy          Sell          Hold        Buy-sell         t-value
                    Low               20.9%        24.3%         22.2%         -3.4%            -5.74
                     2                23.2%        26.4%         24.6%         -3.2%            -5.18
                     3                25.1%        26.8%         25.6%         -1.7%            -2.96
                     4                26.7%        29.6%         27.2%         -2.9%            -4.08
                     5                28.5%        32.1%         29.2%         -3.6%            -4.48
                     6                32.1%        36.2%         32.4%         -4.1%            -3.66
                     7                36.2%        39.6%         35.2%         -3.4%            -3.13
                     8                39.2%        43.8%         37.5%         -4.6%            -3.60
                     9                40.2%        46.1%         37.8%         -5.9%            -4.65
                    High              34.3%        46.6%         34.0%        -12.3%            -8.93
                                     13.47%       22.36%        11.73%
                     H-L
                                       6.37         8.42          6.47




                                                           45
                                         Table 5: Persistence of mutual fund returns and trade_PINs

At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we conduct three by three double sorts based on trade_PINs and four-factor alphas of the mutual
funds. We then report the next quarter risk-adjusted returns on different mutual fund portfolios constructed by the double sorts. For benchmark risk
adjustment, we use both the four-factor model and the characteristics model for risk adjustment. To control for the systematic risk associated with
high-PIN stocks, we compute a five-factor-adjusted mutual fund return by augmenting the benchmark four-factor model with a PIN risk factor.
The PIN risk factor is constructed as the high-PIN-decile portfolio return minus the low-PIN-decile portfolio return. To control for PIN
characteristics risk, we construct characteristics benchmark portfolios by matching along size, book-to-market, past return and PIN simultaneously.
t-values are reported in italics. Panel A reports the result on a double sort where we sort on mutual fund return alpha first and trade_PIN second.
Panel B reports the result on a double sort where we sort on trade_PIN first and mutual fund return alpha second.
Panel A: Sorting on trade_PIN among mutual funds with high and low alphas

                   Sort on                          Benchmark risk adjustment                              Controlling for PIN risk
                             trade_PIN
                 trade_PIN               4f alpha        CS        4f alpha    CS              5f alpha       CS*         5f alpha   CS*
                               (Qtr t)
                   (Qtr t)                (Qtr t)      (Qtr t)    (Qtr t+1) (Qtr t+1)           (Qtr t)      (Qtr t)     (Qtr t+1) (Qtr t+1)
                                                                        High alpha, Qtr t (top 1/3):
                    Low        0.1261     0.0279       0.0183     -0.0015       0.0013            0.0283     0.0188     -0.0013     0.0004
                               62.63      19.07        11.89        -1.07        0.88              18.21     11.17       -0.95       0.24
                  Medium       0.1535     0.0329       0.0236     0.0003        0.0031            0.0333     0.0244     0.0008      0.0027
                               71.92      19.50        11.59         0.20        1.64              19.79     10.57        0.47       1.25
                   High        0.2011     0.0365       0.0273     0.0033        0.0056            0.0365     0.0264     0.0034      0.0045
                               88.08      22.59        11.52         2.10        2.33              23.12     11.25        2.10       1.93
                High - Low     0.0750     0.0086       0.0090     0.0048        0.0043            0.0082     0.0075     0.0047      0.0041
                                          11.25         5.30         3.64        2.43               9.73      4.47        3.43       2.15
                                                                      Low alpha, Qtr t (bottom 1/3):
                    Low        0.1245     -0.0331      -0.0150    -0.0062       0.0004           -0.0325    -0.0160     -0.0052      0.0000
                               62.81       -24.67       -14.92      -4.56        0.33             -23.34     -15.82      -3.63        -0.03
                  Medium       0.1509     -0.0377      -0.0185    -0.0041       0.0026           -0.0370    -0.0198     -0.0038      0.0016
                               70.51       -24.78       -12.90      -2.71        1.64             -22.62     -13.76      -2.34         1.08
                   High        0.1965     -0.0408      -0.0202    -0.0048       0.0009           -0.0404    -0.0229     -0.0044     -0.0008
                               86.80       -26.08       -11.88      -2.66        0.46             -24.00     -12.82      -2.26        -0.38
                High - Low     0.0720     -0.0077      -0.0052     0.0014       0.0005           -0.0080    -0.0069     0.0008      -0.0008
                                            -9.72        -3.58       0.89        0.30              -8.81      -4.58       0.49        -0.39




                                                                           46
Panel B: Sorting on alpha among mutual funds with high and low trade_PINs


                Sort on 4f                          Benchmark risk adjustment                            Controlling for PIN risk
                             trade_PIN
                  alpha                  4f alpha          CS      4f alpha      CS            5f alpha      CS*        5f alpha    CS*
                               (Qtr t)
                 (Qtr t)                  (Qtr t)       (Qtr t)   (Qtr t+1) (Qtr t+1)            (Qtr t)   (Qtr t)     (Qtr t+1) (Qtr t+1)
                                                                  High trade_PIN funds, Qtr t (top 1/3):
                  Low         0.1957     -0.0420       -0.0211     -0.0050     0.0009           -0.0416   -0.0236       -0.0047   -0.0007
                              89.49       -23.56        -11.83       -2.68      0.43             -22.50    -12.75         -2.36    -0.34
                 Medium       0.1970     -0.0014       0.0030       0.0001     0.0043           -0.0015    0.0021        0.0000   0.0032
                              89.49        -1.07          1.82        0.05      2.31              -1.00      1.12         -0.03     1.65
                  High        0.1983     0.0397        0.0298       0.0040     0.0058           0.0397     0.0287        0.0044   0.0046
                              91.68       20.61          11.73        2.44      2.33              20.83     11.38          2.55     1.90
               High - Low     0.0025     0.0816        0.0509       0.0091     0.0049           0.0813     0.0523        0.0091   0.0054
                               2.81                      21.93        4.36      2.27              30.75     21.88          4.17     2.36
                                                                Low trade_PIN funds, Qtr t (bottom 1/3):
                  Low         0.1231     -0.0314       -0.0141     -0.0054     0.0005           -0.0307   -0.0148       -0.0045   0.0001
                              62.96       -23.38        -13.78       -4.24      0.41             -21.89    -14.43         -3.34     0.09
                 Medium       0.1234     -0.0036       0.0007      -0.0036     0.0011           -0.0029    0.0001       -0.0030   0.0004
                              61.68        -4.14          0.70       -3.81      1.02              -3.21      0.09         -3.25     0.38
                  High        0.1234     0.0238        0.0154      -0.0017     0.0022           0.0241     0.0157       -0.0014   0.0013
                              61.87       18.78          10.88       -1.33      1.49              17.56     10.13         -1.12     0.86
               High - Low     0.0003     0.0552        0.0295       0.0038     0.0017           0.0549     0.0304        0.0031   0.0012
                               0.89                      20.79        2.43      1.15              26.85     21.49          1.97     0.77




                                                                           47
 Table 6: Characteristic Selectivity (CS) measure decomposition across Trade_PIN sorted fund
                                             deciles
In each quarter and for each fund, we compute a trade_PIN variable by value-weighing the probability of
information trading (PIN) of stocks traded by the fund during the quarter using the dollar values of the
trade as weights. At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we sort all mutual funds in our sample
into deciles according to their trade_PINs and decompose the Characteristic Selectivity (CS) measure
within each decile. The CS measure and its component are reported in basis points (bp). t-values
associated with the average measures are reported in italics.

                                                                         Info     Liquidity
              Portfolios     Total     Old        Adj         Trade
                                                                       trading      Prov
               sorted on      CS       CSO        CSadj        CST
                                                                        CSinf       CSliq
              Trade_PIN    (=1+2+3)     (1)        (2)     (3=3a+3b)
                in Qtr t                                                 (3a)       (3b)
                            Qtr t+1   Qtr t+1    Qtr t+1     Qtr t+1
                                                                       Qtr t+1    Qtr t+1
               All Funds     23.5       13.9       -1.8       14.2         3.6        8.8
                             1.91       1.19      -2.38       2.09        0.55       1.50
                 Low          -2.9       -7.6      -0.4        3.4       -12.1       16.2
                             -0.29      -0.70     -0.20       0.42       -2.02       2.57
                  2          11.4        10.4      -0.7        2.6        -6.4       8.9
                             0.92       0.87      -0.47       0.40       -0.93       1.28
                  3          11.8        9.2       -1.0        5.5        -5.5       9.8
                             1.04       0.81      -0.69       0.88       -0.78       1.65
                  4          10.3        8.3       -1.1        5.8        -3.5       6.0
                             1.01       0.76      -0.81       0.76       -0.54       0.89
                  5          28.6        23.3      -2.3        6.4         2.5        5.5
                             2.17       1.80      -1.52       0.72        0.31       0.74
                  6          31.9        19.2      -2.4       18.7         5.6        9.4
                             2.07       1.20      -1.52       1.69        0.62       1.10
                  7          28.4        19.4      -0.9       17.2         9.7        0.2
                             1.52       1.17      -0.56       1.18        0.89       0.03
                  8          30.9        14.6      -3.4       25.0         8.6       13.7
                             1.73       0.87      -2.05       2.26        0.84       1.64
                  9          35.1        15.7      -2.7       26.6        16.8        7.6
                             1.75       0.82      -1.35       2.38        1.70       0.77
                 High        50.0        26.5      -3.2       31.2        20.4       10.4
                             2.70       1.43      -1.40       2.83        2.25       1.37
              High - Low     52.9        34.1      -2.8       27.8        32.5       -5.8
                             2.87       1.94      -0.93       2.26        3.50      -0.68




                                                  48
                            Table 7: Empirical validations of the Characteristics Selectivity (CS) decomposition

Panel A reports type of mutual fund trades and the average order imbalances. For each fund in our sample, we examine changes in its holdings
over two consecutive quarters and categorize them into four groups: (1) “Open” (defined as holdings increase from zero to positive); (2) “Close”
(defined as holdings decrease from positive to zero); (3) “Increase” (defined as holdings increase but not from zero); and (4) “Decrease” (defined
as holdings decrease, but not to zero). For each group, we report the average dollar holding change as a percentage of the total dollar holding
change of the fund (computed using prices at quarter end), the average order-imbalance measure and the associated t-value. The average order-
imbalance measure is computed as the difference between total numbers of buyer-initiated shares bought and total numbers of seller-initiated
shares sold, divided by total number of shares traded during the quarter; the resulting number is then cross-sectionally demeaned. The sampling
period is from 1983 to 2004.

Panel B provides two examples to illustrate the decomposition of the mutual fund stock selection skill. We decompose the mutual fund
Characteristics Selectivity (CS) measure (Daniel et al., 1997) for DFA US Micro-Cap fund (FUNDNO=16500 in CDA/Spectrum S-12 mutual
fund holding database) and Index funds a group (fund whose name contains any of the following: “INDEX,” “INDE,” “INDX,” “S&P,” “DOW
JONES,” “MSCI” or “ISHARE”). Specifically, the CS measure is decomposed into:
                                                         CS = CSO + CSadj + CSinf + CSliq,
Where CS is the old component; CS is an adjustment component due to fund inflows; CSinf and CSliq are the informed trading and liquidity
          O                          adj

provision components, respectively. The sampling period is from 1983 to 2004. t-values associated with the average measures are reported in
italics.

Panel C reports the percentage of total cross-sectional variation in the total “Characteristic Selectivity” (CS) measure (DGTW, 1997) explained by
its four components: the old component (CSO), the adjustment component (CSadj), the informed trading component (CSinf) and the liquidity
provision component (CSliq) in a variance decomposition framework outlined in the paper. We perform the variance decomposition on the full
sample and on each style subsample. The t-values associated with the percentages are reported in italics, using the weighted least squares (WLS)
method. The sampling period is from 1983 to 2004.

Panel A: Type of mutual fund trades and average order imbalances

                                ALL                           AGG                            GROWTH                         GNI
        trade type   % of all                      % of all                       % of all                       % of all
                                oimb     t-value              oimb     t-value                oimb     t-value              oimb     t-value
                     trades                        trades                         trades                         trades
         Open        30.6%      0.31%    4.09      34.5%      0.36%    3.19       31.2%       0.14%     1.61     27.7%       0.61%    7.21
         Close       26.7%      -0.27%   -4.73     30.8%      -0.15%   -1.32      27.4%       -0.26%   -3.63     24.0%      -0.30%   -3.75
        Increase     22.8%       0.48%    9.27     17.5%       0.48%    5.86      22.0%        0.55%    8.37     26.4%       0.37%    5.07
        Decrease     19.9%       1.27%   18.06     17.3%       1.69%   14.51      19.4%        1.34%   15.67     21.9%       0.84%   11.17




                                                                        49
Panel B: Characteristics Selectivity (CS) decomposition for DFA US Micro-Cap fund and index funds as
a group

                                                                                                Liquidity
                       Total        Old             Adj            Trade         Info trading
                                                                                                  Prov
                        CS          CSO             CSadj           CST             CSinf
                                                                                                  CSliq
                     (=1+2+3)       (1)              (2)         (3=3a+3b)           (3a)
                                                                                                  (3b)

      DFA US Micro-Cap:
      Alpha (bps)     36.1          19.3             -4.2             21.0          0.5           20.5
      t-value         1.72          0.89            -0.64             1.30          0.06          1.84

      Index Funds:
      Alpha (bps)        0.0        24.9             3.2              -28.1         -34.6          6.4
      t-value           0.00        0.93            0.50              -1.11         -2.19         0.36

Panel C: Variance Decomposition of CS measure

                                                              Info      Liquidity
                                 Old        Adj
                                                            trading       Prov
                                 CSO        CSadj
                                                              CSinf       CSliq
                                                     All
                                56.8%      -2.5%            37.2%         8.4%
                                127.2      -15.3            120.9         24.4

                                        Aggressive Growth (AGG)
                                52.1%      -1.0%      44.9%     4.0%
                                 44.7       -2.7       55.2      4.2

                                           Growth (Growth)
                                55.7%      -3.0%     37.0%               10.2%
                                 96.0      -14.9      95.0                22.3

                                      Growth and Income (GNI)
                                54.1%    -2.2%      37.0%     11.1%
                                 56.8     -5.4       55.9      16.6




                                                     50
