                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MORTALITY, MASS-LAYOFFS, AND CAREER OUTCOMES:
                  AN ANALYSIS USING ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                         Daniel Sullivan
                                         Till von Wachter

                                       Working Paper 13626
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13626


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2007




Contact Daniel.Sullivan@chi.frb.org or vw2112@columbia.edu. We would like to thank Marianne
Bertrand, David Card, Janet Currie, Ed Glaeser, Michael Greenstone, Larry Katz, David Lee, Adriana
Lleras-Muney, Claudio Lucifora, Chris Paxson, Chris Ruhm, Jon Skinner, and seminar participants
at the SOLE 2006 Meetings, the NBER 2006 Summer Institute, the Milan Mills Workshop, London
School of Economics, University College London (UCL), Pompeu Fabra Barcelona, Boston University,
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, Harris School, Harvard University, Columbia University
Social Work, UC San Diego, UC Santa Barbara, UC Berkeley, Tufts University, Oxford University,
UCL Epidemiology, Princeton University, Prague CERGEI, Catholic University of Milan, University
of North Carolina Greensboro, University of Texas Houston, Texas A&M, RWI Essen, and Columbia
University for helpful comments. We would like to thank Elizabeth Weber Handwerker for sharing
her programs to load the mortality data. Alice Henriques and Phil Doctor provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Daniel Sullivan and Till von Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Mortality, Mass-Layoffs, and Career Outcomes:¸˛An Analysis using Administrative Data
Daniel Sullivan and Till von Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 13626
November 2007
JEL No. I1,J63,J65

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper uses administrative data on quarterly employment and earnings matched to death records
to estimate the effects of job displacement on mortality. We find that job displacement leads to a 15-20%
increase in death rates during the following 20 years. If such increases were sustained beyond this
period, they would imply a loss in life expectancy of about 1.5 years for a worker displaced at age
40. These results are robust to extensive controls for sorting and selection, and are consistent with
estimates of the effects of job loss on mortality pooling displaced workers and stayers that are not
affected by selective job displacement. To examine the channels through which mass layoffs raise
mortality, we exploit the panel nature of our data -- covering over 15 years of earnings -- to analyze
the correlation of long-run career outcomes, such as the mean and standard deviation of earnings, with
mortality at the individual and group level, something not possible with typical data sets. Our findings
suggest that factors correlated with a decrease in mean earnings and a rise in standard deviation of
earnings have the potential to explain an important fraction of the effect of a job displacement on mortality.


Daniel Sullivan
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, Illinois 60604-1413
daniel.sullivan@chi.frb.org

Till von Wachter
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, 1022 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
vw2112@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

         A growing literature shows that what should be short-term career shocks – such as

involuntary job losses or cyclical downturns – can have large and persistent effects on workers’ lives.

For example, displaced workers with high-seniority on the lost job tend to experience long-term

earnings losses, reduced employment rates, early retirement, increased job instability, lower

consumption and loss of health insurance coverage.2 Similarly, cyclical shocks can lead to persistent

earnings declines and long-term increases in the variance of career outcomes, especially for younger

and lower skilled workers.3 These effects have likely played a role in recent increases in earnings

instability, declines in long-term employment relationships, and increases in displacement rates for

high-tenured workers.4

         Existing evidence suggests it is plausible that job loss would also raise mortality. A large

literature documents a strong correlation of socio-economic status with health. Moreover, an

increasing amount of research links stress from economic uncertainty and unemployment to

unhappiness and mental health problems and a growing literature in epidemiology shows that job

loss is associated with strokes and heart attacks and other detailed health measures, especially for

older workers. However, while highly suggestive of an important relationship between career shocks

and health outcomes, the existing evidence linking economic status and job loss to health suffers

from a variety of measurement and identification problems associated with omitted variable bias and

reverse causality. At present, no comprehensive study of the effect of exogenous labor market

shocks on health exists, partly due to a lack of data on detailed longitudinal career and health

information for a large sample of workers.

         We use a large administrative longitudinal data set of individual earnings and employment

histories matched to employer characteristics and individual mortality outcomes to study the effect


2 See for example Ruhm (1991), Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993), Chan and Stevens (2001), Stevens (1997),
Gruber (1997), Olson (1992).
3 E.g., Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz (2006), Oyer (2006), Kahn (2005), Hines, Hoynes, and Krueger (2002),

Okun (1973).
4 See for example Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994, 1998), Farber (2003), Stevens (2001), Aaronson and Sullivan (2005),

Farber (2007).


                                                           2
of workers losing their jobs as part of a mass layoff by their employer, or simply “job displacement,”

on their mortality rates. Following Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993), we use our data, spanning

over 15 years of quarterly earnings and employer records from the unemployment insurance system

in Pennsylvania, to identify mass-layoffs. We then follow the incidence of mortality for these

workers up until 20 years after job loss and compare their mortality to that of similar workers who

did not lose their job. This allows us to estimate both the short and long-term response of mortality

rates to job displacement.

        Our large samples allow us to compare the effect of job displacement on mortality across

age and industry groups, and to engage in a thorough sensitivity analysis. Our estimates are robust to

the inclusion of industry or firm fixed effects, and to controls for detailed pre-displacement career

experiences. In addition, we show that our results are consistent with estimates of job loss that pool

displaced workers with those not leaving the firm. These intent-to-treat type estimates are unaffected

by residual selection into job loss or misclassification of job losers.

        To examine the multiple channels through which job loss can affect mortality, we first study

the correlation of several long-term career outcomes – such as average earnings, employment

mobility, and the standard deviation of earnings – with death. We then use these results combined

with additional estimates of the impact of job displacement on our measures long-term career

outcomes to interpret the alternative channels of the ‘reduced form’ effect of mass-layoffs on

mortality. In addition, we document an important correlation between displaced workers’ earnings

losses and their long-run subsequent mortality rates. To further gauge the importance of the

earnings channel, we can also exploit predictable differences in earnings losses across groups of

workers as an additional source of variation.

        Our data have several advantages for our purposes. First, longitudinal information on firm

size enables us to identify large changes in employment at the firm level that are plausibly exogenous

to workers’ own health developments. This allows us to overcome some of the problems of reverse

causality and omitted variable bias in existing studies of the effect of job loss on health. Second,

reliable information on death from administrative sources for a long follow-up period allows us to


                                                     3
estimate the effect of job loss on an objective health measure with sufficient precision over both

short and long horizons. Third, the longitudinal information on individual workers’ earnings and

employment allows us to construct detailed measures of long-term career outcomes and examine

their correlation with mortality; we are unaware of any other study of the socio-economic

determinants of mortality using such detailed career information.

        We find that job displacement substantially raises mortality rates. The mortality increase is

particularly high in the years immediately following job loss and then converges to a persistent

positive effect of 15-20%. If sustained beyond the 20 year window we can follow workers, these

increases imply substantial loss of life expectancy for workers displaced in middle age or earlier. In

contrast, we find little effect of job loss on mortality for workers displaced near retirement age.

        These results are consistent with an initial increase in mortality from acute stress and a long-

term increase in mortality from chronic stress, partly resulting from permanently lower average

earnings and initial increases in the instability of earnings and employment. Given our estimates of

the correlation of the mean and standard deviation of earnings with mortality, the effects of job

displacement on these career outcomes could explain about 50-75% and 20% of the mass-layoff

effects on long-term mortality, respectively. A comparison of groups of workers with different

earnings losses confirms that a majority of the long-term increase we find could be driven by

persistent earnings losses. The stress or depression caused by job displacement is likely to have

additional direct effects on mortality not captured by our measures of career outcomes.

        Our paper contributes to the existing literature in several ways. First, it is one of the first

studies estimating the long-term effect of a plausibly exogenous labor market event on an objective

measure of health for a large group of workers. It thereby helps to establish a causal link between

labor market shocks and health outcomes. Second, we use a novel approach to obtain estimates of

the effect of job loss that are not affected by any bias from firms selectively displacing their least

healthy workers. These and an extensive sensitivity analysis confirm our results. Third, it shows how

persistent earnings losses are likely to be an important channel through which layoffs permanently

raise mortality rates. Last, it is the first study to provide a comprehensive analysis of the correlation


                                                     4
of permanent earnings and long-term earnings and employment instability with mortality. It also

provides estimates of the long-term effects of mass-layoffs on a range of career outcomes that are a

contribution to the literature on the effects job displacements in their own right.

          The next section gives a brief overview of the existing literature. The third section describes

our approach and our data. The fourth section presents our main results, discusses the sensitivity

analysis, and summarizes the implications of our estimates for losses in life expectancy. The fifth

section assesses the role of alternative channels of the effect we find. The last section concludes.


2. Literature Review: Why Should Job Displacement Affect Mortality?

          Job displacements and other negative economic events can have both direct and indirect

impacts on health outcomes. First, job loss has strong effects on several economic outcomes that

may influence health. A large literature has shown that job losers can experience substantial and

long-lasting declines in earnings (e.g., Ruhm 1991, Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan 1993, Schoeni

and Dardia 2003, Couch 2006). The decline in earnings is larger for older and high tenured workers

(e.g., Kletzer 1998), for workers in manufacturing, and for workers living in economically depressed

areas. Job losses can also lead to substantial increases in earnings instability, by raising the propensity

of non-employment and further job losses (e.g., Stevens 1997, Farber 2003). In addition, it has been

shown that job losses affect consumption (Gruber 1997, Browning and Crossley 2001), and access

to health insurance (Olson 1992). The incidence of job loss and the variance of transitory and

permanent earnings shocks have been increasing since the mid-1980s, especially among older and

high-tenured workers (e.g., Aaronson and Sullivan 1998, Farber 2003, Gottschalk and Moffitt 1994,

2002).5

          A separate strand of literature documents a significant correlation of income with health and

mortality. Indeed, at face value, the existing estimates of the impact of income on health would

imply a strong effect of job loss on mortality (e.g., Deaton and Paxson 1999). However, such

5Similarly, a growing literature shows that economic conditions in the local labor market and the firm have long term
effects on workers’ earnings and career instability. Cyclical swings have highly persistent effect on earnings (e.g.,
Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2006, Kahn 2006, Oyer 2006), and have lasting effects on job mobility and job
quality, especially for less-advantaged workers (e.g., Oreopoulos et al. 2006).


                                                           5
estimates may be biased due to reverse causality running from health to income, omitted worker

characteristics, and measurement error.6 These difficulties have led recent observers of the literature

to deemphasize the effect of income on health in favor of more lasting individual traits such as

education (e.g., Cutler, Deaton, and Lleras-Muney 2006). There are indeed few studies of the effect

of income on health with a research design that allow identification of a causal relationship.7 Yet,

even if there is no direct effect of earnings on health, earnings losses due to job displacement are still

likely to capture the worsened life conditions of job losers through reduced health insurance, less

consumption, or increased earnings instability.

         In addition to indirect effects running through income, earnings instability, or access to

health insurance, job displacement may also have direct effects on well-being. A large literature in

economics and sociology has shown that unemployment correlates strongly with the incidence of

depression, low self-esteem, unhappiness, and even suicide.8 While some of these outcomes are

conceivably due to lower income, some of them may derive from factors independent of the

earnings situation. Similarly, several authors in sociology, social work, and epidemiology have

analyzed the effect of job loss on mental and physical health. These studies use either longitudinal

data with health and career information, such as the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), or study

the effect of single plant closures (see Burgard, Brand, and House 2005 for an excellent survey).

Most prominently, a series of studies using the HRS has found increased incidence of adverse health

outcomes such as heart attacks or strokes among older job losers (e.g., Gallo et al. 2000, 2006). A

smaller set of studies has analyzed randomized trials to study the effect of alternative forms of

assistance to job losers on job search, employment, and health outcomes (e.g., Price, Choi, and

Vinokur 2002).




6 Another important question is regarding the source of any true income effects of health; these might arise from lack of
access to health improving investments, or from effects through social-status and relative deprivation (e.g., Deaton 1999,
Miller and Paxson 2001).
7 An exception is a recent experimental study analyzing lottery winners in Sweden that confirms a significant causal

relationship running from income to health (Lindahl 2005).
8 E.g., see papers summarized in Darity and Goldsmith (1996) and Burgard, Brand, and House (2005).




                                                            6
         Several recent studies based on European data have analyzed the effect of job loss on health

using administrative data on earnings, firm sizes, and health outcomes. These studies find

contrasting results on mortality and outcomes such as mental health, with some indicating significant

negative effects of job loss on longevity.9 Important methodological differences aside, it is difficult

to compare the results from these studies to ours, since the underlying experience of job losers is so

different. Most European countries have generous unemployment insurance and welfare programs

and have universal health insurance coverage. As a consequence, studies of job displacement in

Europe often find much smaller and short lived effects on earnings losses than is the case for our

sample of job losers in Pennsylvania from the early to mid 1980s.10

         Although the current estimates of job loss on health outcomes indicate that there are

potentially significant effects on health even after controlling for pre-job loss characteristics such as

health and socio-economic status, they suffer from several potential drawbacks. Most importantly,

since an important body of literature shows that job loss is in itself affected by poor health (e.g.,

Smith 2003) special care has to be taken to avoid selection bias (Gibbons and Katz 1991). While

several studies focus on workers displaced by plant closing and try to control for background

characteristics, selection problems remain even for workers displaced in plant closings.11 Another

concern is that health environments differ across sectors and firms, possibly attracting different

types of workers. Thus, it is important to analyze the effect of job loss within sectors, and to control

for the sorting of workers between firms (von Wachter and Bender 2006). Finally, recent studies

typically focus on older workers, possibly missing the effects of more long-lasting exposure to low

income and chronic stress from earnings instability due to job loss earlier in workers’ careers.

9 Eliason and Storrie (2004) find male workers losing their jobs in establishment closures in Sweden experience excess
mortality for up to ten years after job loss. Martikainen, Maki, and Jantti (2007) find no such effects in Finland. Similarly,
while for example Kuhn, Lalive, and Zweimueller (2007) find that job loss reduces mental health of men in Austria,
Browning, Dano, and Heinesen (2007) find no such effects in Denmark.
10 Not many studies analyze the effect of job loss on earnings in Europe, the focus being more often employment

effects. Of those analyses that study wages, there is considerable heterogeneity in approaches and results. For example,
the effects of job loss on earnings in Austria are very small (Card, Chetty, and Weber 2006). Earnings losses in Sweden
have been found to be short lived (Ohlsson and Storrie 2006) or persistent (Eliason and Storrie 2007), depending on the
sample used. See von Wachter (2007) for a survey of literature on the cost of job displacement in the U.S. and Europe.
11 This is because plant closings are more likely to occur in smaller firms that pay less and attract different employees

(Krashinsky 2002).


                                                              7
         An important part of the difficulty in studying the effects of exogenous career shocks such

as a job displacement on health is the lack of proper data. Studies based on survey data sets have

difficulty isolating events at the firm level that are a plausibly exogenous source of job loss.12 In

addition, small samples prevent the inclusion of industry or firm fixed effects and make it difficult to

deal with remaining selection. Small samples and short follow-up periods also preclude the separate

study of short- and long-run impacts of job loss on health or the analysis of differences in the effect

for alternative groups of workers. Similarly, previous studies do not have good measures of

permanent income and other long-term career outcomes such as earnings instability. This makes it

difficult to assess the effect of alternative channels of the job loss effect on health.13

         Obtaining information on the effect of individual level career shocks such as job

displacement is also important since influential recent studies have shown that reduced economic

activity during recessions actually reduces mortality. In a seminal study, looking at outcomes across

U.S. states, Ruhm (2000) reports that mortality declines during economic downturns, perhaps

because workers have more time to invest in their health, reduce risky health behaviors such as

smoking, and face fewer car and work-related accidents.14 This suggests that job loss could have

some beneficial effect by reducing accidents and possibly risky health behavior.15 We will explore the

role of non-employment directly in Section 5. However, while our study of mass-layoffs can provide

additional information on possible channels operating at the macro level, care has to be taken when


12 Instead they have to rely on workers’ self-reports that have been shown to be affected by measurement error. See
Hildreth, von Wachter, and Weber (2005) and studies cited therein.
13 The best income data currently available for studies of health in the U.S. comes from the Current Population Surveys,

which provide information only on income in the year prior to the survey with little longitudinal information on careers
or employers. This can lead to a downward bias in estimates of the impact of permanent income on mortality due to
classical measurement error arising from respondents’ inaccurate reporting (Bound and Krueger 1991) as well as an error
in approximating permanent income by current income (e.g., Haider and Solon 2006).
14 Ruhm (2000) regresses mortality rates by causes at the state-year level on state unemployment rates controlling for

state and year fixed effects. The largest responses are obtained for vehicle deaths, other accidents and suicide, and for
‘preventable causes’ (such as heart or liver disease), with the effect of vehicle deaths five times larger than that of
‘preventable causes.’ Due to the large share of preventable causes in overall death rates, these causes explain about 40%
of predicted mortality, whereas all accidents explain about 25% of predicted mortality.
15 On the other hand, comparing cohorts before and after the Social Security ‘Notch’, Evans and Snyder (2002) suggest

that reduced economic activity may negatively affect health outcomes for older workers, perhaps due to a loss in social
status or purpose. However, Weber-Handwerker (2007) shows these results may partly arise from overall cohort-
differences in mortality.



                                                           8
comparing the two approaches. First, the event we analyze is of different nature than the aggregate

variation used in Ruhm (2000). Only a fraction of reallocation of employment in recessions occurs

through job separations and mass-layoffs, and these are often concentrated in particular regions,

sectors, or groups of workers. Second, we analyze affects associated with earnings losses exceeding

what is typically observed in an economic downturn or in the career of an average worker. Thus, the

beneficial effects from a lower rate accidents or improved health behavior in a recession may be

more than offset by the large negative effects of job loss on workers’ careers in our sample.16


3. Empirical Approach: Mortality, Career Outcomes, and Mass Layoffs

         In the present paper, we merge two large administrative data sets to study the effects of

career outcomes and exogenous labor market shocks on mortality. Specifically, panel data on

individual earnings and employment information is merged with administrative data on the date of

death. The former is derived from the unemployment insurance records of the state of

Pennsylvania and covers male workers from the period from 1974 to 1991. The latter is derived

from a database compiled by the Social Security Administration and covers deaths between 1974

and 2002.17 The combined data set has several attractive features. First, it allows us to identify large-

scale layoffs at the firm level that constitute plausibly exogenous shocks to workers’ career

development. Second, an extended period of follow-up using administrative data provides us with

reliable and rich information on mortality patterns. In particular, since we examine displacements

occurring in the early 1980s we can trace both the short and long-term effects of job loss on

mortality. Third, our large samples allow us to implement estimation strategies dealing explicitly with

sorting and selection. Fourth, the long time period covered by the data allow us to better examine

the effect of career outcomes such as permanent earnings or earnings stability on mortality.


16We would like to thank Chris Ruhm for helpful feedback on these questions.
17The Social Security Administration’s Death Master File (DMF) is described and evaluated in Hill and Rosenwaike
(2002). Coverage of the death data is better in the 1990s, for older workers, and for men. Recent work comparing the
DMF with complete mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics (cited in Weber-Handwerker 2006)
suggests coverage for men is between 80-90% before age 65, and above 95% after age 65. We replicated these
tabulations for deaths in Pennsylvania from 1980-2002 and find similar results (in the main sample, we also include
deaths occurring in other states).


                                                           9
        Our empirical analysis proceeds in four steps. First, we analyze the effect of job

displacement on short and long-run mortality rates for different samples and workers, including a

thorough sensitivity analysis dealing with selection, sorting, and misclassification. In a second step,

we analyze differences in the long-term effect of job loss on mortality by age and industry, and use

these estimates to provide an assessment of the losses in life-expectancies arising from mass-layoffs.

Third, we use our data to provide estimates of the correlation of mortality with detailed measures of

permanent earnings and other long-term career outcomes, factors not previously analyzed in the

literature on mortality and socio-economic status. Together with new estimates of the long-term

effects of job loss on a range of career outcomes, these results to give a first assessment of

alternative channels underlying the effect of job loss on death. Fourth, we document the relationship

between earnings changes due to job displacement and mortality, and use predictable differences in

earnings losses across groups in the population to gain further insight into the channel of the effect

of job displacement on mortality.

3.1 Structure of Sample

        To analyze the effect of job loss and other career outcomes on mortality, we divide our

sample into a baseline period (1974-1979), a mass-layoff period (1980-1986), and a follow-up period.

The follow up period ranges from 1980-2002 or 1987-2002, depending on the sample we use. We

then analyze the probability of dying each year in the follow-up period as a function of job loss in

the mass-layoff period and of career outcomes in the baseline period. This structure has several

advantages. Separating the baseline period and the job loss event from the follow up period reduces

the bias from reverse causality running from health to income or job loss. It also replicates

important features of the well-established research design of the paper on the effects of mass-layoff

by Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993) further discussed below. In addition, it allows us to

replicate existing studies of the effect of income on mortality (e.g., Deaton and Paxson 1999, see our

Appendix Table 5).




                                                   10
            We define job displacement exactly as in Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993) (henceforth

JLS). Specifically, we identify the workers who left their employer at the same time that the employer

experienced a 30% or larger decline in employment. We work with three main samples that each

satisfy a common set of restrictions, but differ in the degree of labor force attachment they require.

Following JLS, both samples focus on workers born between 1930 and 1959 who lost their job

between 1980 and 1986 after having remained with the same employer in the period from 1974 to

1979. The first sample makes no restrictions on employment after 1979 or the control group, and

thus simply compares mortality of workers who lost their job in the displacement period to all other

workers. For these workers, we analyze the incidence of death from 1980 to 2002.18

            Our second sample is the sample used by JLS in their analysis of long-term earnings losses.

It differs from the first by focusing on workers who remained highly attached to the Pennsylvania

labor force as evidenced by positive reported earnings in each year 1980 to 1986. Since we only

observe earnings information for workers who remain in PA, this allows us to consider various

career outcomes such as earnings losses as potential channels of the displacement effect. By focusing

on high-attachment male employees this sample also limits the underlying heterogeneity of workers

in our main samples. In addition, as in the earlier paper, when working with this sample we also

drop non-mass layoff separators for whom displacement status is not as well measured in our data.

We also consider an intermediate sample with weaker restrictions on labor force attachment after

job loss. Since the labor force attachment requirement obviously implies workers are alive through

1986, for these samples the follow up period starts in 1987. In addition, to explore the role of age at

job loss, we replicate our analysis including workers born between 1920 and 1929.

3.2 Main Estimation Strategy

            Using these samples, we estimate several logistic models of the annual probability of dying as

a function of an indicator for whether a worker left his 1974-79 employer during a mass-layoff

occurring from 1980-1986 ( MLFi 80−86 ), prior career information Ci74 − 79 measured over the horizon


18   Mortality data comes from the Social Security Administration and is not limited to deaths that occur in Pennsylvania.


                                                             11
1974 to 1979 (the baseline period), as well as controls for age and calendar year. The model we

estimate can be represented as

                                    ⎛ p         ⎞
                                 ln⎜⎜ it        ⎟⎟ = πC i74−79 + γMLFi 80−86 + χ a + φ t                           (1)
                                    ⎝ 1 − pit    ⎠

where the annual probability of dying in year t given survival until year t-1 (the hazard function),

 pit ≡ Pr{Deathit = 1 | Deathit −1 = 0} = Λ ( x' β ) , is measured over the follow-up period.19 All

specifications include year dummies, and we alternatively model the role of age ( χ a ) as a 4th order

polynomial or as separate age dummies (with little difference in results). The coefficient on the

MLF-dummy measures the overall increase in the log odds of dying in a year due to job

displacement.

         Given that the probability of death is typically quite small, the log-odds ratio approximates

the log of the death rate itself, and the coefficients have an approximate interpretation as percentage

changes of the probability of death. In addition, we report the proper marginal effects on death

probabilities that control for the curvature of the logistic distribution. The marginal effects will be

higher for groups of workers who tend to have higher mortality, such as older or low-income

workers. We have also made sure that the logistic functional form did not drive our estimates; all

results are evident in straightforward tabulations of average mortality rates and in linear probability

models.20

         Since the shock that triggers job loss in this analysis occurs at the firm level, it should be

exogenous to workers’ own health problems. However, it is possible that the firm lays off its least

productive workers, who may in turn be in poor health. To address this potential problem we

control for the mean and standard deviation of earnings in the baseline period, with little difference

in results. To further control for differences among job losers and stayers we also included other



19 The cumulative distribution function of the extreme value distribution is Λ ( x' β ) = exp{x' β } (1 − exp{x' β }) .
Workers contribute one observation for each year that they are alive from either 1980 or 1987 to 2002.
20 Note that once we include interactions of MLF-dummy with dummies for years since job loss, the logit specification

estimates the hazard function (see Efron 1988).


                                                            12
career characteristics such as earnings growth and non-employment spells.21 Similarly, to account for

underlying differences in average mortality rates and mass-layoff rates across sectors our baseline

specification controls for one-digit industry effects. Thus, our flexible baseline specification is

              ⎛ p
           ln⎜⎜ it
              ⎝ 1 − pit
                          ⎞
                                                 (
                          ⎟⎟ = δMLFi 8−86 + π ln qearnit
                           ⎠
                                                         74 − 79
                                                                 )
                                                                 + γSD(ln (qearnit ))
                                                                                     74 − 79
                                                                                             + χ a + φt + ψ j         (2)


where qearn stands for quarterly earnings as measured by unemployment insurance records, and ψ j

represent six industry dummies. To account for the possibility that workers of different ability and

health outcomes might be sorted into firms with different rates of mass-layoff, we also replicate all

our results including fixed effects for workers’ employers.22 This compares the short and long-term

mortality for workers from the same firm with similar age, average career earnings, and variability

and, should be robust to selection within and between employers. We address the potential for

remaining selection directly below.

         To examine the source of the effect we estimate, we also estimate interactions of the MLF-

dummy with age at layoff and initial industry. In particular, we are interested in how the mortality

effects of job loss vary with age at displacement. Older workers face potentially higher immediate

losses due to difficulties of re-integrating in the labor market, but the reduced earnings may occur

over a shorter period, limiting the life-time earnings reduction. Similarly, we are interested in

whether the results are driven by layoffs from particular sectors, or whether workers losing jobs in

traditionally ‘unhealthy’ sectors actually benefit from the layoff.

         We also consider the evolution of the mortality effect with years since layoff to distinguish

between initial and long-term effects. This is of particular interest since in our analysis of the effect

of job loss on career outcomes we find that there are important short term responses in a wide range




21 This also helps to control for the fact that the logarithm of earnings is not defined for quarters of zero earnings.
22 A long literature suggests that more able workers are sorted into larger higher-paying firms. That such sorting behavior
can bias estimates of the effects of layoffs has been shown by von Wachter and Bender (2006). Since in PA in the early
1980s downsizing occurred in traditionally high-wage manufacturing sectors, this may mean that workers in mass-layoff
firms may be of above average earnings potential and health.


                                                            13
of career outcomes. However, the only effect remaining past four years after a job loss is a sizeable

reduction in earnings.

3.3 Sensitivity: Selection and Misclassification

         Most estimators of the effects of job loss face the problem that certain types of workers may

be sorted into firms with higher layoff risk and that the firm selectively displaces certain kinds of

workers (von Wachter and Bender 2006). While in the analysis of earnings the potential biases from

sorting and selection can be controlled for by the inclusion of worker fixed effects (e.g., Jacobson,

Lalonde, Sullivan 1993), this is not possible in the case of mortality. Our basic estimates control for

sorting by including industry or firm fixed effects and for selection with an extensive set of long-

term pre-layoff career outcomes that are related to productivity (and thereby to the firm’s selection

criteria), such as the average, trend, and variance of earnings and employment. Moreover, the scope

for selective displacement was limited in the period we study because many firms – especially in

manufacturing where our layoffs are concentrated – were constrained by seniority rules. This held

whether the firm was unionized or not (Abraham and Meadoff 1984).

         Nevertheless, we develop two strategies to directly address the concern that firms may still

have information on workers’ underlying health status and selectively dismiss the least healthy. First,

we use a novel strategy to estimate the costs of job loss that directly avoids the problem of selective

job displacement by pooling the sample of displaced workers with those not displaced. The pooled

estimator compares the short and long-term mortality rate of all workers present in firms that

experience a mass-layoff with similar workers at non-mass layoff firms in the same industry. If we

were to treat a mass-layoff at the firm level as an instrument for individual job loss, this would be

the reduced form estimate, also known as the intent-to-treat estimator.23 Thus, to compare the

resulting estimates to those in the main tables, we have to rescale it by dividing by the effect of

mass-layoff on job loss.


23 Von Wachter and Bender (2006) discuss the problems of sorting and selection in job loss estimates when fixed effects

cannot be used and discuss alternative instrumental variable strategies using layoffs at the firm-occupation level as
instruments for job loss.


                                                          14
              Second, if there is selection, the degree of bias should be related to the size of the layoff; i.e.,

the larger the layoff, the less selective should be the sample of job losers. We thus analyze the effect

of job loss at mass-layoffs by size of layoffs. The caveat in such an analysis is the concern that larger

layoffs and closures are typically experienced by smaller firms that also attract less able workers and

provide less desirable career environments. Similarly, layoff rules such as a seniority rule are less

likely to bind in larger layoffs, suggesting caution when interpreting this sensitivity check.

              Another potential concern is that workers dying around the layoff date are automatically

classified as job losers. A straightforward calculation shows that the approximate misclassification

bias is expected to be small because the average mortality rate is small.24 Another advantage of the

pooled estimator is that it is robust to such mechanical misclassification. An additional concern that

has found little attention in the literature on job loss is that no true measure of involuntary job loss

is available, and displacement is approximated using firm level events. This may lead to some degree

to misclassification of voluntary movers as job losers (Hildreth, von Wachter and Weber 2005). The

pooled estimates do not suffer from this ambiguity in interpretation.

3.4 Sources of the Mass-Layoff Effect on Mortality

              As discussed in Section 2, job loss is likely to affect mortality through a variety of channels.

We take three approaches to gauging the effect of those channels running through career outcomes.

In the first approach, we show that job loss has strong effects on average earnings and career

instability. We then combine such estimates with estimates of the association of these long-term

career outcomes with mortality to see how much of the effect of job displacement on mortality can

be explained by its effects on the mean and standard deviation of earning. In a second approach, we

address the potential correlation of the response to job loss with underlying health status by


24   If   β   is the true difference in mortality rates of job losers and stayers, then one can show that the actual comparison is
a weighted function of the true mortality gap and the difference between the actual mortality of stayers ( δ 2 ) and the
mortality of misclassified stayers (which is equal to one). The weight is the misclassification probability
              {                 }
q = Pr D * = 0 | D = 1 ; i.e., we have that the probability limit of the simple difference in mortality rates of job losers
and stayers is b = β (1 − q ) + (1 − δ 2 )q . The misclassification rate q can itself be approximated as a function of the
overall mortality rate and the fraction of job losers, and turns out to be very small under reasonable scenarios.


                                                                  15
exploiting differences in predicted earnings impacts of displacement at the cell-level. Third, to learn

more about the cumulative effect of lower earnings due to mass-layoff on health, we assess the

potential of life-time losses in earnings in explaining the loss in total life expectancy due job

displacement.

         In the first approach, we exploit the large sample sizes and limited degree of top-coding of

quarterly earnings information in the unemployment insurance records to examine the correlation of

long-term earnings and mortality; we also use our results to gauge the role of two important sources

of measurement error afflicting estimates of the income-death correlation based only on survey

measures of a single year of income – classical measurement error affecting surveyed earnings, and

the mis-measurement of permanent earnings by current earnings. We then analyze the effect of

various measures of instability over worker’s careers, among others the standard deviation of

earnings, number of quarters worked, number of transitions between jobs and into non-

employment, or the number of large earnings declines. The correlations we obtain should not be

afflicted by short term reverse causality or strong measurement error. However, we do not interpret

the results as a causal link between career earnings outcomes and mortality since they may still be

affected by omitted variable bias.

         In a second step, we estimate the effect dynamic effects of losing a job displacement on

annual earnings, the variability of earnings, non-employment, job changes, industry changes, and

regional mobility.25 The results can be combined with the correlations obtained from models as in

equation (2) to interpret the sources of the effects estimated from the effects of mass-layoff on

          We do this by re-estimating the distributed lag model used by JLS with different career outcomes as the
         25

dependent variable. The model we estimate at the annual level is

                                       y it = α i + γ t + βX it +    ∑δ
                                                                    k ≥− m,
                                                                              k   Ditk + u it

where the outcome variable yit represents a measure of annual earnings or another career outcome, the time dummies
γ t are identified by the presence of ‘stayers’ (i.e., workers not losing their job), and the error u it represents truly
random components affecting the outcome. The coefficients δ k on the dummies indicating the k-th period before,
during, or after job loss ( Ditk ) measure the time path of earnings changes of job losers before and after a displacement
relative to the baseline and the control group. The displacement effect is identified by the inclusion of workers staying at
their employers throughout the period under study (the comparison group).


                                                            16
mortality (estimated in model (3)). Clearly, this does not allow an exact decomposition of the effect,

since the correlations may not represent causal estimates, but it will allow us to obtain important

insights regarding the potential magnitudes of the likely importance of alternative channels.

         To go beyond the basic approximation in assessing how much of the mass-layoff effect can

be explained by variation in earnings, ideally we would like to control directly for individual earnings

losses in our model of mortality. We thereby face the common problem that although a mass-layoff

(MLF) provides a valid quasi-experimental design for the overall effect of a job loss on mortality, it

may not in itself provide sufficient identifying variation to estimate the effect running through

alternative channels such as earnings losses.

         Specifically, we would like to directly estimate the following augmented logit model for the

annual hazard of death after a MLF

                              ⎛ p         ⎞
                           ln⎜⎜ it                                       (       )
                                          ⎟⎟ = χ a + φ t + βMLFi + π ln y i74−79 + γ∆ ln y i ,                        (3)
                              ⎝ 1 − pit    ⎠

where ∆ ln y i ≡ ln( y i87 −91 ) − ln( y i74−79 ) is the earnings change during the mass-layoff period.26 This

model yields consistent estimates if the change in earnings is uncorrelated with other factors

resulting in higher mortality rates. If this were true, the resulting estimates would tell us how much

earnings changes affect mortality, and to what extent any of the MLF effect is left conditioning on

the earnings change. However, we may be concerned that part of the response to MLF in earnings

may itself be driven by underlying health conditions that also affect mortality. For example, even

though job losers are on average as healthy as stayers, physically frail job losers may both have high

earnings losses and die earlier.

         An alternative approach is to find an additional source of variation that helps to determine

the response of alternative channels to MLF. For example, if different observable labor force groups

experience predictably different earnings losses due to job displacement, we can use this source of

26This model is a special case of a more general model where current and past earnings have flexible dynamic effects on
mortality. Since little is known about the true relationship between life-time earnings and mortality, after experimenting
with alternative specifications, we have settled on (implicitly) age-adjusted medium-term averages of earnings as a
sensible representation of the underlying functional form.


                                                            17
variation to re-estimate equation (3). As further explained in Section 5, since existing theory and

evidence suggest there are permanent wage differentials along these dimensions, we will use groups

based on alternative combinations of age at job loss, average earnings prior to job loss, region, and

industry of displacement. Note that were we to interpret these as causal estimates of earnings on

mortality, we have to be willing to assume that there are no other responses to MLF at the group

level correlated with both earnings and mortality.27 However, there may still be group-level

responses that drive both earnings and mortality. For example, differential rates of depression across

groups may affect both earnings capacity as well as long-term mortality outcomes. Instead, we

interpret the resulting estimates as an additional descriptive measure of the correlation of earnings

losses at MLF and increases in mortality among job losers. Note, however, that a general effect of

mass-layoff on stress or depression does not affect group level estimates.

         To implement the group level model, we first include group-level dummies ( Di (i ∈ c) ) and

their interaction with the MLF dummy in a model for earnings after a job loss (modeling the

changes in average earnings is equivalent)

                                              (          )
                                                             C                   C
                ∆ ln y i = δ a + π t + π ln y i74−79 + ∑θ c Di (i ∈ c) + ∑ψ c Di (i ∈ c) MLFi + u i                         (4)
                                                             c =1                c =1


To implement our strategy using a linear probability model of mortality we then use the fitted value

from this regression to replace the individual earnings change in equation in model (4). Equivalently,

we estimate the linear reduced form equation for mortality

                                                     (           )
                                                                          C             C
               pit = χ a + φ t + βMLFi + π ln y i74−79 + ∑ γ c Di (i ∈ c) + ∑ λ c Di (i ∈ c) MLFi ,
                                                                      c =1              c =1


and run a linear regression of the dummies on the interaction in the reduced form and the first stage,

properly weighted. The resulting slope coefficient would be the IV estimator for the earnings loss if

the interactions of mass-layoff and group dummies were to be used as instrument for earnings. The

sum of squared errors of the group level model divided by the number of groups is the test statistic

27 The intuition for identification in the cell-level model is parallel to that at the individual level model. I.e., we obtain

consistent estimates if there are no group level error components correlated with both group level earnings losses and
mortality.


                                                                     18
of a Chi-Squared test for the validity of the group-level dummies as instruments. Although we do

not treat our group-level estimates as two stage least squares estimates since we cannot exclude other

group level changes affecting both earnings and mortality, we will exploit this interpretation below.28

            The cell-level analysis misses potential cumulative effect of reduced career opportunities and

earnings on mortality. The long-term increase in the hazard of death we find suggest the loss in life-

expectancy might be a useful alternative summary measure of the effect of job loss on mortality.

Thus, we use our estimates of the decline in life-expectancy by age- and industry-groups combined

with estimates of the present-discounted value of life-time earnings estimates to provide an

additional group-level estimate of the potential role of career losses in earnings on long-term health

outcomes.


4. Mass Layoffs, Career Outcomes, and Mortality


4.1. Mass-Layoff, Job Loss, and Mortality

            Table 1 shows the workers’ average characteristics in the pre-period (1974-79) by layoff-

status for our least and most restrictive samples. As discussed by Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan

(1993) [JLS], job losers are somewhat younger and have slightly lower average earnings. They also

have higher earnings growth and lower variance; they tend to come from larger establishments and

from the manufacturing sector. These patterns suggest it is important to control for potential

differences across sectors and firms, but also for pre-job loss differences in career outcomes among

movers and stayers. Note that the two samples are very similar from 1974-79, but differ in the

aftermath; the sample of job losers without work restriction have much larger average earnings

losses and about double as many quarters of non-employment.

            Appendix Table 1 shows additional characteristics of our two main samples of male workers

for every two years of the follow up period. The typical worker is in middle age at the time of layoff,

and the sample ages over time. We capture these differences by controlling for age in our log-odds



28   See Angrist (1991) for a detailed exposition.


                                                      19
models.29 Our sample sizes are substantial, but given the overall mortality rate is low the number of

deaths every year is sufficient for the main analysis, but not large. This limits the number of detailed

interactions we can estimate. There is some attrition as the sample ages, but the pattern of average

quarterly earnings suggests it is not selective. The last column shows the layoff rate, which at 30-

35% is higher than in the U.S. population because our focus on Pennsylvania in the early 1980s. The

high-employment sample, shown in Panel B, has slightly higher average earnings and lower mortality

rates, but otherwise looks similar to the broad sample in Panel A.

         Our sample extends the original sample used by JLS by three years. Since we are particularly

interested in the long-term effect of mass-layoffs, we replicated the main result of the earlier paper

using the high attachment sample. The results are shown in Figure 1, which displays estimates of

the percentage difference in annual earnings relative to the baseline period and to the comparison

group of workers remaining at their employer in 1980 to 1986 controlling for year, age, and worker

fixed effects. The estimates confirm the result in JLS that job displacements in the course of a mass-

layoff lead to large immediate effects and a pattern of incomplete reversion in the first five years

after layoff. In addition, they show that there is no sign of catching up even eight to eleven years

after a job loss. The long-run decline in earnings we estimate is on the order of 20%.

     We next analyze the effect of the same mass-layoff events on mortality. As a preliminary step,

Table 2 shows various averages of raw and adjusted mortality rate by job loss status and their

difference. These straightforward tabulations give a preview of our main results.

     •   First, we find an increase in average mortality rates from 1987-2002 for those losing jobs at

         mass-layoffs during the period from 1980-86 (Column 4). For the sample without work

         restriction, we find that the initial effect occurring during the layoff period is particularly

         large; the effect is stable for the remainder of the period (Panel B).




29We replicated estimates of the age-gradient in mortality in the appendix (Appendix Figure 1), and find it to be quite
similar to the typical pattern for representative U.S. samples.


                                                           20
    •   Second, these differences are robust to controls for age, prior earnings, and initial firm size

        (Column 6). Below we also show that they are also robust to adding industry and firm fixed

        effects, adding further controls, or pooling the samples of movers and stayers.

    •   Third, once we control for the changes in average earnings at job loss, the difference in

        mortality rates becomes small and insignificant (Column 7).

The comparison of average mortality rates suggest that job displacement can lead to substantial

increases in mortality in the short and long run, and thereby significantly reduce job losers’ overall

life-expectancy. In what follows, we substantially deepen our analyses of these results.

        To fully exploit the structure of our data, we estimated several logistic regression models for

death in a year given survival until the previous year and include controls for age, year of the sample,

and baseline career outcomes shown in equation (2). The first group of estimates, based on the

broad sample with no employment restriction past 1979, is shown in the first column of Table 3.

The entries in the table are parameter estimates on the MLF-dummy from separate logit models;

parameter estimates for other covariates for our most extended model are shown in Table 4. Recall

that since average mortality rates are small, these coefficients can be interpreted as approximate

percentage changes.

        The coefficient shown in the first column of Table 3 indicates that displacement between

1980 and 1986 is associated with an increase in the log odds of death each year of about 0.28.

Because the probability of death each year is low, this implies about a 28% increase in the

probability of dying each year given survival to the previous year. The inclusion of log average

earnings and the log standard deviation of earnings in 1974-79 affected the estimate only marginally.

        To further assess whether our estimates might overstate the effect of job loss on mortality

because firms selectively fired the least healthy workers, rows (A) to (D) add additional

characteristics of workers’ careers from 1974 to 1979. Including dummies for 1-digit industry during

the baseline reduces the coefficient slightly. While added career outcomes – such as time worked or

the growth of earnings – are significantly correlated with long-term mortality (Table 4), and partly



                                                   21
differ by job loss status (Table 1), their inclusion matters only slightly. In results not reported here,

the same holds when we also add number of job changes or number of large earnings shocks.

Similarly, interacting average quarterly earnings and the standard deviation with dummies for age-

categories at baseline to allow for a more flexible specification does not affect our results (row D).

         We interpret these results to mean that there are large and robust effects of job

displacements on long-term mortality outcomes. In particular, our results are not affected by

displacement workers being selected on pre-job loss career outcomes. The robustness to industry

fixed effects also implies that our results are not driven by differences in the rate of downsizing and

mortality (e.g., because of job safety) across industries.

         The bottom panel of Table 3 re-estimates all specifications using fixed effects for the firm in

1979 instead of baseline industry. Due to the difficulty in estimating fixed effects in the logit model,

we use a linear probability model. To make the estimates comparable, we also show the percentage

effect relative to mean mortality in the sample.30 Including firm fixed effects, the estimates are

typically the same or somewhat larger (although the difference is never statistically significant). This

may be consistent with the fact that Pennsylvania experienced downsizing in some traditionally high-

wage sectors with large firms, such as steel manufacturing, and it appears that these firms also

tended to employ healthier workers.

         The second column of Table 3 shows the results when we use our high-attachment sample

(the original JLS sample). The effects are somewhat smaller but still large and significant. As shown

in column 4, the difference in the estimates arises primarily because the later start of the follow-up

period for this sample excludes deaths occurring right after the job loss. In addition, by focusing on

workers who continue to work for a certain number of years after a layoff the high-attachment

sample is likely to exclude the frailest workers most likely to die as a result of a layoff. As for the

broad sample, including industry or firm effects and the standard deviation of pre-job loss earnings




30When we replicated the main results with a linear probability model, the estimates are very similar to the results in
sTables 2 and 3.


                                                            22
reduces the effect of job loss on mortality by a bit less than a standard error. Again, including further

career characteristics has hardly any bearing on the results.

        Overall, for cohorts born after 1930, the effects range from 10% to 28% depending on the

sample and follow up period. In particular, once the follow up period is limited to start in 1987, the

estimates are of similar order of magnitude for alternative degrees of labor force attachment and

range between 10% and 17%. The right hand side of Table 3 shows estimates including workers

born from 1920 to 1929, who would be on average 55 to 60 at layoff. Including older workers the

effect of layoff on mortality is somewhat smaller, albeit still large and highly significant. These

differences are further addressed in Tables 5 and 7.

        Although the coefficients in Table 3 give an approximate effect of MLF on the hazard of

death, the curvature of the logit-function implies that the true marginal effect varies by age and

earnings. In Figure 3 we show differences in the fitted probabilities of dying due to mass-layoffs by

age and average earnings at layoff. Since the probability of dying increases faster for older and

poorer individuals, the effect of mass-layoff rises with age and declines with average earnings. As

shown in Appendix Table 2, the percentage change relative to the baseline is similar across age-

earnings cells, with exception of the youngest workers due to their low baseline hazards.

        Table 5 breaks up the effect of job loss on death by year since layoff. This is shown

graphically in Figure 2, which plots the point estimates and two standard error bands. For our main

sample in columns 2 and 3, we see large percentage increases immediately after job displacement

when the baseline hazard is low. The effect remains high for the first five years after job loss.

However, the effect gradually declines with time since layoff and bottoms out at a long run average

of about 15%, a result more similar to the other estimates in Table 3. These estimates suggest strong

immediate responses to when the impact of a layoff on career outcomes is most severe. The effects

then stabilize at a permanent difference as workers continue to suffer negative consequences of

layoffs in terms of reduced earnings.

        Columns 5 and 6 show the same estimates including the earlier cohorts. The effect of job

loss on the long-term mortality rate is similar in the two samples. This is expected, because ten years


                                                   23
after job loss the results in the second part of the table are again driven by a younger group of

workers. However, the results indicate an important difference in the initial response to job loss

when workers age 55 to 65 at job loss have most weight. Older workers’ mortality appears to

respond much less in the first five years after job loss than that of workers in middle age. This is

perhaps not surprising, since workers in that age range are likely to have either access to Social

Security Benefits at age 62 or to company pension plans. Even for workers not yet at retirement age,

access to disability insurance improves substantially at age 55, when workers can claim loss of

vocational qualifications to qualify for disability insurance (e.g., Chan and Van der Klaauw 2005,

Black, Daniel, and Sanders 2002). Middle aged workers do not have access to similar mechanisms to

smooth long-term earnings losses.

         One can see that in both samples the effect actually increases somewhat 15 years after job

loss, amounting to a U-shape, albeit a weak one.31 A similar pattern has been observed for the event

of losing a spouse that leads to an initial increase in mortality from stress, and a long-term rise of the

mortality rate to the level of single individuals (e.g., Martikainen and Valkonen 1996). The pattern is

suggestive of an initial response due to acute stress caused by the job loss, followed by a long-term

impact of increased chronic stress due to lower earnings.

4.2. Sensitivity Analysis: Selection and Misclassification

         We have shown that our estimates are very robust to the inclusion of an extensive set of

alternative control variables and industry and firm fixed effects. We have argued that this suggests

the remaining bias from selective displacement or from sorting of workers into firms is small,

especially in an environment of Pennsylvania in the early to mid 1980s, when firms were either

unionized or followed seniority rules in dismissals, and mass-layoffs were large. Both of these factors

may have reduced the ability to selectively displace workers. Yet, as in any non-experimental study,


31 Appendix Figure 1 explores the role of the time-pattern of the effects of job further. The upper panel shows the raw

mortality rate by mass-layoff status over the period under study. The aging of the sample is apparent for both lines. In
addition, it appears the difference in mortality rates is greater at the beginning and at the end of the sample period. To
eliminate age and year effects, the lower panel of Appendix Figure 1 plots the coefficients of an interaction of a job loss
dummy with annual dummies for years since 1987, the beginning of our follow up period.


                                                            24
we cannot fully exclude that firms use information on workers’ health development not captured by

workers’ earnings level, growth, or patterns of non-employment when deciding which workers to

displace.

         To address the question of a remaining bias from selective displacement directly, we present

results obtained from estimates that pool movers and stayers. These estimates replicate the main

specification shown in equation (2), but define the main variable of interest at the firm level, not the

worker level. Since the mass-layoff dummy now varies only at the firm, not at the worker level, the

estimates compare the mortality of all workers present at a firm experiencing a mass-layoff before

and after the layoff with similar workers at stable firms. The resulting intent-to-treat estimates are

not affected by selection at the time of job loss. However, they may still be affected by sorting of

workers into firms prior to layoff. To control for any remaining bias from sorting, we also include

industry fixed effects and our core career characteristics prior to layoff.32

         The resulting estimates in Table 6 confirm our main findings. The top panel shows the

results for mortality as an outcome, the bottom panel replicates the estimates for earnings. The table

shows estimates for two sets of mass-layoff definitions. The first defines mass-layoff as in JLS and in

our main estimates. Since this includes gradually declining firms, it makes less sense when working at

the firm level. Thus, Table 6 also includes specifications where mass-layoff is defined as a sudden

large drop in employment at the firm. We focus on the results based on this cleaner layoff definition

(Columns 3 and 4). The estimates for the average effect on mortality during the period from 1980 or

1987 to 2002 in Panel A is imprecisely estimated once industry dummies are included. However, the

magnitudes, when scaled by about a factor of three (the inverse of the effect of mass-layoff on




32 While the pooled estimates should be free of bias from selective job displacement, they may still be affected by a bias

from sorting of less healthy workers into sectors or firms with higher displacement rates. In our main analysis, we
showed that the results are unaffected by the inclusion of industry or firm fixed effects. Here, we cannot include firm
fixed effects without losing precision, but the results are robust for inclusion of industry controls.


                                                            25
mobility, which is about 0.3), 33 are comparable to the main results, especially for the 1987-2002

period.

          The dynamic estimates in Panel B (columns 3 and 4) show an increase in death rates in the

two years prior to closure (parallel to the decline in earnings), as well as a large positive spike at

mass-layoff. Rescaled by a factor of three, the magnitude of the increase is remarkably similar to the

size of the effects shown in Table 5 (when the mass-layoff dummy was defined as an individual job

loss at a firm experiencing a mass-layoff). The effect then drops in the years following the layoff and

increase in the long run. The long run effect is again significant and of similar magnitude as for the

main estimates that distinguish between movers and stayers. The results are similar but noisier in the

case of the gradual mass layoff definition in columns (1) and (2). We see a spike at layoff and a

positive long-run effect, but also a rise a mortality difference four years prior to layoff. This suggests

that the timing of the shock affecting workers at the firm level is better captured by a sudden in

employment.34

          The definition of mass-layoffs also makes a difference for the analysis of earnings shown in

Panels C and D of Table 6. In particular, the sudden drop leads to sharper losses in earnings around

the mass-layoff date and larger earnings losses in the first ten years after layoff. The effect of the

definition of mass-layoff based on administrative earnings estimates on the cost of job loss in terms

of earnings is discussed in detail in Hildreth, von Wachter, and Weber (2005).

          These results confirm that our main estimates are unlikely to be driven by selection. The

same conclusion is borne out when we split the sample by the size of layoff. The results in Appendix

Table 3 suggest that at best, workers at firms with higher layoff rates have higher mortality (columns




33 If we estimate the same regression models with an individual dummy for the event of job displacement as dependent
variable, the coefficient is 0.299 and 0.289 for the gradual and sudden drop definitions of mass-layoff, respectively. This
number also results from the fraction displaced in Appendix Table 1.
34 This is less of a problem with job loss definition at the individual level used in our main estimates. There, the shock

was an individual job change from a firm experiencing strong gradual decline in employment as in JLS. When the main
shock is defined at the firm level, the gradual nature of the decline leads some workers to be affected prior to the date at
which we assign them the mass-layoff. This is confirmed by the results based on a sudden drop in employment.


                                                            26
4 to 6).35 The table also shows that other separators (those leaving their employers but not during a

mass-layoff) do not have higher mortality rates (column 3). Consistent with results in Tables 3 and 6,

these numbers imply that selection into job loss appears not to be a pervasive problem in our

application.

         Finally, note that the fact that the estimate of the effect at the time of layoff in Table 6

(properly rescaled) coincides with that in Table 5 suggests that the initial spike we find is not driven

by a mechanic misclassification of dying stayers as job movers. This confirms the prediction of the

bias calculations discussed in section 3. This does not imply that there is no misclassification just

that it is unlikely to play an important role in determining our results.

4.3. Mass-Layoff Effects on Mortality by Age and Industry

         Given the role of age at layoff apparent in Tables 3 and 5, Table 7 shows the results for

specifications allowing a more flexible impact of mass-layoffs by age at job loss. To cover a broader

age range, these models are estimated only including the earlier cohorts. Clearly, the largest effect of

MLF on mortality is for younger and middle-aged workers. The lowest effect is for workers age 60

and above, the difference being largest for the broad sample. This is consistent with the fact that

younger workers experience the negative consequences of mass-layoffs on their careers for much

longer periods of time. Being laid off before retirement appears to have no health consequences.

This will make an important difference when calculating the effects on life expectancy below.

         Table 7 also shows the results by industry, mean earnings prior to job loss, and region. To

maximize sample size, we again show the results for workers born after 1920. The effects are among

the highest in steel and other durable goods manufacturing. This is to be expected, since there are

sectors with traditionally high paying jobs that were over-represented in Pennsylvania and

experienced large reductions in economic activity. However, the effects of job loss at mass-layoff are

also large in construction and transportation, and in services.


35 This result, robust to controls for age, average earnings, and other pre-job loss outcomes, is consistent with the
hypothesis that smaller firms are more likely to close and provide less favorable career environments and possibly attract
less able workers.


                                                           27
        When we break up the sample by quartile of average earnings in 1974-79, the results differ

somewhat across samples. When we require no or some work attachment during the layoff-period,

the effect is lower for those from the highest quartile of the pre-layoff distribution; when we

consider the sample with high work attachment, the effect is reversed. This may indicate that the

high attachment sample excludes low earners with unstable work attachment and higher mortality.

The bottom of the table also shows that the effects tend to be larger in eastern Pennsylvania. This is

perhaps somewhat surprising, since most of the steel manufacturing and heavy industry is in the

western part of the state. However, we also see strong effects of job displacement on mortality in

transportation, construction, and services, sectors relatively more important in eastern Pennsylvania.

4.4. The Reduction in Life-Expectancy due to Job Loss

        Since increased mortality affects workers over a long time horizon, our estimates imply

substantial reductions in life expectancy. The average loss in life-expectancy can also be used as a

summary measure of the cost of job loss at mass-layoff in terms of life-years, much as the present

discounted value of life-time earnings losses provide summary measures in conventional analyses of

the cost of job loss. In Table 8, we present a range of estimates of losses in life expectancies for

alternative samples and ages. Since some cohorts are still alive at the end of the sample period, to

calculate the total cumulated effect of permanently greater mortality hazards we have to make an

assumption about the development of mortality differences among laid off workers and the control

group past our observation window. Specifically, we maintain the assumption of constant

proportional differences in the odds of death. Given that the typical profile of the log odds of dying

is stable through older age ranges, and is so within the groups of our sample, this is a plausible

assumption. To take into account that the effect of mass-layoff on mortality differs by age at

displacement, the losses in life expectancy in Table 8 are based on estimates in Table 7. All life-




                                                   28
expectancies are calculated for workers with average annual earnings in 1974-79 and working in the

steel industry in 1979. 36

         The first set of estimates shows the loss in life expectancy for our most general sample.

Since there are large spikes in mortality at layoff, for this sample we also take into account the

dynamic response in mortality estimated in Table 5. The last column shows large losses in life

expectancy of more than two years for workers losing their job in their 30s and 40s. Life-expectancy

of workers displaced in their 50s still declines, but about half as much. This difference arises first,

because younger workers are exposed to higher mortality rates over a longer period of time. Second,

because the increase in mortality rates are greater for younger workers, possibly because earnings

losses accrue over a longer period of time.

         The remaining sets of estimates show results for samples restricting workers to have some

employment in the period of job loss. Since for these samples follow up starts in 1987, we first

replicate the calculation for our broad sample using the shorter follow up period. The results show

smaller losses, since we take out the initial period with strong mortality effects and reduce the range

of time over which losses can accrue. The next two sets of estimates are for a sample requiring three

year employment, and the JLS sample requiring some work every year from 1980 to 1986. The

estimates decline further but remain in the range of one to one and a half years in particular for

younger and middle aged workers.

         Given these substantial declines in life expectancy, an important question is how these losses

should be treated with respect to more conventional estimates of the cost of job loss. The typical

measure of the cost of displacements is based on the loss in present discounted value of earnings.

For the average worker in our high attachment sample this amounts to about $200,000 at a real

interest rate of four percent. To make the losses in life expectancy comparable, we can monetize

them by choosing an estimate of the statistical value of life. At about five million dollars per

statistical life, a loss in one and a half years would amount to a monetary loss of $100,000. Although


36 Life expectancy can be calculated as the sum of survivor probabilities over the remaining age-years an individual is
alive. The difference in life-expectancies then is the sum of the differences in survivor probabilities.


                                                            29
they can be no more than broadly indicative, values of this order of magnitude implies that the

willingness to pay of a worker to avoid a job loss may be substantially underestimated by traditional

summary measures such as the loss in life-time earnings.37


5. Potential Channels of Mass-Layoff Effect on Death

         The most frequently studied consequence of job displacement is the long-term decline in

earnings. The long-term earnings decline observed in Figure 1 is a likely channel through which

layoffs raise mortality in the long run. Lower earnings may affect necessary health investments or

lead to unhealthy life styles. Alternatively, it may raise mortality by increasing social stress. However,

layoff can affect other career outcomes such as variability of earnings, job changes, or regional

mobility. Such adjustments are likely to be closely correlated with the earnings loss. They may also

directly affect mortality by increasing stress from adjustment, loss in familiar environments, or put

strain on social relationships. A common difficulty in accounting for the role of each separate

channel is that workers’ responses to a job loss may be itself correlated with their underlying health

status. An added difficulty is that very little is known about the correlation of permanent earnings

and other long-term career outcomes with mortality. Similarly, remarkably little systematic and

representative evidence exists about the effect of mass-layoff on outcomes other than earnings.

         Despite the difficulty of the problem, the exceptional nature of our data allows us to gain

important insights on the potential role of alternative channels not possible with existing sources of

information. First, we can gauge the potential magnitude of the sources of the mortality effect we

find by providing new the first estimates of the association of long-term career outcomes with death

37 To think about how these two numbers should be treated, consider that in the typical neo-classical model of health
investments in which long-term health is an outcome of optimally chosen inputs given a life-time budget constraint. In
this case, the loss in the PDV of earnings is a sufficient statistic for the cost of job loss, since the reduction of life time
would be the optimal response to the reduced resources. However, only a small fraction of health expenditures are out
of pocket. Moreover, health is likely to be affected by factors other than consumption or health inputs. For example, it
may be affected by losses in social status related to earnings declines at layoff. In that case, the PDV of earnings losses is
not a sufficient statistic anymore, and to obtain the total costs of job displacements the monetary value of the direct
effect of layoffs on mortality should be added to the PDV of earnings losses. In particular, we should have that the Total
cost of job loss = PDV of Earnings Losses + α × Monetary Value of Lost Life, where α is between zero and one. In the
neoclassical model, α = 0; in a model of social status, α = 1. The right value probably lies in between, but given the
limited role of individual health expenditures it is likely to be closer to one than to zero. This implies that increases in
mortality due to layoffs substantially raise the costs of job loss and workers’ willingness to pay to avoid displacement.


                                                              30
and job loss. Second, we directly estimate the effect of earnings losses and changes in other

outcomes on the effect of job loss on mortality. Third, we address the fact that earnings losses may

be correlated with underlying health status by exploiting predictable variation in earnings loss at cell

level. Using this strategy, we obtain four results:

•   First, while all career outcomes are likely to have some impact in the short run, the predicted

    effect of earnings is largest and the only effect lasting more than five years after mass-layoff; in

    the individual level models, earnings changes can explain the entire mass-layoff effect on

    mortality.

•   Second, it does not appear job losers’ earnings changes are more strongly correlated with

    mortality than that of stayers, suggesting that the effect of earnings losses at job displacement on

    mortality is not primarily due to ill health of job losers.

•   Third, the potential role of earnings changes is confirmed when we exploit variation in

    predictable earnings losses by groups of age, industry, or region groups.

•   Fourth, those groups of workers with the highest loss in present discounted value of lifetime

    earnings are those with the largest losses in life-expectancy.

Overall, we interpret these results as suggesting that at least for job losses involving such dramatic

earnings declines as in Pennsylvania in the early to mid 1980s, the sources of the increase in

mortality are likely to be strongly correlated with earnings losses. This may include direct effects of

earnings, but also stress and adjustment costs correlated with long-term earnings declines. Clearly,

although suggestive, our results do not exclude the possibility that earnings losses and mortality

increases may also be driven by a common underlying variable such as depression as a result from

job loss.

5.1. Long-Term Career Outcomes and Mortality

        To help us gauge the magnitude of the effect of potential channels, we exploit the

longitudinal nature of our data to provide estimates of the correlation of career outcomes in the

baseline period with mortality in the follow up period. Table 4 shows the estimates from our most



                                                      31
complete model for the various alternative samples, with more detail contained in Appendix Table 6.

Although these estimates of career outcomes on long-term mortality are of substantial independent

interest, we limit ourselves to summarizing the main points. The Appendix discusses the results in

more detail. First, average earnings have a large and robust effect on long-term mortality; only

average earnings matter in the long run, not earnings in any given year. The effect we estimate is

about a third larger than typical estimates in the literature, and we show that this is due both to

classical measurement error from the use of earnings from survey data as well as measurement error

from approximating permanent earnings by current earnings.

         Second, the standard deviation of log quarterly earnings in 1974 to 1979 has robust and

sizeable effects the long term mortality rate.38 Figure 4 suggests that the correlations for both

measures are well captured by a log-specification. These results suggest workers with lower average

earnings and higher earnings variability die younger. Of course, while reverse causality and

measurement error are less of a concern here, omitted variable bias still is. Last, other career

measures we tried have little discernible effect on long-term mortality outcomes. The exception is

time worked which enters significantly negatively for some samples, consistent with Ruhm’s (2002)

analysis of the effects of recession on mortality.


5.2. Effects of Mass Layoffs on Career Outcomes

         To better understand how displacement impacts mortality, we also studied the impact of

displacement on a broad range of workers’ career outcomes. As noted above, our estimates are

based on an annual distributed lag model that controls for worker fixed effects, year effects, and a

quadratic in age. Because in our Pennsylvania administrative data earnings may appear to be zero

when workers have moved out of state, we focus on a sample of workers who had positive earnings

in every year through 1991.

         As Table 9 shows, we estimate that displacement some time during the 1980-1986 time

period reduces workers’ earnings by approximately 22% in the 1987 to 1991 period. These estimates

38We use the standard deviation of the log of quarterly earnings to obtain a measure of earnings variability based on
percentage changes that is comparable across wage levels.


                                                           32
are quite similar to those reported in Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993) for a somewhat shorter

follow up period. Thus the earnings losses associated with job displacement for workers with

substantial job tenure appear to be extremely persistent.

         Table 9 also shows that many other career outcomes are strongly affected by a layoff in the

short run but return to normal at about the fifth year after a job loss. In particular, we find strong

temporary increases in absolute value of earnings growth (our measure of annual career variability)

and job and regional mobility. These results suggest that after an initial turbulent phase, job losers

settle into a stable career at a permanently lower level of earnings.


5.3 Gauging the Effects of Alternative Channels

         Using the results in Table 9, one can gauge the potential order of magnitude of different

channels through which mass-layoffs can affect mortality. To do so, we combine the mass-layoff

results with the correlations shown in Table 4. Clearly, this does not yield a true decomposition of

the effect as if these were causal parameters. Below, we will try to gauge our interpretation using

predictable differences in earnings losses across groups of workers.

         The two main career outcomes that were most important in our analysis of correlations are

mean and standard deviation of log quarterly earnings. Taken at face value, the estimated correlation

of average earnings with mortality of -0.5 would imply that we expect an increase in mortality of

about 12.5% for workers with high attachment (0.25*0.5). Thus about two-thirds of the long-run

effect of mass-layoff on mortality, about 0.15 to 0.2, could be explained by the observed declines in

average earnings. Clearly, if frail workers die younger and have lower average earnings, this

prediction overstates the potential effect of job loss through earnings. 39




39 In his study of Swedish lottery winners, Lindahl (2005, Appendix Table 2) shows that the effect of controlling for
initial health conditions tends to reduce the correlation between mortality and earnings by about a third. (The
magnitudes of the OLS effect that Lindahl estimates are somewhat smaller but in the same ball-park as ours. He does
not report logit estimates, so the comparison is based on approximate percentage effects derived from the results of
linear probability models.) Were this to be the case, the predicted role of earnings in explaining the mass layoff effects is
reduced to about half of the effect, which is still substantial. Note however that our high-attachment sample is likely to
be of better health than the older sample used in Lindahl (2005).


                                                             33
        The remaining effects could partially be driven by increases in the instability of earnings and

other career outcomes. From a replication of Table 8 in with a difference-in-difference specification,

we find the standard deviation of log quarterly earnings increases on average by about 16% at a

mass-layoff. At a coefficient of -0.2 (Table 7), this implies an increase in the probability of dying of

about 3.2%. While the order of magnitude of this effect is much lower than the potential impact of

earnings, it can still account for about 20% of the mass-layoff effect. Although the fact that they also

attain for workers with high job attachment and are robust to controls for baseline average income

lends credibility to the results, if frail people have higher earnings instability and higher death rates,

this prediction is likely to be over stated. Moreover, as shown in Table 8, this effect is relevant

mostly in the short term and is unlikely to be able to explain persistent increases in mortality rates.

        These straightforward calibrations suggest a potentially important role for long term earnings

losses in explaining the effect of layoff on mortality we find. To further explore the role of long-

term earnings losses in accounting for the effect of job displacement on mortality, we also directly

included the long-term earnings change into our logit model (equation 3). The result is shown in the

first panel of Table 9 for alternative samples. The results suggest a strong correlation between

earnings changes and long term mortality. Moreover, once we condition on earnings changes, the

effect of the mass-layoff dummy becomes numerically small and insignificant. Figure 5 confirms

these patterns by showing the non-parametric relationship between long-term earnings losses and

mortality, controlling for age, year, and past average earnings.

        These results further suggest that the mechanism explaining the mass-layoff effect on

mortality strongly correlates with long-term earnings losses. However, as discussed in Section 3, we

cannot interpret these results as indicating a causal channel from earnings losses to mortality, unless

we are willing to assume that the earnings response to layoff is not correlated with workers’ health.

Note that if there were a strong correlation, then we would expect the correlation of earnings losses

and mortality to rise for workers experiencing a job displacement. However, if we replicate our

estimates focusing on the sample of job losers, the coefficients on the earnings change becomes

smaller (row two of Table 9).


                                                    34
          To further examine whether earnings losses really capture the effect of increasing stress in

the labor market due to uncertainty, we also included the standard deviation of quarterly earnings

from 1987 to 1991 (not shown). If earnings losses just index the degree of stress due to adjustments

in the labor market, we might expect that this would reduce the effect of earnings changes on

mortality. However, although as expected the standard deviation has a positive significant effect, the

impact of earnings changes on long-term mortality outcomes is unaffected.

          The results in this section are suggestive of an important role of earnings losses in explaining

the effect of layoffs on mortality. However, here may be omitted variables that drive both earnings

losses and mortality increases, such as a differential increases in depression in response to layoffs. To

explore the role of earnings losses further, we next try to exploit cell-level variation in earnings

losses.


5.4. Cell-Level Analysis

          A long literature suggests that there are differential effects of job loss in the population (e.g.,

Farber 2003, JLS 1993, Kletzer 1989, Neal 1995). Part of these differences arise from differences in

rent workers receive on the job that are permanently lost as workers move employers (von Wachter

and Bender 2007). We would like to isolate groups of workers that have different rents and thereby

predictable differences in earnings losses. If these groups do not have other differential responses to

layoffs, we can study the effect of earnings changes at job loss on long-term mortality at the group

level.

          We use various cell definitions based on age, average earnings, industry, and region, all

measured at the end of our baseline period. Wage differences among age and average earnings

groups partially reflect differences in skills. However, they also reflect differences in wage levels due

to contractual premiums (Beaudry and DiNardo 1991, Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2006),

job search (Topel and Ward 1992), and firm and industry wage premiums (e.g., Krueger and

Summers 1988, Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz 2002). Similarly, differences in age lead to differential

cumulated long-term earnings losses due to layoffs. Thus, differences in earnings losses among cells



                                                      35
partly arise from labor market factors unrelated to productivity and health. Clearly, health responses

to layoff may also differ across cells.

         To implement our approach we regress mortality increases on average earnings losses at the

cell-level. As explained in Section 3, this is equivalent to using cell-level dummies as instruments for

earnings losses in a linear probability model of mortality. The lower panel of Table 10 shows the

coefficient estimates on actual earnings changes in a linear probability model and the slope

coefficient in the cell level model. The model also controls for cell-level dummies. Thus, the

variation of earnings changes at the cell-level arises from the interaction of cell-dummies with the

mass-layoff dummy. 40

         We find that the effect of earnings losses on mortality is similar at the individual and cell

level for the samples with no or low work requirement. The cell-level effect is smaller for the high-

attachment sample, but standard errors increase substantially as well.41 As before, if we include the

mass-layoff dummy, its coefficient is small and insignificant. However, now the estimates lose

precision. The bottom panel in Figure 5 shows the corresponding cells and a linear regression line

for the high attachment sample. There is a clear negative and relatively precise association, albeit

there is a high degree of variation left. The results are very similar for different definition of cells.

Unfortunately, we could not include changes in the standard deviation at the cell level without

further losing precision.

         The resulting value for the mean-squared error of the group-level regression is the test

statistics for of a test of over-identification with a limiting Chi-Squared distribution with degrees of

freedom equal to the number of cells. This test is equivalent to the standard test of over-

identification in 2SLS and amounts to a joint test of the equality of the different Wald-estimates

corresponding to each group (Angrist 1991). In results not reported here, for neither model can we

40 The cell-level model is implemented in two steps. First, we regressed individual earnings and mortality on
characteristics such as baseline earnings, baseline standard deviation, a quartic in age, and year effects; in addition, we
included cell-level dummies, and interactions between cell-level dummies and the mass-layoff dummy. The coefficients
on the interaction are used in the second step. Second, we regress cell-level changes in mortality on cell level earnings
losses weighting by the inverse sampling variance of the cell-specific mortality increases.
41 Note that the standard errors are from the group-level model and are thus corrected for group-level error

components.


                                                             36
reject the over-identifying restrictions at any reasonable degree of significance. This is particularly

helpful in our case, since failure to reject the null-hypothesis supports an underlying model of a

constant proportional effect of earnings on mortality.

         Although the results discussed so far refer to changes in average earnings, standard models

of health investment refer to life-time resources as the relevant earnings concept. That this could

make an important difference is suggested in Table 7. Although older workers typically have the

largest losses in earnings (e.g., Farber 1997, JLS 1993), they experience the lowest increase in average

mortality rates after a job loss. This may be because older workers are typically exposed to reduced

earnings for a shorter period of time.

         To address this question, we calculated the present-discounted value (PDV) of life-time

earnings losses following a job loss at a mass-layoff by age-group.42 The results, shown in Figure 6,

show that the PDV of earnings losses after a job loss is a declining function of age. The figure also

displays losses in life-expectancy taken from Table 8 by age-group. Young workers not only have

higher average mortality increases after a job loss (Table 7), but also the largest life-time losses in

earnings and remaining life-time. Thus, it is not the oldest workers that are most affected, but those

in prime working age that are exposed to the negative consequences of job loss over a longer period

of time.

         Given the robustness of our results across specifications, and the similarity of results at the

individual level and cell level, we interpret the foregoing analysis as confirming an important channel

for earnings changes on mortality. Clearly there are other explanations consistent with our results.

For example, changes in depression or stress at the group level may lead to both greater earnings

losses and larger increases in mortality. In either case, our results suggest that any channel explaining

the effect of job displacement at mass-layoffs on mortality is likely to be at least correlated with the

degree of earnings losses.



42 To do so, we allowed the short- and long-term effects of job loss on earnings to vary by either 10 year or 5 year age-

groups. Since we do not have complete earnings histories after job loss for all workers, we assume that the earnings loss
decays at the same speed of reversion observed between years 6 to 11 after a job loss eventually staying fixed at zero.


                                                           37
        As discussed in Section 2, our results are not in conflict with recent studies suggesting that

mortality declines in recessions (e.g., Ruhm 2000), since the shock we analyze is of different nature

than the impact of aggregate variation in economic activity. In addition, the role of employment in

our regressions suggests that stress and work-accidents may play an important role in our sample as

well. Some non-employment in the years prior to job loss turns out to reduce mortality in the long

run (Table 4); conditional on earnings losses, job losers with some non-employment live longer on

average (Appendix Table 4); similarly, conditional on earnings losses, those job losers with largest

earnings increases have higher mortality as well.

        Thus, while the strong earnings losses play a particularly important role in our sample of job

losers in the recessions of the early 1980s in Pennsylvania, this does not exclude the influence of

other channels. In particular, it does not preclude the dominance of other channels in situations

where earnings losses are not as large and sustained as in our case.


6. Conclusion

        This paper uses administrative data covering over 15 years of quarterly earnings and

employer records matched to information on date of death to study the effects of job displacement

on mortality. To measure an event plausibly exogenous to workers’ own health outcomes, we

analyze job losses occurring when employers experience mass layoffs affecting at least 30% of their

work force. To further control for selection, we also control for workers’ average earnings and a

range of career outcomes in the period before job loss, and present selection-free estimates pooling

movers and stayers. The results suggest a particularly pronounced increase in mortality during the

period immediately following job loss and long-run increase of 15-20% in the annual probability of

dying persisting for at least the next 20 years. These effects, robust across alternative samples and

specifications, are consistent with strong responses to both acute and chronic stress.

        To analyze the channels underlying the mass-layoff effect we analyze the correlation of long-

run career outcomes with mortality. We show that the mean and standard deviation of earnings

during a baseline period have large and significant correlations with mortality in a later follow up



                                                    38
period. The results on the role of earnings and employment instability are novel with respect to the

existing literature on mortality that has had not access to long-run career outcomes. Together with

estimates of the effects of mass-layoffs on long-run career outcomes these results suggest that an

important fraction of the effect of job loss on mortality can be attributed to persistent losses in

earnings. This is confirmed by a direct analysis of differences in mortality responses by groups of

workers with differential earnings losses at job displacement.

        These results suggest that events in the labor market shaping workers’ careers also have

long-run effects on health outcomes. The losses in life expectancy implied by our results shows

these effects can be large. A worker displaced in mid-career can expect to live about two years less

than a luckier counterpart. The reduction in life expectancy is smaller for older workers who

experience lower life-time earnings losses and are exposed to increased mortality for a shorter period

of time. Our results do not speak to the role of non-economic factors such as stress, self-worth, and

happiness. Yet, they suggest an important avenue for future research would be to examine whether

the negative health consequences of mass-layoffs can be prevented by providing assistance that

stabilizes the level and variance of earnings.




                                                   39
References


Aaronson, Daniel and Daniel Sullivan (1998). ‘The decline of job security in the 1990s:
      Displacement, anxiety, and their effect on wages.’ Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic
      Perspectives, Vol.22 No. 1.
Abowd, John, Robert Creecy, and Francis Kramarz (2002). ‘Computing Person and Firm Effects
      Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data.’ Cornell, mimeo.
Abraham, Katharine G. and James L. Medoff (1984). ‘Length of Service and Layoffs in Union and
      Nonunion Work Groups.’ Industrial Labor Relations Review, Vol.38 No.1 pp. 87-97.
Angrist, Joshua (1991). ‘Grouped Data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor Supply Models,’
        Journal of Econometrics 47, February/March 1991.
Baker, George, Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom (1994). ‘The Internal Economics of the Firm:
       Evidence from Personnel Data.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 881-919.
Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo (1991). ‘The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movements of
       Wages over the Business Cycle’ Journal of Political Economy, 99(4).
Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders (2002). ‘The Impact of Economic Conditions on
        Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust,’ American
        Economic Review, vol. 92(1), pages 27-50, March.
Bound, John and Alan B. Krueger (1991). The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
       Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?’ Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 9, No. 1 pp.
       1-24
Browning, Martin and T.F. Crossley (2001). ‘Unemployment Insurance Levels and Consumption
      Changes.’ Journal of Public Economics. 80(1):1-23
Browning, Martin, Anne Moller Dano, and Eskil Heinesen (2006). ‘Job displacement and stress-
      related health outcomes.’ Health Economics, Vo.15 pp. 1061 - 1075.
Burgard, Sarah, Jennie Brand, and James House (2005). ‘Causation and Selection in the Relationship
       of Job Loss to Health in the United States.’ Mimeo. University of Michigan.
Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens (2001) “Job Loss and Employment Patterns of Older Workers,”
       Journal of Labor Economics 19, 484-521.
Chen, Susan and Wilbert Van der Klaauw (2006). ‘The Effect of Disability Insurance on Labor
       Supply of Older Individuals in the 1990s‘ forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics.
Couch, Kenneth (2006). ‘The Earnings Impact of Job Displacement Measured with Longitudinally
       Matched Individual and Firm Data.’ Presented at 2006 SOLE Meetings.
Darity, William and Arthur Goldsmith (1996). ‘Social Psychology, Unemployment, and
        Macroeconomics.’ Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(1): 121-140.
Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber (2006). ‘Cash-on-Hand and Competing Models of
       Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.’ NBER Working Paper No.
       12639.
Deaton, Angus (1999). ‘Inequalities in income and inequalities in health.’ Research Program in
      Development Studies, Princeton University, mimeo.



                                                40
Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson (1999). ‘Mortality, education, income and inequality among
      American cohorts.’ NBER Working Papers No. 7140.
Deaton, Angus, David Cutler, and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2006). ‘The Determinants of Mortality.’
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3): 97-120.
Efron, Bradley (1988). ‘Logistic Regression, Survival Analysis, and the Kaplan-Meier Survival Curve.’
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 83 (402): 414-425.
Eliason, Marcus and Donald Storrie (2004). ‘Does job loss shorten life?’ Göteborg University
       Department of Economics Working Paper Series No. 153.
Eliason, Marcus and Donald Storrie (2006). ‘Latent or Lasting Scars: Swedish evidence on the long-
       term effects of job displacement.’ Journal of Labor Economics, 24, pp 831-856.
Evans, William N. and Steven Snyder, “The Impact of Income on Mortality: Evidence from the
       Social Security Notch,” NBER working paper number 9197, Review of Economics and Statistics,
       Forthcoming.
Farber, Henry (2003). ‘Job Loss in the United States, 1981-2001.’ IRS Working Paper No. 471
        Princeton University.
Farber, Henry (2007). ‘Job Loss and the Decline in Job Security in the United States.’ Industrial
        Relations Section Working Paper 520.
Gallo, W.T., H.M. Teng, T.A. Falba, S.V. Kasl, H.M. Krumholz, E.H. Bradley (2006). ‘The Impact
       of a Late-Career Job Loss on Myocardial Infarction and Stroke: a 10-year Follow-Up Using
       the Health and Retirement Study.’ Occupational and Environmental Medicine. July.
Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz (1991). ‘Layoffs and Lemons.’ Journal of Labor Economics 9(4):
      351-380.
Gottschalk, Peter and Robert Moffitt (1994). ‘Growth in Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
       Market.’ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Gottschalk, Peter and Robert Moffitt (2002). ‘Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings in the
       U.S.’ The Economic Journal, Vol. 112 (478), C68-C73.
Gruber, Jonathan (1997). ‘The consumption smoothing benefit of unemployment insurance.’
       American Economic Review 87 (1): 192–205.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte C. Madrian (2002) “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
       Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature,” NBER Working Paper No. 8817.
Haider, Steven J. and Solon, Gary, "Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between Current and
        Lifetime Earnings" (January 2006). NBER Working Paper No. W11943
Hildreth, Andrew, Till von Wachter, and Elizabeth Weber (2005). ‘Estimating the 'True' Cost of Job
       Loss: Evidence Using Matched Data from California 1991-2000.’ Mimeo, Columbia
       University.
Hines, James, Hilary Hoynes, and Alan Krueger (2002). ‘Another Look at Whether a Rising Tide
        Lifts All Boats.’ in Alan Krueger and Robert Solow. (Eds.), The Roaring Nineties: Can Full
        Employment Be Sustained? Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Hill, Mark E. and Ira Rosenwaike (2002). ‘The Social Security Administration's Death Master File:
        the completeness of death reporting at older ages.’ Social Security Bulletin Vol.64 No.1.



                                                  41
Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan (1993). ‘Earnings Losses of Displaced
       Workers.’ American Economic Review 83(4): 685-709.
Kahn, Lisa (2005). ‘The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating College in a Bad
       Economy.’ Harvard University. Mimeo.
Johnson, Norman, Paul Sorlie, and Eric Backlund (1998). ‘The Impact of Specific Occupation on
       Mortality in the U.S. National Longitudinal Mortality Study.’ Demography 36(3): 355-67.
Kletzer, Lori (1989). ‘Returns to Seniority after a Permanent Job Loss.’ American Economic Review 79:
        536-43.
Krashinsky, Harry (2002). ‘Evidence on Adverse Selection and Establishment Size In the Labor
       Market.’ Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(1): 84-96.
Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers (1988). ‘Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure.’ Econometrica 56 (2): 259-293.
Lemieux, Thomas, Bentley MacLeod, Daniel Parent (2006). ‘Employment and Bonus Pay in the
      U.S.’ Working Paper.
Lindahl, Mikael (2005). ‘Estimating the Effect of Income on Health and Mortality using Lottery
       Prizes as an Exogenous Source of Variation in Income.’ Forthcoming, Journal of Human
       Resources.
Martikainen, Pekka and Tapani Valkonen (1996). ‘Mortaltiy after death of a spouse in relation to
       duration of bereavement in Finland.’ Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 50: 264-268.
Martikainen, Pekka, Netta Maki, and Markus Jantti (2007). ‘The Effects of Unemployment on
       Mortality following Workplace Downsizing and Workplace Closure: A Register-based
       Follow-up Study of Finnish Men and Women during Economic Boom and Recession.’
       American Journal of Epidemiology Vol. 165 No. 9 pp. 1070 - 1075.
Miller, Doug and Christina Paxson (2006). ‘Relative Income, Race, and Mortality.’ Forthcoming,
        Journal of Health Economics.
Neal, Derek (1995). ‘Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence From Displaced Workers,’ Journal of
       Labor Economics, October, vol. 13: 653-77.
Ohlsson, Henry and Donald Storrie (2007). ‘Long term effects of public policy for displaced
      workers in Sweden – shipyard workers in the West and miners in the North.’ Uppsala
      University Department of Economics Working Paper Series No 2007:19.
Okun, Arthur M. (1973). ‘Upward Mobility in a High-Pressure Economy.’ Brookings Papers of Economic
      Activity, 1: 207-52.
Olson, Craig (1992). ‘The Impact of Permanent Job Loss on Health Insurance Benefits.’ Industrial
       Relations Section Working Paper No. 305. Princeton University.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2006). The Short- and Long-Term Career
      Effects of Graduating in a Recession: Hysteresis and Heterogeneity in the Market for
      College Graduates.’ Mimeo Columbia University.
Paul Oyer, 2006. "The Making of an Investment Banker: Macroeconomic Shocks, Career Choice,
       and Lifetime Income," NBER Working Papers 12059




                                                  42
Price, Richard, Jin Nam Choi, and Amiram Vinokur (2002). ‘Links in the Chain of Adversity
        Following Job Loss: How Financial Strain and Loss of Personal Control Lead to Depression,
        Impaired Functioning, and Poor Health.’ Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 7(4): 302-312.
Ruhm, Christopher (1991). ‘Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?’ American
      Economic Review 81: 319-23.
Ruhm, Christopher (2000). „Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      115 (2): 617-650.
Schoeni, Robert and Michael Dardia (2003). "Estimates of Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
       Using California Administrative Data." PSC Research Report No. 03-543.
Smith, James (1999). ‘Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and
        Economic Status.’ Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2):145–166.
Smith, James P. (2003). ‘Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events.’ NBER Working
        Paper No. 10063.
Stevens, Ann Huff (1997). ‘Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job
       Losses.’ Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1, Part 1, pp. 165-188
Stevens, Ann Huff (2001). ‘Changes in Earnings Instability and Job Loss.’ Industrial and Labor
       Relations Review, Vol. 55, No. 1, 60-78.
Topel, Robert and Michael Ward (1992). ‘Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men.’ Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 107(2): 439-479.
von Wachter, Till and Stefan Bender (2006) ‘At the Right Place at the Wrong Time: The Role of
      Firms and Luck in Young Workers’ Careers.’ American Economic Review.
von Wachter, Till (2007). ‘Summary of the Literature on Job Displacement in the US and EU: What
      we know and what we would like to know.’ Mimeo, Columbia University.
Weber-Handwerker, Elizabeth (2006). ‘The Social-Security Notch, Mortality, and Cohort Variability:
      A Cautionary Tale.’ Mimeo. University of California Berkeley.




                                                  43
Appendix 1: Average Earnings and Mortality

         This is one of the few studies of earnings and mortality that approximate permanent
earnings with more than a single year of earnings data. Figure 4shows various estimates of the
correlation of average quarterly earnings in the period of 1974-1979 on mortality in 1986-2002. Since
the natural logarithm turns out to be a good approximation to the declining correlation of average
earnings and mortality, all our econometric specifications include the log of average quarterly
baseline earnings.43 The first three columns of Appendix Table 5 show various estimates of Model
(1) for our main mass-layoff sample (without a mass-layoff dummy).44 The effect of log average
earnings is about -0.5 for the group of workers with high job attachment in the baseline period.
Given that the probability of death is very small, the coefficient approximately implies a 10%
decrease in mortality for a 20% increase in average quarterly earnings. For example, a two standard
deviation increase in average quarterly earnings would lead to about a 4% decline in mortality. To
properly assess the magnitudes of the estimated effects, the second panel in Appendix Table 2 and
Figure 3 show the predicted values of the probability of dying by age- and income-group based on
the estimates shown in Appendix Table 5 (1st column and 1st row). As expected, the earnings
gradient rises with age – a comparison of differences in mortality rates at 25th and 75th earnings
percentiles shows substantial differences across age-groups. Equivalently, the role of age decreases
for high-income workers.
         These results are robust for cohort controls, are similar across age groups, are unaffected by
controls for other career measures such as quarters worked, and are not changed if the baseline
period is extended to cover 13 instead of 6 years (1974-1986). Interestingly, the effect of income is
significantly higher for workers who worked in manufacturing during the baseline period (see
Appendix Table 6, Models 6 and 7). To replicate results in the existing literature, we also estimated
models of 5 and 10 year follow-up (e.g., see Deaton and Paxson 1999). The results, shown in
columns 4 to 9 in Appendix Table 5, essentially confirm our main estimates.45 These estimates are
bigger in absolute terms than the effects estimated by Deaton and Paxson (1999, Table 5) using CPS


43 For high and low earnings, a fourth order polynomial does a better job at approximating the ‘non-parametric’ dummy-

variable estimates. We chose the more parsimonious specifications, but double-checked our results by including
earnings-dummies. This is particularly important when non-linearities can matter, such as in the analysis of earnings
ranks. The more fully non-parametric results in the lower panel of Figure 1 confirm that a smooth concave function is
appropriate to capturing the relationship between earnings and mortality.
44 Appendix Table 5 compares results across alternative samples, further discussed below.
45 Changes in the fraction of older workers in our panel sample over time are likely to explain variation in the results

across age groups for these models.


                                                          44
earnings data matched to mortality information. Even when we follow the literature by using a single
year of earnings at beginning of the follow up period (row 3 of Appendix Table 5), our estimates are
slightly larger, albeit weaker than the effects of average earnings. As shown in Bound and Krueger
(1991, Table 6), the reliability ratio for men at single employers is about .8 in the case of classical
measurement error, and .95-1 for mean-reverting measurement error. Thus classical measurement
error could explain part of the difference of using annual earnings measures from survey data (CPS)
and annual earnings information from administrative data (row 3).
         The interpretation of the difference between the estimates in row 1 and row 3 is only slightly
more involved. Consider a typical model of current earnings yit as a function of persistent ( θ it ) and
transitory ( u it ) components

                    yit = θ it + u it , where θ it = θ it −1 + vit , u it ~ ARMA, vit ~ WN .                      (A1)

If both components affect health and longevity, when included as the sole explanatory variable
current earnings captures the joint effect of the permanent and transitory earnings components. On
the other hand, if only permanent earnings matter for long-term health outcomes, then current
earnings is a noisy measure of permanent earnings. If so, then row 3 is downward biased by either
classical (if u it has short memory) or mean-reverting measurement error. Since we have measures of
permanent earnings available in our data, we can check this directly by including them jointly into
the model. If current earnings are simply a noisy measure of permanent earnings, its coefficient
should drop to zero. This is shown in the last two rows of Appendix Table 5 (and Appendix Table 6
for other samples). In most cases, including a measure of average earnings indeed drives the effect
of current earnings to zero.46 This suggests that other studies having at disposition only measures of
annual earnings should scale their coefficients up by a factor taking into account measurement error
from survey responses as well as from transitory earnings disturbances. In separate calculations, we
show that the combined reliability ratio can be as low as 0.6.
         The current results are obtained from workers with a stable job from 1974 to 1979 who
either continue to hold that job through the end of 1986 or who leave their baseline job at the time
of a mass layoff. In both cases workers are required to have positive earnings in each year from 1979
to 1986. To assess to what extent our results are driven by the focus on high-attachment workers,
Appendix Table 6 replicates our main specifications for a series of different samples. The second

46 Since the relationship between permanent earnings and current earnings also differs by age, the measurement error

might be more complicated (Haider and Solon 2006). This should be partially taken into account by the age controls
included in our models.


                                                          45
column shows results based on all workers who have a stable job in 1974 to 79 (i.e., with respect to
column 1 it includes non-mass layoff job changers), and confirms the results from the mass-layoff
sample for all specifications. The third column substantially weakens the restriction on labor force
attachment by including all workers who where employed or received unemployment insurance at
least half of the time in 1974-79. The effect of log average earnings is somewhat lower, but partly
due to correlation with quarters worked, which has a negative coefficient. 47 This somewhat
surprising result is consistent with Ruhm (2000)’s analysis suggesting lower economic activity in
recessions may be beneficial to health. However, it turns out that the beneficial effect of non-
employment is not a very robust feature of our data.48 The last two columns show the results for
high and low attachment samples of older workers for whom we calculate average quarterly earnings
with all quarters available from 1974 to 1986 (spanning the last 10 to 15 years of workers’ earnings).
The results confirm those in corresponding columns 2 and 3, and suggest that our main estimates
are not driven by the choice of a particular time period or reference period within a workers’ career
as baseline.

Appendix 2: Career Instability and Mortality
         In addition to average quarterly earnings, other career outcomes such as the degree of
employment or earnings stability may also be related to health and mortality. We have considered
alternative measures of career instability, including the standard deviation of log earnings, the
number of quarters worked, the number of large declines in quarterly earnings (drops in earnings of
more than two standard deviations), the number of transitions into non-employment, the number of
job changes, and the number of long non-employment spells. Workers in the main mass-layoff
sample experienced important variation in earnings over the baseline period, as shown by the
standard deviation and the high fraction of workers with large drops in earnings. Although by
construction this sample has very few transitions to non-employment or job changes, both earnings
and employment instability become very relevant for the broader samples in the remaining

47 The fourth column shows the results for a very broad sample that includes all workers who were ever present in the
UI system between 1974 and 1979. The effects of log average earnings are even lower for this sample. These results
partly derive from the fact that the standard deviation of log average earnings is much higher in the broader samples (see
Table 4); i.e., a two standard deviation increase in log average earnings is of much more similar magnitude across
samples. This also hints at the fact that for the broader sample, on average fewer observations are used to calculate
average quarterly earnings. Thus, part of the difference will be due to attenuation bias from classical measurement error,
too. In addition, it may be that for low-income workers, average earnings are a worse approximation of the actual
amount of resources due to greater importance of second earners, family ties, and government subsidy programs.
48 The effects of quarters worked are positive for the sample of older high-attachment workers in column 5 and

insignificant for more workers with some labor force attachment in column 6.


                                                           46
columns.49 For these samples, the standard deviation of log earnings is substantially higher and a
larger fraction of workers experience job changes, transitions to non-employment, and longer non-
employment spells.
         To estimate the correlation of these measures with mortality, we present results from logit-
models as shown in equation (1). These are shown for different samples and specifications in Table
4 and Appendix Table 6. All models include age dummies, year dummies, and log average earnings
as controls, and all results are robust to inclusion of measures of the number of quarters worked.
The main result of Table 4 is that the effect of the standard deviation of log earnings on mortality is
positive, non-linear (the effect is positive and decreasing and well-captured by a log-specification, see
Figure 4), and substantial. The results in column 1 of the first panel in Table 4 suggest that a 20%
increase in the standard deviation of earnings leads to an increase in the risk of death of about 4%.
In the pooled model, this corresponds to the effect of a 10% decline in average earnings. The
estimates are also robust to inclusions of other measures career shocks such as quarters worked,
non-employment transitions, or the presence and frequency of large earnings drops.
         Given it is calculated over a relatively short period of time (six years), we interpret the
standard deviation of log-earnings as a measure of the transitory component ( u it ) of the earnings
process in equation (A1). We believe this to be a reasonable interpretation of the short-term
earnings risk an individual faces. This interpretation is helped by the fact that the effect of the
standard deviation is robust to the inclusion of indicators for the presence of large earnings shocks
and non-employment transitions. Thus, we interpret the results in Table 4 to imply that the
variability a worker faces in the labor market is negatively correlated with long-term health
outcomes. Clearly, less healthy workers are likely to have higher standard deviations in earnings.
However, the fact that the result also attains for very stable workers and is largely unaffected by the
inclusion of log average earnings as additional control suggests it may not be fully explained by
omitted variable bias. Reverse causation is not an issue given that the follow up period begins seven
years after the baseline period at which the standard deviation is calculated.
         Table 4 also shows results for other measures of career instability and more broadly defined
samples of workers. The effect of the standard deviation is present across all samples; it is smaller
for the broader sample, partly due to the fact that the range of values the standard deviation takes is
much higher (such that a change of two standard deviations would have a more similar effect).

49Note that some mobility is possible even for those workers due to temporary layoffs and short breaks in the
employment spell.


                                                          47
Similarly, its effect is essentially unaffected if it is calculated over a much longer time period. Not
surprisingly, for the main high-attachment sample, the only other significant effect is the presence of
large earnings declines. However, this effect fades for the sample with the long baseline in the
bottom of the table. For the broader samples, transitions to non-employment tend to raise mortality
even when controlling for the incidence of large earnings declines. This result stands in contrast to
the sometimes beneficial effect of the amount of time spend in non-employment. Once we control
for the number of times individuals transit to non-employment, the incidence of job changes has no
effect for either sample.
        Overall, we interpret these results to signify that the interaction between individual health
and career outcomes is potentially complex, and goes beyond a simple correlation between earnings
and mortality. In particular, it appears that various measures capturing the degree of earnings and
employment stability have robust effect on mortality, too. It appears that workers with unstable
careers die younger. To address part of the concerns of omitted variable bias afflicting these
correlations, in the next section we study the short and long-term mortality effect of an explicit
shock to workers careers – an involuntary job loss in the course of mass-layoffs at the plant level.




                                                    48
Table 1: Sample Characteristics in Baseline Period (1974-1979) by Displacement Status


                                         Work Every Year 1980-86               No Work Restriction 1980-86
                                               Workers                                 Workers
                                               Displaced     Non-                     Displaced      Non-
                                        All    at Mass- Displaced               All    at Mass- Displaced
                                      Workers   Layoff     Workers            Workers   Layoff     Workers
Sample Size                            15377        4802         10575          21323        7190        14133
Age in 1979                             37.54       37.02         37.77          37.36       37.09        37.49
                                       (7.014)     (7.295)       (6.870)        (7.114)     (7.406)      (6.956)
Log Average Quarterly                   8.75        8.70          8.77           8.74        8.70         8.76
Earnings in 1974-79                    (0.334)     (0.337)       (0.330)        (0.358)     (0.346)      (0.362)
Log Std. Dev. of Log Quarterly         -1.678      -1.545        -1.738         -1.638      -1.484        -1.716
Earnings 1974-79                       (0.711)     (0.749)       (0.685)        (0.731)     (0.768)      (0.699)
Percent Change in Quarterly             0.468       0.580         0.418          0.517       0.682        0.434
Earnings 1974-79                       (5.645)     (7.274)       (4.729)        (5.769)     (7.733)      (4.453)
Number of Quarters in Non-              0.45        0.54          0.40           0.48        0.58         0.43
Employment 1974-79                     (0.913)     (1.031)       (0.851)        (0.978)     (1.102)      (0.905)
Establishment Employment                8608         9040         8412          8564         10459       7599
Size in 1979                           (13649)     (15001)      (12984)        (13950)      (16272)     (12496)
Fraction Durable Goods                  0.304       0.365         0.277          0.298       0.350        0.271
Manufacturing (Non Steel)              (0.460)     (0.481)       (0.448)        (0.457)     (0.477)      (0.445)
Fraction Steel Industries               0.177       0.259         0.140          0.180       0.291        0.123
                                       (0.382)     (0.438)       (0.347)        (0.384)     (0.454)      (0.328)
Fraction Other Manufacturing            0.195       0.184         0.200          0.191       0.165        0.204
                                       (0.396)     (0.388)       (0.400)        (0.393)     (0.371)      (0.403)
Fraction East PA                        0.565       0.522         0.584          0.561       0.472        0.607
                                       (0.496)     (0.500)       (0.493)        (0.496)     (0.499)      (0.489)
Log Average Quarterly                   8.735       8.421         8.871          8.607       8.187        8.792
Earnings in 1987-91                    (0.876)     (1.064)       (0.740)        (1.067)     (1.307)      (0.880)
Log Std. Dev. of Log Quarterly         -1.396       -1.199        -1.481        -1.344       -1.120      -1.440
Earnings in 1987-91                    (0.737)     (0.758)       (0.712)        (0.763)     (0.792)      (0.730)
Number of Quarters in Non-
                                         2.09        3.32           1.53          4.12        6.50         2.91
Employment in 1987-91
                                        (4.568)     (5.900)       (3.678)       (6.904)      (8.126)     (5.829)
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. The samples only include male workers in stable employment 1974-1979
at an employer of size 50 in 1979.
Table 2: Mortality Rates in Different Periods by Displacement Status
Panel A: Work Every Year 1980-86
                                                                                 Difference Adjusted For
                                                                                                     Age and Base
                                                                                    Age and Base      Period and
                                          Non-                                         Period         Change in
Time                   Displaced        Displaced      Simple                       Earnings and     Earnings and
Period     All Workers Workers          Workers       Difference        Age          Firm Size        Firm Size
 87-02        5.720          6.204         5.502         0.702          0.974           0.757            -0.055
             (0.165)        (0.308)       (0.195)       (0.365)        (0.364)         (0.364)           (0.369)
 87-91        3.641          4.287         3.348         0.939          1.095           0.891             0.076
             (0.218)        (0.424)       (0.252)       (0.493)        (0.493)         (0.493)           (0.498)
 92-96        6.562          7.063         6.336         0.727          0.996           0.775             -0.011
             (0.270)        (0.503)       (0.320)       (0.596)        (0.595)         (0.595)           (0.603)
 97-02        8.047          8.753         7.729         1.024          1.541           1.209             0.537
             (0.334)        (0.626)       (0.394)       (0.740)        (0.740)         (0.738)           (0.747)

Notes: Deaths per 1000 per year. Standard errors in parentheses. Displaced Workers left jobs in a year in which their
former firms' employment was 30% or more below its 1974-1979 peak. Nondisplaced workers remain at their 1979
firm through 1986.

Panel B: No Work Restriction
                                                                                 Difference Adjusted For
                                                                                                     Age and Base
                                                                                    Age and Base      Period and
                                          Non-                                         Period         Change in
Time                   Displaced        Displaced      Simple                       Earnings and     Earnings and
Period     All Workers Workers          Workers       Difference        Age          Firm Size        Firm Size
 87-02        6.185          7.031         5.758         1.273          1.384           1.004             0.294
             (0.146)        (0.269)       (0.173)       (0.319)        (0.319)         (0.319)           (0.341)
 80-86        2.465          3.996         1.677         2.320          2.344           1.978            -0.147
             (0.128)        (0.279)       (0.130)       (0.307)        (0.307)         (0.307)           (0.152)
 87-91        4.008          4.946         3.533         1.412          1.468           1.091             0.323
             (0.194)        (0.372)       (0.224)       (0.434)        (0.434)         (0.434)           (0.457)
 92-96        6.981          7.776         6.562         1.249          1.348           0.966             0.416
             (0.237)        (0.425)       (0.284)       (0.517)        (0.516)         (0.515)           (0.558)
 97-02        8.699          9.527         8.284         1.243          1.481           1.096             0.543
             (0.296)        (0.536)       (0.354)       (0.642)        (0.640)         (0.640)           (0.694)
Notes: Deaths per 1000 per year. Standard errors in parentheses. Displaced Workers left jobs in a year in which their
former firms' employment was 30% or more below its 1974-1979 peak.
Table 3: Impact of Layoff During Mass-Layoff on Log-Odds of Death for Various Samples, Follow-Up Periods, and Specifications, Workers in Stable
Employment 1974-1979, Employment Size 50 in 1979
                                                                              Work At                                                       Work At
                                                No Work Work Every                           No Work         No Work Work Every                           No Work
       Mass-Layoff Sample:                                                    Least 3                                                       Least 3
                                               Restriction Year                             Restriction     Restriction Year                             Restriction
                                                                               Years                                                         Years
       Follow-Up Period:                         1980-02        1987-02        1987-02        1987-02         1980-02        1987-02        1987-02        1987-02
       Cohort Range:                                               Born     1930-59                                             Born     1920-59
Specification:                                     (1)            (3)            (5)            (7)              (2)            (4)            (6)            (8)

 (A) Baseline Model with Average                  0.275          0.145          0.166          0.170            0.154          0.089          0.122          0.111
     and Std. Dev. of Earnings in
     1974-79                                     (0.041)        (0.056)        (0.046)        (0.045)          (0.025)        (0.039)        (0.028)        (0.027)

 (B) Model in Row (A) with 1-Digit                0.262          0.129          0.145          0.149            0.139          0.076          0.104          0.092
     Industry Fixed Effects
                                                 (0.043)        (0.058)        (0.048)        (0.047)          (0.026)        (0.040)        (0.029)        (0.028)

 (C) Model in Row (A) with 1-Digit                0.247          0.102          0.117          0.129            0.134          0.066          0.100          0.089
     Industry Effects and Added
     Career Variables                            (0.044)        (0.060)        (0.050)        (0.049)          (0.026)        (0.041)        (0.030)        (0.029)

 (D) Model in Row (A) with Industry               0.262          0.127          0.144          0.149            0.143          0.077          0.105          0.094
     Effects, Career*Age
     Interactions                                (0.043)        (0.058)        (0.048)        (0.047)          (0.026)        (0.040)        (0.029)        (0.028)

 (E) Linear Probability Model                     0.0014        0.0008          0.0010         0.0010           0.0015        0.0008          0.0014        0.0013
     (Specification Row B)
                                                (0.00027)      (0.00035)      (0.00032)      (0.00033)        (0.00031)      (0.00042)      (0.00039)     (0.00039)

 (F) Linear Probability Model                     0.0019        0.0008         0.0006         0.0006            0.0015         0.0010         0.0013       0.0008
     (Spedificattion Row A) with
     Firm Effects                               (0.00051)      (0.00054)      (0.00051)      (0.00054)        (0.00053)      (0.00075)      (0.00059)     (0.00059)

     Percentage Effect For Linear
 (G)                                              0.274          0.135          0.150          0.155            0.148          0.085          0.114          0.101
     Probability Model in Row (E)
     Percentage Effect For Linear
 (H)                                              0.369          0.131          0.091          0.090            0.147          0.102          0.106         0.066
     Model in Row (F)
       Observations                              478,664        237,122        319,358        327,775         681,614        301,531        442,643        458,910
Notes: Dependent variable is the log odds of death in a year between 1980 or 1987 and 2002. The entries in the tables are the coefficient on a dummy for job loss
during mass-layoff. See Figure 3 and the Appendix for marginal effects. All models include year effects and a quartic in age as well as the indicated variables in the
column "Specification." In all models, the average of quarterly earnings from 1974-79 is entered in logs; the standard deviation is of the log quarterly earnings, and
also entered in logs. The additional "Career Variables" in Rows (C) to (F) are growth in quarterly earnings from 1974-79 and the total time spent in non-
employment in 1974-79. Row (D) interacts the log of average earnings and the log of the standard deviation of log earnings with five dummies for age at layoff.
Table 4: Coefficients on Career Variables in Extended Log-Odds of Death Model, Various Samples, Workers in Stable Employment 1974-
1979, Employment Size 50 in 1979
                                                                    Work At                                                    Work At
                                       No Work Work Every                         No Work         No Work Work Every                       No Work
Mass-Layoff Sample:                                                 Least 3                                                    Least 3
                                      Restriction Year                           Restriction     Restriction Year                         Restriction
                                                                     Years                                                      Years
Follow-Up Period:                       1980-02       1987-02        1987-02       1987-02         1980-02       1987-02        1987-02    1987-02
Cohort Range:                                            Born     1930-59                                           Born     1920-59
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)         (8)

Displacement-Dummy                       0.247          0.102         0.117          0.129           0.135         0.066         0.100       0.089
                                        (0.044)        (0.060)       (0.050)        (0.049)         (0.026)       (0.041)       (0.030)     (0.029)
Log(Average Quarterly
                                        -0.536         -0.491        -0.532         -0.543          -0.474        -0.431        -0.465      -0.472
Earnings 1974-79)
                                        (0.064)        (0.091)       (0.072)        (0.070)         (0.036)       (0.058)       (0.041)     (0.039)
Log(Std. Dev. of Log Quarterly
                                         0.130          0.144         0.109          0.104           0.121         0.107         0.097       0.103
Earnings 1974-79)
                                        (0.035)        (0.046)       (0.039)        (0.038)         (0.020)       (0.032)       (0.023)     (0.022)
Number of Quarters in Non-
                                        -0.123         -0.122        -0.097         -0.094          -0.091        -0.077        -0.070      -0.067
Employment 1974-79
                                        (0.034)        (0.047)       (0.037)        (0.036)         (0.020)       (0.033)       (0.023)     (0.022)
Percent Change in Quarterly
                                        -0.044         -0.021        -0.026         -0.033          -0.128         0.044        -0.064       -0.101
Earnings 1974-79
                                        (0.062)        (0.084)       (0.069)        (0.067)         (0.038)       (0.062)       (0.044)     (0.042)

1-Digit Dummies for 1979
                                          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
Industry
Observations                            437,420       219,284        291,923       299,450         631,411       280,872        409,692    424,765
Notes: These are coefficients on covariates included in Model C of Table 4. Please refer to Notes of Table 4 for further explanations.
Table 5: Effect of Job Loss at Mass-Layoff By Time Since Displacement, No Work Restsriction 1980-1986, Alternative Age-
Groups
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)

                                                           Born 1930-59                               Born 1920-59
Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)                  -0.458        -0.463        -0.463        -0.413         -0.413        -0.414
                                                (0.057)       (0.057)       (0.057)       (0.032)        (0.032)       (0.032)
Log(Standard Deviation of Log                    0.143         0.146         0.146          0.135         0.139         0.139
Quarterly Earnings)                             (0.029)       (0.029)       (0.029)        (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.017)
Displacement-Dummy                               0.250                                     0.135
                                                (0.043)                                   (0.026)
Displacement Year                                              0.983         0.982                        0.297         0.297
                                                              (0.119)       (0.119)                      (0.072)       (0.071)
Displacement Year + 1                                          0.688         0.685                        0.490         0.489
                                                              (0.189)       (0.189)                      (0.099)       (0.099)
Displacement Year + 2-3                                        0.555         0.549                        0.243         0.240
                                                              (0.137)       (0.137)                      (0.077)       (0.077)
Displacement Year + 4-5                                        0.249         0.240                        0.053         0.048
                                                              (0.139)       (0.138)                      (0.076)       (0.075)
Displacement Year + 6-10                                       0.179                                      0.119
                                                              (0.081)                                    (0.045)
Displacement Year + 11-15                                     0.065                                       0.047
                                                              (0.07)                                     (0.041)
Displacement Year + 16+                                        0.153                                      0.142
                                                              (0.077)                                    (0.047)
Displacement Year + 6+                                                       0.127                                      0.098
                                                                            (0.048)                                    (0.029)
Observations                                   478,664        478,664       478,664       681,614        681,614       681,614
Notes: Samples are workers in stable jobs from 1974-79 with an employer of over 50 workers. Dependent variable is the log odds of
death. Columns (1)-(3) include workers born 1930-59. Columns (4)-(6) inclue workers born 1920-59. All models include industry
fixed effects.
Table 6: Effect of Mass-Layoff at Establishment Level on Mortality and Earnings Pooling
Movers and Stayers, No Work Restriction, Born 1920+ (Intent-To-Treat Estimates)
Mass Layoff Definition:                30% Drop Relative to                  30% Drop Relative to
                                      Employment in 1974-79                 Employment in Past Year
                                     Model 1            Model 2              Model 1            Model 2
Panel A: Average Effect on Hazard of Death
1987-2002                              0.046              0.007                0.066              0.027
                                      (0.025)            (0.027)              (0.029)            (0.031)
1980-2002                              0.021              -0.019               0.067              0.029
                                      (0.028)            (0.030)              (0.032)            (0.034)
Panel B: Dynamic Effect on Hazard of Death, 1980-2002
t-4 to t-3                             0.197              0.192                0.066              0.027
                                      (0.133)            (0.133)              (0.174)            (0.174)
t-2 to t-1                             0.162              0.142                0.166              0.139
                                      (0.098)            (0.099)              (0.117)            (0.118)
Year of Mass Layoff (= t)              0.386              0.367                0.397              0.372
                                      (0.104)            (0.105)              (0.133)            (0.133)
t+1 to t+10                            0.056              0.035                0.033              0.007
                                      (0.038)            (0.040)              (0.044)            (0.045)
t+11 to t+22                           0.047              0.021                0.106              0.078
                                      (0.033)            (0.035)              (0.037)            (0.038)
Panel C: Average Effect on Annual Earnings
1987-2002                              -0.181             -0.103              -0.256             -0.180
                                      (0.003)            (0.003)              (0.004)            (0.004)
1980-2002                              -0.241             -0.140              -0.329             -0.230
                                      (0.006)            (0.006)              (0.007)            (0.007)
Panel D: Dynamic Effect on Annual Earnings, 1980-2002
t-4 to t-3                             0.005              0.043                0.009              0.073
                                      (0.007)            (0.007)              (0.008)            (0.008)
t-2 to t-1                             -0.119            -0.052               -0.216             -0.143
                                      (0.006)            (0.006)              (0.007)            (0.007)
Year of Mass Layoff (= t)             -0.272              -0.214              -0.432             -0.366
                                      (0.007)            (0.007)              (0.010)            (0.010)
t+1 to t+10                           -0.290             -0.230               -0.364             -0.301
                                      (0.004)            (0.004)              (0.004)            (0.004)
t+11 to t+22                           -0.141             -0.137              -0.120             -0.108
                                      (0.026)            (0.026)              (0.055)            (0.054)

Notes: Entries are coefficients on establishment-level mass-layoff dummy in logit model of the event of
dying in a given year. All regressions include a quartic in age, year effects, and the log of the average and
standard deviation of annual earnings in 1974-79 as control. In addition, Model 2 includes six dummies
for 1979 industry. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 7: Mortality Impact of Job Displacment by Age, Industry, Earnings, Region of Job Loss,
Workers Born 1920-1959
                                                   No Work                                  Work At Least 3
Work Restriction in 1980-1986                                        Work Every Year
                                                  Restriction                                   Years
Period of Death Follow-Up                         1980-2002               1987-2002           1987-2002
Displacement-Dummy                                    0.139                 0.076                  0.197
                                                     (0.026)               (0.040)                (0.031)
Displacement aged 30-39                               0.313                  0.181                 0.172
                                                     (0.090)               (0.130)                (0.103)
Displacement aged 40-49                               0.266                 0.094                  0.144
                                                     (0.058)               (0.082)                (0.066)
Displacement aged 50-59                               0.219                 0.071                  0.141
                                                     (0.034)               (0.055)                (0.040)
Displacement aged 60-69                              -0.005                 0.046                  0.044
                                                     (0.036)               (0.066)                (0.041)
Displaced in Non-Manufacturing                        0.068                 -0.071                 0.255
Goods Sector                                         (0.124)               (0.213)                (0.151)
Displaced in Non-Durables                             0.079                -0.036                  0.071
Manufacturing                                        (0.056)               (0.086)                (0.064)
Displaced in Steel Manufacturing                      0.136                 0.137                  0.202
                                                     (0.057)               (0.088)                (0.072)
Displaced in Other Durables                           0.191                 0.173                  0.288
Manufacturing                                        (0.044)               (0.068)                (0.054)
Displaced in Transportation,                          0.248                 0.143                  0.243
Construction, Public Utilities                       (0.086)               (0.137)                (0.090)
Displaced in Trade                                   -0.074                -0.239                  0.040
                                                     (0.097)               (0.152)                (0.096)
Displaced in Services                                 0.220                 0.108                  0.285
                                                     (0.105)               (0.185)                (0.114)
Displaced and Mean Quarterly                          0.132                 0.027                  0.225
Earnings 1974-79 < 25th Percentile                   (0.043)               (0.070)                (0.049)
Displaced and Mean Qrt. Earnings                      0.153                 0.028                  0.198
1974-79 >25th Perc. and < Median                     (0.040)               (0.070)                (0.044)
Displaced and Mean Qrt. Earnings                      0.172                 0.100                  0.245
1974-79 >Median and < 75th Perc.                     (0.040)               (0.068)                (0.042)
Displaced and Mean Qrt. Earnings                      0.101                 0.144                  0.128
1974-79 >75th Perc.                                  (0.043)               (0.070)                (0.047)
Displaced in West Pennsylvania                        0.095                 0.027                  0.191
                                                     (0.037)               (0.060)                (0.045)
Displaced in East Pennsylvania                        0.180                  0.115                 0.202
                                                     (0.034)               (0.053)                (0.040)
Notes: Samples are workers born 1920-59 in stable jobs from 1974-79 with an employer of over 50
workers. Dependent variable is the log odds of death. Entries are coefficient estimates from the logit-
model. All models include year fixed effects, industry fixed effects, a quartic in age, the log of average
quarterly earnings in 1974-79, and the log of the standard deviation of quarterly earnings in 1974-79.
Table 8: Impact of Job Displacement at Mass-Layoff on Life Expectancy, Alternative Samples (May Upd


                                                                    Life             Life       Lost Years of
                                                                Expectancy       Expectancy       Life due
                                                                 given not          given          to Job
             Data                     Model             Age      Displaced        Displaced     Displacement

(1) Stable job 1974-79                                   30         75.86           73.79             2.06
    No restrictions on                                   35         75.47           73.38             2.09
    earnings 1980-86         Displacement by age         40         75.64           74.21             1.43
    non mass layoff          at displacement in 10       45         75.90           74.40             1.49
    separators included      year increments plus        50         76.28           75.30             0.98
                             five time since
   Estimated 1980-2002       displacment categories      55         76.85           75.74             1.11

(2) Stable job 1974-79       Displacement by age         30         75.96           74.21             1.75
    No restrictions on       at displacement in 10       35         76.07           74.34             1.74
    earnings 1980-86         year increments             40         76.25           75.23             1.02
    non mass layoff                                      45         76.51           75.51             1.00
    separators included                                  50         76.90           75.74             1.16

   Estimated 1987-2002                                   55         77.46           76.36             1.10

(3) Stable job 1974-79       Displacement by age         30         76.21           74.60             1.61
    earnings three years     at displacement in 10       35         76.32           74.73             1.59
    1980-86                  year increments             40         76.50           75.42             1.07
    non mass layoff                                      45         76.76           75.71             1.05
    separators included                                  50         77.15           76.05             1.10

   Estimated 1987-2002                                   55         77.71           76.67             1.04

(4) Stable job 1974-79       Displacement by age         30         76.47           74.75             1.72
    earnings every year      at displacement in 10       35         76.57           74.87             1.70
    1980-86                  year increments             40         76.73           75.87             0.86
    no non mass layoff                                   45         76.98           76.13             0.84
    separators                                           50         77.34           76.41             0.93

   Estimated 1987-2002                                   55         77.87           76.99             0.89
Notes: All models include log of mean earnings, log of standard deviation of log quarterly earnings, 1-digit
industry dummies, and a linear age effect. The numbers are based on a linear extrapolation in age for cohorts
still alive.
Table 9: Impact of Mass-Layoff on Career Outcomes

Panel A: stable job 1974-79; born 1930-59; earnings every year through 1991 (17,576 workers)

                                                                           Years since displacement
      Outcome Measure                                           -1 to -2      0 to 2    3 to 6    7 to 11

      ln average earnings                                       -0.047        -0.459    -0.266    -0.195
                                                                (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)
      Quarterly employment probability                          -0.002        -0.069    -0.013     0.002
                                                                (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      Absolute value of earnings growth                          0.008         0.309     0.065    -0.008
                                                                (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)
      Transitions to nonemployment per year                      0.003         0.036     0.007     0.000
                                                                (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      Probability of job change in year                                        0.404     0.124     0.057
                                                                              (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)
      Probability of industry change in year                                   0.253     0.026    -0.024
                                                                              (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)
      Probability of county of employer change in year                         0.195     0.028    -0.010
                                                                              (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.003)


Panel B: stable job 1974-79; born 1920-59; earnings every year 1974-79 and 1987-91 (24,520 workers)

                                                                           Years since displacement
      Outcome Measure                                           -1 to -2      0 to 2    3 to 6    7 to 11

      ln average earnings                                       -0.015        -0.454    -0.325    -0.240
                                                                (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.004)
      Quarterly employment probability                           0.011        -0.123    -0.043     0.009
                                                                (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      Absolute value of earnings growth                         -0.006         0.305     0.097     0.013
                                                                (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)
      Transitions to nonemployment per year                      0.003         0.040     0.010     0.004
                                                                (0.000)       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
      Probability of job change in year                                        0.403     0.141     0.067
                                                                              (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
      Probability of industry change in year                                   0.272     0.057    -0.022
                                                                              (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)
      Probability of county of employer change in year                         0.221     0.053    -0.020
                                                                              (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)
Table 10: Mortality Increases by Career Outcomes after Job Loss at Individual and Cell Level
                                                       No Work Restriction,          Work Every Year 1980-1986,
      Coefficient on Covariate in Logit                   Cohort>1930                      Cohort>1930
      Model of Annual Mortality                                        Only                              Only
Model Hazard:                                      All Workers       Displaced       All Workers       Displaced

         Dummy for Job Loss During                    -0.013              --             0.010              --
  (1)
         Mass-Layoff                                  (0.046)             --            (0.063)             --

         Percent Change in Long-Term                   -1.169          -0.997           -0.706           -0.567
         Average Earnings                             (0.069)          (0.111)          (0.142)          (0.199)

         Dummy for Job Loss During                    -0.073              --            -0.079              --
  (2)
         Mass-Layoff                                  (0.059)             --            (0.066)             --

         Change in Individual Long-Term               -0.345           -0.421           -0.479           -0.422
         Average Earnings                             (0.111)          (0.188)          (0.152)          (0.231)

         At Least One Transition to Non-               0.065           -0.095            0.067           -0.076
         Employment                                   (0.059)          (0.109)          (0.065)          (0.112)

                                                       No Work Restriction,          Work Every Year 1980-1986,
Linear Probability Models: Average
                                                          Cohort>1930                      Cohort>1930
Earnings Change Predicted by
Interaction of MLF and Cell-Effects                 Individual                        Individual
                                                      Level          Cell Level         Level          Cell Level
         Cells of Age in 1979 and Avg.                -0.0028          -0.0030          -0.0033          -0.0021
  (3)
         Earnings in 1974-79                          (0.0001)         (0.0007)         (0.0003)         (0.0011)

         Cells of Age in 1979 and Industry            -0.0028          -0.0027          -0.0033          -0.0021
  (4)
         in 1979                                      (0.0001)         (0.0007)         (0.0002)         (0.0012)

         Cells of Avg. Earnings in 1974-79            -0.0028          -0.0025          -0.0033          -0.0013
  (5)
         and Industry in 1979                         (0.0001)         (0.0005)         (0.0003)         (0.0009)
         Cells of Avg. Age in 1979 and                -0.0028          -0.0026          -0.0033          -0.0016
  (6)
         Local Unemployment in 1979                   (0.0001)         (0.0005)         (0.0003)         (0.0010)
Notes: The models in the first half of the table show coefficients for logit models of the annual hazard of death contr
dummies, a quartic in age, pre-mass layoff career outcomes (log average quarterly earnings, log of standard deviation o
number of quarters in non-employment, average quarterly growth in earnings, all measured from 1974-79), as well as
from 1974-79 to 1987-91 (percent change in the standard deviation of log quarterly earnings, change in the average gr
The models in the second half of the table report coefficients on linear probability models of the hazard of death con
dummies, a quartic in age, pre-mass layoff career outcomes.
Figure 1: Estimate of the Long-term Earnings Decline Due to Job Displacement at Mass-Layoffs
Using Jacobson,Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993)'s Mass-Layoff Sample


                       0.1


                        0


                      -0.1
     Log-Difference




                      -0.2


                      -0.3


                      -0.4


                      -0.5


                      -0.6
                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1     2    3    4      5   6   7   8    9    10     11
                                                      Years Since Displacement

Notes: Solid line represent coefficient estimates of the interaction of year effects and displacement dummies
in a regression model of log quarterly earnings including year fixed effects, person fixed effects, and a quartic
for age. Two standard error bands are drawn around main effects.
Figure 2: Percentage Effect of Job Displacement at Mass-Layoff on Mortality Rate by Time Since
Layoff (Sample of Men in Stable Employment 1974-1979, Born 1930-1959)


    1.5

  1.25

      1

  0.75

    0.5

  0.25

      0

 -0.25

   -0.5
          0      2        4        6      8      10     12    14              16       18      20        22
                                         Years since Displacement
Notes: Solid line represents coefficients of log-odds model shown in Table 4, column (3). Dashed lines
represent two-standard errors bands.
Figure 3: Predicted Effects of Job Loss at Mass-Layoff on Mortality and Average Earnings
on Mortality by Age
Panel A: Mortality by Mass-Layoff Status [Average Mean 1974-1979 Quarterly Earnings]



    0.07

    0.06                     Movers (Mass-Layoff)
                             Stayers
    0.05

    0.04

    0.03

    0.02

    0.01

          0
              40     45         50          55          60         65          70
                                             Age

Panel B: Mortality by Average, 25th, 75th Percentile of Mean 1974-19 79 Quarterly Earnings


   0.06

   0.05
                              Average
                              10th Percentile
   0.04
                              90th Percentile
   0.03

   0.02

   0.01

      0
          40        45          50          55          60          65          70
                                              Age
Figure 4: Mortality Gradient in Average 1974-1979 Earnings and Standard Deviation: Men
in Stable Employment 1974-1986
Panel A: Correlation between Average Quarterly Earnings and Mortality, Alternative
Specifications


                  0.0025
                  0.0023
                                                                               Dummies for Earnings Categories
                  0.0021
                                                                               Log-Earnings
                  0.0019
                                                                               Quartic in Earnings
 Mortality Rate




                  0.0017
                  0.0015
                  0.0013
                  0.0011
                  0.0009
                  0.0007
                  0.0005
                       3000                     4000     5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000                       11000   12000
                                                            Average Quarterly Earnings in 1974-1979

Panel B: Correlation between Standar Deviation of Log Quarterly Earnings and Mortality,
Alternative Specifications

                                     -2.2
                                            0      0.1      0.2       0.3     0.4      0.5    0.6       0.7     0.8     0.9
                                     -2.3

                                     -2.4

                                     -2.5
                    Mortality Rate




                                     -2.6

                                     -2.7

                                     -2.8
                                                                                    Dummy-Specification
                                     -2.9
                                                                                    Log-Specification
                                      -3
                                                                  Standard Deviation of Log Earnings
Figure 5: The Effect of Earnings Changes at Mass Layoff on Mortality at Individual Level
and at Cell Level
Panel A: Differences in Mortality by Deciles of Changes in Average Earnings, Workers Born in 1920,
Alternative Samples

                                           0.1


                                                   0
    Marginal Effect on Death Rate




                                     -0.1


                                    -0.2


                                    -0.3                              No Work Restriction
                                                                      Work 1980-86
                                    -0.4                              Some Work 1980-86


                                    -0.5
                                                       1       2        3        4       5       6        7       8      9   10
                                                                      Decile of Earnings Change (First Decile Omitted)

Notes: Coefficients on dummies for deciles of changes in average earnings from 1974-79 to 1980-86 in a logit model
of death. Other variables include year effects, a quartic in age, and the average and standard deviation of earnings
1974-79.


                                                           Panel B: Mortality and Earnings Effects of Mass-Layoff By Cells
                                                           By Industry and Local UR at Job Loss (35 Cells)
       Differences in Death Rate/Regression Line
          -.01 -.005      0     .005   .01




                                                   -.8               -.6          -.4             -.2        -5.55e-17            .2
                                                                     Average Percent Differences in Annual Earnings
                                                                   Differences in Death Rate               Regression Line
                                                   Notes: Birth Year>=1930, Stable Workers
Figure 6: PDV Earnings Losses and Life-Expectancy By Five Year Age-Group, Alternative PDV
Estimates

                                12                                                                2.5



                                10
                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                        Loss in Years of Life-Expectancy
 Loss in PDV Earnings ($1000)




                                8
                                                                                                  1.5

                                6

                                                                                                  1
                                               PDV1
                                4

                                               PDV2
                                                                                                  0.5
                                2
                                               Life Expectancy


                                0                                                                 0
                                     25   30     35         40           45   50   55        60
                                                                 Age-Group

Notes: PDV 1 is based on 10-year age-interactions with job loss dummy, PDV 2 is based on 5-year
interactions with job loss dummy.
Appendix Table 1: Sample Statistics by Alternate Years and Samples for Workers in Stable Job 1974-
1979 at Employer with at least 50 Employees
Panel A: Broad Sample (No Work Restriction 1980-1986)

                                                                   Average
Year of                                                                    Fraction
        Average                   Fraction Sample Mortality Number Quart.
Follow-         Min. Age Max. Age                                           Mass-
         Age                      Age >=60  Size   Rate      Dead Earnings
  Up                                                                        Layoff
                                                                   1974-79

  1981       39          22         51         0.00       21655      0.0021       45         6663       0.352
  1983       41          24         53         0.00       21567      0.0026       57         6663       0.351
  1985       43          26         55         0.00       21456      0.0028       60         6665       0.350
  1987       45          28         57         0.00       21323      0.0040       86         6664       0.348
  1989       47          30         59         0.00       21158      0.0036       76         6664       0.347
  1991       49          32         61         0.09      20986       0.0041       87         6663       0.347
  1993       51          34         63         0.16      20788       0.0059       122        6664       0.346
  1995       53          36         65         0.24      20534       0.0075       155        6664       0.346
  1997       55          38         67         0.31      20206       0.0084       169        6664       0.345
  1999       57          40         69         0.39       19894      0.0082       164        6667       0.345
  2001       59          42         71         0.46       19536      0.0111       216        6668       0.344

Panel B: Original Mass-Layoff Sample (Some Earnings each Year 1980-86)
                                                                   Average
Year of                                                                    Fraction
        Average                   Fraction Sample Mortality Number Quart.
Follow-         Min. Age Max. Age                                           Mass-
         Age                      Age >=60  Size   Rate      Dead Earnings
  Up                                                                        Layoff
                                                                   1974-79

  1987       46          28         57         0.00       15532      0.003        53         6707       0.319
  1989       47          30         59         0.00       15430      0.003        53         6705       0.318
  1991       49          32         61         0.08       15309      0.004        57         6703       0.318
  1993       51          34         63         0.16       15182      0.006        87         6704       0.318
  1995       53          36         65         0.24       15009      0.007        111        6703       0.317
  1997       55          38         67         0.32       14777      0.008        116        6704       0.317
  1999       57          40         69         0.40       14570      0.008        119        6707       0.318
  2001       59          42         71         0.47       14323      0.010        147        6705       0.317
Notes: Both sample include only male workers working at a stable job in 1974-1979 at firms with at least 50
employees in 1979. The mass-layoff sample in Panel B further requires some employment every year 1980-86
and only includes workers that either experience a mass layoff in the period 1980-86 or who remain with the
present employer for that period. Both samples limit workers to birth cohorts 1930 to 1959. Further details on
sample specifications in the text.
Appendix Table 2: Sample Statistics by Alternate Years and Samples for Workers in
Stable Job 1974-1979 at Employer with at least 50 Employees


Panel A: Broad Sample (No Work Restriction 1980-1986)

                         Absolute Difference                          Percent Change to Baseline
   Age       Average         25th         50th         75th      Average    25th     50th      75th

    40         0.0002       0.0002       0.0002       0.0002        0.13         0.12         0.13       0.11
    50         0.0004       0.0005       0.0004       0.0004        0.12         0.14         0.13       0.11
    60         0.0013       0.0014       0.0013       0.0013        0.13         0.13         0.13       0.11
    70         0.0036       0.0038       0.0036       0.0034        0.13         0.13         0.14       0.11
Notes: Probabilities predicted using coefficients from the logit model of row A, column 1 in Table 3.

Panel B: Fitted Probability of Death by Age and Earnings Groups
                                          Mean Quarterly 1974-79 Earnings
                                                                                                         25th
   Age                    Average         10th         25th         50th         75th         90th      minus
                                                                                                         75th
                           $6,416       $4,314        $5,257       $6,451       $7,828       $9,370

    40                      0.0016       0.0016       0.0017       0.0015       0.0018       0.0014     -0.0001
    50                      0.0034       0.0034       0.0036       0.0032       0.0038       0.003      -0.0002
    60                      0.0104       0.0104       0.0111       0.0098       0.0117       0.0093     -0.0006
    70                      0.0282       0.0281       0.0299       0.0264       0.0317       0.0252     -0.0018

70 minus
                            0.0266       0.0265       0.0282       0.0249       0.0299       0.0238
   40

Notes: Probabilities predicted using coefficients from the logit model of row 1 and column 1 in Appendix Table
5.
Appendix Table 3: Mortality Rates in Different Periods by Displacement Status
Panel A: Work Every Year 1980-86
                                                                                         Displaced
                                             Non-Mass-        Displaced       Displaced Greater Than
                             Same Firm         Layoff         30%-60%         60%-90%    90% Below
            All Workers        1974-86       Separators      Below Peak      Below Peak     Peak
  87-02         5.716           5.502            5.688           5.727           6.402           6.875
               (0.154)         (0.195)          (0.429)         (0.453)         (0.506)         (0.743)
  87-91         3.607           3.348            3.381           3.743           4.723           4.630
               (0.203)         (0.252)          (0.548)         (0.606)         (0.718)         (1.008)
  92-96         6.539           6.336            6.386           6.749           7.255           7.381
               (0.252)         (0.320)          (0.695)         (0.752)         (0.824)         (1.178)
  97-02         8.221           7.729            9.405           7.354           9.346          10.735
               (0.315)         (0.394)          (0.941)         (0.876)         (1.047)         (1.592)

Notes: Deaths per 1000 per year. Standard errors in parentheses. Displaced Workers left jobs in a year in
which their former firms' employment was 30% or more below its 1974-1979 peak. Nondisplaced workers
remain at their 1979 firm through 1986.

Panel B: No Work Restriction in 1980-86
                                                                                         Displaced
                                             Non-Mass-        Displaced       Displaced Greater Than
                             Same Firm         Layoff         30%-60%         60%-90%    90% Below
            All Workers        1974-86       Separators      Below Peak      Below Peak     Peak
  87-02         6.185           5.502            6.525           6.774           6.828           8.051
               (0.146)         (0.195)          (0.367)         (0.396)         (0.434)         (0.666)
  80-86         2.465           0.000            6.525           5.537           3.410           1.477
               (0.128)                          (0.367)         (0.492)         (0.422)         (0.395)
  87-91         4.008           3.348            4.083           4.517           4.987           5.874
               (0.194)         (0.252)          (0.480)         (0.535)         (0.613)         (0.938)
  92-96         6.981           6.336            7.244           7.661           7.605           8.584
               (0.237)         (0.320)          (0.591)         (0.645)         (0.700)         (1.052)
  97-02         8.699           7.729            9.957           8.656           9.975          10.717
               (0.296)         (0.394)          (0.776)         (0.768)         (0.899)         (1.322)
Notes: Deaths per 1000 per year. Standard errors in parentheses. Displaced Workers left jobs in a year in
which their former firms' employment was 30% or more below its 1974-1979 peak.
Appendix Table 4: Effect of Mass-Layoff on Mortality by Earnings Loss at Job Loss and Employment Status in Displacement Period

                                                          No Work Restriction, Birth Year>1930                                      No Work Restriction, Birth Year>1920

                                                (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)            (10)

                                              -0.448         -0.491         -0.488        -0.471         -0.471        -0.505         -0.491         -0.488        -0.471         -0.471
Log Average Earnings 1974-79
                                              (0.032)        (0.059)        (0.059)       (0.058)        (0.058)       (0.057)        (0.059)        (0.059)       (0.058)        (0.058)

% Change in Long-Term Average                    --          -1.200         -0.891        -0.749         -0.754           --          -1.200         -0.891        -0.749         -0.754
Earnings 74-79 vs. 80-86 (∆E)                    --          (0.067)        (0.156)       (0.154)        (0.155)          --          (0.067)        (0.156)       (0.154)        (0.155)

Dummy for Job Loss During Mass-                0.140          -0.008        -0.143         0.105          0.119         0.262          -0.008        -0.143         0.105          0.119
Layoff (MLF)                                  (0.026)        (0.045)       (0.076)        (0.158)        (0.162)       (0.043)        (0.045)       (0.076)        (0.158)        (0.162)
Displaced at MLF and ∆E >25th                    --             --           0.034         -0.151         -0.153          --             --           0.034         -0.151         -0.153
Perc. and < Median                                                          (0.111)       (0.134)        (0.134)                                     (0.111)       (0.134)        (0.134)
                                                 --             --                                                        --             --
Displaced at MLF and ∆E >Median                  --             --          0.270          0.055          0.054           --             --          0.270          0.055          0.054
and < 75th Perc.                                                           (0.124)        (0.166)        (0.166)                                    (0.124)        (0.166)        (0.166)
                                                 --             --                                                        --             --
Displaced at MLF and ∆E >75th                    --             --          0.368          0.147          0.151           --             --          0.368          0.147          0.151
Perc.                                                                      (0.140)        (0.182)        (0.183)                                    (0.140)        (0.182)        (0.183)
                                                 --             --                                                        --             --
Dummy for 1-2 Quarters Non-                      --             --            --           0.260          0.259           --             --            --           0.260          0.259
Employment                                                                                (0.067)        (0.067)                                                   (0.067)        (0.067)
                                                 --             --            --                                          --             --            --
Dummy for More Than 2 Quarters                   --             --            --           0.539          0.536           --             --            --           0.539          0.536
Non-Employment                                                                            (0.099)        (0.099)                                                   (0.099)        (0.099)
                                                 --             --            --                                          --             --            --
Displaced at MLF and Non-                        --             --            --           -0.199         -0.197          --             --            --           -0.199         -0.197
Employed for 1-2 Periods                                                                  (0.127)        (0.127)                                                   (0.127)        (0.127)
                                                 --             --            --                                          --             --            --
Displaced at MLF and Non-                        --             --            --          -0.272         -0.266           --             --            --          -0.272         -0.266
Employed More Than 2 Periods                                                              (0.146)        (0.146)                                                   (0.146)        (0.146)
                                                 --             --            --                                          --             --            --
Dummies for Quartiles of ∆E                     Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Controls for Age at Separation                   --             --            --             --           Yes             --             --            --             --            Yes
Observations                                  681614         478664        478664         478664         478664        478664         478664        478664         478664         478664
Notes: Samples are workers born 1920-59 in stable jobs from 1974-79 with an employer of over 50 workers. Dependent variable is the log odds of death. Entries are the coefficient
estimates from the logit-model. All models include year fixed effects, industry fixed effects, a quartic in age, and the log of the standard deviation of quarterly earnings in 1974-79. All
models also include three dummies for whether percent change in average earnings (∆E) lies in between 25th and 50th percentile, 50th and 75th percentile, or above 75th percentile of the
distribution in the population. None of the three dummy variables has an effect that is significantly different from zero.
Appendix Table 5: Correlation of Mortality and Average Earnings, Sample With Work Every Year 1980-86

                                         Pooled Logit - Model                                      Deaton and Paxson Models

                                               1986-2002                      Death 0-5 Years post 1986               Death 5-10 Years post 1986

                                      All       Age < 60    Age > 60          All      Age < 60      Age > 60         All      Age < 60     Age > 60

                                      (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)

Basic Model [Average 1974 -          -0.509      -0.514       -0.506        -0.309       -0.591       -0.309        -0.515       0.093       -0.936
1979 Quarterly Earnings]
                                    (0.075)      (0.105)     (0.108)        (0.179)      (0.096)      (0.179)       (0.099)     (0.990)      (0.195)
With Birth Cohort-Controls           -0.508      -0.511       -0.506        -0.309       -0.591       -0.309        -0.515       0.093       -0.936
                                    (0.075)      (0.105)     (0.108)        (0.179)      (0.096)      (0.179)       (0.099)     (0.990)      (0.195)

Single Year Earnings (1979)          -0.388      -0.347      -0.433         -0.326       -0.437       -0.326        -0.377       0.057       -0.746
                                    (0.066)      (0.092)     (0.095)        (0.155)      (0.083)      (0.155)       (0.086)     (0.925)      (0.174)

Average 1974-79 Earnings             -0.603      -0.806       -0.342         0.130       -0.752       0.130         -0.692       0.296       -1.090
With 1979 Earnings                  (0.182)      (0.244)     (0.267)        (0.400)      (0.225)      (0.400)       (0.235)     (2.843)      (0.486)
1979 Earnings with Average           0.092        0.289       -0.159        -0.428       0.159        -0.428         0.173       -0.201       0.154
1974-79 Earnings                    (0.163)      (0.219)     (0.237)        (0.346)      (0.201)      (0.346)       (0.209)     (2.639)      (0.446)
Observations                        238672       193261       45411          17642       17326         727          17316        15879        1437
Notes: Columns 1 to 3 show the coefficients of a logit model of the annual probability of dying from 1987 to 2002 on the natural logarithms of average
quarterly income from 1974 to 1979. Columns 4-9 show the probability of dying within the indicated follow-up duration. All models include year and age
effects. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Appendix Table 6: Correlation of Other Career Outcomes and Mortality, Various Samples and Specifications

                                                                                Alternative Samples
                                                      Mass-                    Some        Major                          Major
                                                                 Stable Job                               Stable Job
                                                     Layoff                 Presence 74- Presence                       Presence
                                                                  1974-79                                  1974-79
                                                     Sample                     79        1974-79                        1974-79

(Model) Baseline Period, Cohorts                      Average 1974-79, Born 1930-59            Average 1974-86, Born 1924-29
   (1)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.380        -0.411       -0.091        -0.208       -0.555        -0.251
                                                      (0.049)      (0.034)       (0.006)       (0.011)      (0.050)       (0.021)
          Log(Standard Deviation of Log                0.167        0.134         0.081         0.066        0.097         0.120
          Quarterly Earnings)                         (0.026)      (0.018)       (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.032)       (0.022)
   (2)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.400       -0.426        -0.082        -0.199       -0.553        -0.235
                                                      (0.050)      (0.035)       (0.006)       (0.012)      (0.053)       (0.022)
          Log(Standard Deviation of Log                0.176        0.141         0.061         0.057        0.096         0.084
          Quarterly Earnings)                         (0.027)      (0.019)       (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.035)       (0.025)
          Number of Transitions to Non-               -0.053       -0.040         0.046         0.023        0.004         0.035
          Employment                                  (0.031)      (0.022)       (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.020)       (0.011)
          One Drop in Earnings More Than 2             0.221        0.161        -0.021         0.014        0.046        -0.042
          Std. Dev.                                   (0.086)      (0.061)       (0.019)       (0.022)      (0.080)       (0.052)
          More Than One Drop in Earnings               0.140        0.103        -0.017         0.022        0.028        -0.041
          More Than 2 Std. Dev.                       (0.076)      (0.054)       (0.017)       (0.019)      (0.063)       (0.042)
   (3)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.443       -0.467        -0.066        -0.215       -0.572        -0.265
                                                      (0.051)      (0.035)       (0.005)       (0.012)      (0.052)       (0.021)
          Number of Employer Changes                  -0.063       -0.036         0.012        -0.002       -0.003        -0.016
                                                      (0.040)      (0.029)       (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.021)       (0.010)
          Number of Transitions to Non-               -0.019       -0.008         0.071         0.041        0.024         0.056
          Employment                                  (0.031)      (0.021)       (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.018)       (0.010)
   (5)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.439       -0.465        -0.082        -0.225       -0.529        -0.256
                                                      (0.051)      (0.035)       (0.006)       (0.012)      (0.054)       (0.024)
          Number of Non-Employment Spells             -0.263       -0.253        -0.053        -0.045        0.187         0.001
          Lasting At Least A Year                     (0.414)      (0.293)       (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.047)       (0.025)
   (6)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.362       -0.435        -0.100        -0.339       -0.406        -0.602
          Workers Non-Manufacturing                   (0.126)      (0.088)       (0.010)       (0.023)      (0.031)       (0.055)
   (7)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.594       -0.616        -0.234        -0.507       -0.500        -0.564
          Workers Manufacturing                       (0.099)      (0.080)       (0.026)       (0.041)      (0.048)       (0.100)
   (8)    Log(Average Quarterly Earnings)             -0.616       -0.437        -0.075        -0.321       -0.364        -0.434
          With 1979 or 1986 Qrt. Earnings             (0.184)      (0.134)       (0.021)       (0.034)      (0.042)       (0.074)
   (9)    Log(1979 or 1986 Qrt. Earnings)              0.099       -0.096        -0.125        -0.074       -0.071        -0.043
          With Log Average Qrt. Earn.                 (0.164)      (0.115)       (0.019)       (0.023)      (0.028)       (0.029)
Notes: Entries in table are coefficients from logit models of the annual probability of dying from 1987 to 2002. All models also
include dummies for age and year. Standard errors are in parentheses. Columns give details on sample specifications, the range of
birth cohorts, and the length of the base-line period over which career outcomes are calculated. Different rows correspond to
different models. Model 5 also controls for the number of non-employment spells.
Appendix Figure 1: Age-Gradient in Death Rates - Mass-Layoff Sample

                       Panel A: Log-Odds Ratio by Age
   -2


   -3
                      Age-Dummies

   -4                 Quartic in Age


   -5


   -6


   -7


   -8
         40    45        50            55         60        65    70
                                        Age

                           Panel B: Mortality Rate by Age
 0.04

0.035
                    Age-Dummies
 0.03
                    Quartic in Age
0.025

 0.02

 0.015

  0.01

0.005

    0
         40    45        50            55          60        65    70
                                            Age
Appendix Figure 2: Effect of Mass-Layoffs during 1980 to 1986 on Mortality by Time
Since Displacement
Panel A: Mortality Rate by Mass-Layoff Status

              0.012



                         0.01

                                                                Stayers
                                                                Movers
             0.008
 Mortality Rate




             0.006



             0.004



             0.002



                                             0
                                              1986     1988          1990        1992    1994    1996   1998   2000   2002
                                                                                         Year

Panel B: Estimated Effect of Mass-Layoff on Mortality

                                               1



                                             0.8



                                             0.6
              Difference in Mortality Rate




                                             0.4



                                             0.2



                                               0
                                                1986     1988             1990    1992    1994   1996   1998   2000   2002

                                             -0.2



                                             -0.4
                                                                                          Year
