TAXES AND THE GLOBAL ALLOCATION OF CAPITAL

               David Backus
              Espen Henriksen
              Kjetil Storesletten
           WORKING PAPER 13624
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TAXES AND THE GLOBAL ALLOCATION OF CAPITAL

                                          David Backus
                                         Espen Henriksen
                                         Kjetil Storesletten

                                        Working Paper 13624
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13624


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




This paper was prepared for the April 2007 meeting of the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public
Policy, "Advances in Dynamic Public Finance." We thank the conference participants, particularly
our discussant, Peter Rupert, and the organizer, Stanley Zin. We also thank Andrew Abel, Robin Boadway,
Antonio Ciccone, Jack Mintz, Tomasz Piskorski, Fabrizio Perri, and James Poterba for help at various
stages of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Backus, Espen Henriksen, and Kjetil Storesletten. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taxes and the Global Allocation of Capital
David Backus, Espen Henriksen, and Kjetil Storesletten
NBER Working Paper No. 13624
November 2007
JEL No. E22,F21,H25,H32

                                              ABSTRACT

Despite enormous growth in international capital flows, capital-output ratios continue to exhibit substantial
heterogeneity across countries. We explore the possibility that taxes, particularly corporate taxes, are
a significant source of this heterogeneity. The evidence is mixed. Tax rates computed from tax revenue
are inversely correlated with capital-output ratios, as we might expect. However, effective tax rates
constructed from official tax rates show little relation to capital -- or to revenue-based tax measures.
The stark difference between these two tax measures remains an open issue.


David Backus                                          Kjetil Storesletten
Stern School of Business                              Department of Economics
NYU                                                   University of Oslo
44 West 4th Street                                    Box 1095 Blindern
New York, NY 10012-1126                               N-0317 Oslo
and NBER                                              Norway
dbackus@stern.nyu.edu                                 kjetil.storesletten@econ.uio.no

Espen Henriksen
Department of Economics
University of Oslo
N-0851 Oslo, Norway
espen.henriksen@econ.uio.no
1     Introduction

With net flows of financial capital into the US running at about 7% of GDP — and
similar flows out of Germany and Japan — it’s increasingly difficult to think about
the allocation of physical capital without considering its international dimension. We
may not live in a world of frictionless international capital markets, but international
markets nevertheless appear to have a significant impact on local conditions. Despite
this, there are substantial differences in the capital intensities of developed countries.
By our calculations, capital-output ratios in 2004 were about 2.5 in the US, 3.1 in
France, 3.9 in Japan, and 1.8 in Ireland. These differences in capital-output ratios
suggest similar differences in marginal products. If the US and Japan produced output
with the same Cobb-Douglas production function, with a capital share of one-third,
the implied marginal product of capital would be about 5% higher in the US. The
question is why. While some ask why capital flows out of Japan and into the US are
so large, we ask why they aren’t large enough to eliminate a conjectured 5% rate of
return differential.

    There are many possible sources of cross-country differences in capital-output ra-
tios, but we focus on one: taxes, particularly corporate taxes. Could differences in tax
rates account for some of the heterogeneity we see in capital-output ratios? Certainly
corporate tax rates differ substantially across countries, and these differences can, in
principle, generate substantial variation in capital-output ratios. The US, for exam-
ple, now has a relatively high corporate tax rate, which might offset the advantages
to an investor of its apparent high marginal product of capital.

    We examine data on capital and taxes in a panel of OECD countries over the
last 25 years to see whether the two variables are related in a statistical sense. The
answer? It depends how you measure tax rates. For that reason, much of our effort
is devoted to measurement issues.

    We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we describe the relation between the capital-
output ratio and the tax rate on capital in a frictionless theoretical example. The
example provides a concrete illustration of how high taxes on capital might be asso-
ciated with low capital-output ratios. In Section 3, we look at capital data, summa-
rizing the behavior of capital-output ratios across countries and over time. Although
capital-output ratios have been stable in most countries, the data exhibit substantial
variation both over time and across countries. Measurement issues include investment
price deflators and depreciation schedules. In Section 4, we look at tax data. We use
two sources: revenue collected by various taxes, including taxes on corporate income,
and effective tax rates constructed from features of the tax code. Tax systems are
enormously complex, so each of these approaches raises substantive measurement is-
sues. With effective tax rates, we show that there’s been a dramatic convergence over
the last decade or so, as well as a decline in average tax rates. Tax revenue, however,
has changed much less as a fraction of GDP. The difference between these two mea-
sures is a central issue in interpreting the evidence. Have corporate tax rates become
more similar across countries — or not? In Section 5, we look at the relation between
capital-output ratios and tax rates. For measures of tax rates based on corporate tax
law, the correlation with the capital-output ratio is small or positive. However, for
measures based on tax revenue the correlation is clearly negative, with countries that
collect more tax revenue having, on average, less capital per unit of output. However,
even revenue-based taxes explain only a small fraction of the observed variance in
capital-output ratios. A more formal analysis based on panel regressions leads to
similar conclusions. In the final two sections, we explore a range of related issues,
including mechanisms that might lead to correlations between capital and taxes for
reasons other than the direct impact of tax rates on investment decisions.

    We are left with two outstanding issues: why effective and revenue-based tax rates
are so different, and why even revenue-based measures explain such a small fraction
of international differences in capital-output ratios.



2     The allocation of capital in theory

An example shows how international capital mobility might interact with taxes in
producing an allocation of capital across countries. The idea is that taxes on capital


                                           2
reduce its use, leading countries with high taxes (suitably defined) to use less capital
than those with low taxes. We emphasize taxes levied on businesses for reasons that
should become apparent later on.

   Consider a world with one good and many countries across which physical capital
can be shifted costlessly. In each country i, a representative firm produces output yit
at date t using capital kit and labor nit according to the same production function f :

                                     yit = f (kit , zit nit ),

where f is homogeneous of degree one and zit is exogenous labor-augmenting produc-
tivity. Firms purchase capital kit in the previous period at price pt−1 , the same across
countries. Capital and labor generate output yit and next-period capital (1 − δ)kit ,
where δ is the depreciation rate. This “gross output” has price pt . The price of labor
in country i is pt wit per unit, so that wit is the wage in units of the date-t good. The
interest rate is 1 + rt−1 = pt−1 /pt .

   Without taxes, the profit of a competitive firm in country i is

               Profit = pt [f (kit , zit nit ) + (1 − δ)kit − wit nit ] − pt−1 kit .

Its optimal choice of capital follows from the first-order condition:

                            1 + rt−1 = 1 + fk (kit , zit nit ) − δ,                    (1)

where fk (k, zn) = ∂f (k, zn)/∂k is the marginal product of capital gross of deprecia-
tion. Since firms in all countries have the same technologies and face the same interest
rate, they equalize their marginal products of capital. We can be more specific if we
have a CES production function,

                          f (k, zn) = [ωk ν + (1 − ω)(zn)ν ]1/ν ,

with 0 < ω < 1 and ν ≤ 1. The elasticity of substitution between the two inputs is
σ = 1/(1 − ν). Then the marginal product of capital is related to the capital-output
ratio by

                              fk (kit , zit nit ) = ω(kit /yit )ν−1 ,                  (2)

                                                3
so that international capital markets equate capital-output ratios.

   With taxes, the international allocation of capital depends on tax rates and the
way in which taxes are collected. The most common version is to tax returns to
capital net of depreciation at a constant rate τit , so that after-tax profit is

         Profit = pt [(1 − τit ){f (kit , zit nit ) − δkit − wit nit } + kit ] − pt−1 kit .

In an international context, the implicit assumption is that capital taxes are source-
based: the tax rate applies to the country in which the capital is used, regardless of
who owns it. The first-order condition for capital now implies

                      1 + rt−1 = 1 + (1 − τit ) [fk (kit , zit nit ) − δ] .                   (3)

In the CES case, there is an inverse relation across countries between the tax rate
on capital and the capital-output ratio. This relation is predicated on countries
having identical production functions. Differences in, say, depreciation rates δ or
share parameters ω also lead to international differences in capital-output ratios.

   A numerical example gives us a sense of the magnitudes involved. Suppose ν =
0 (Cobb-Douglas production function), ω = 1/3 (capital’s share), and δ = 0.08
(depreciation rate). Then the marginal product of capital is 13.3% with the US
capital-output ratio of 2.5, 10.8% with France’s ratio of 3.1, and 8.5% with Japan’s
ratio of 3.9. Now consider the impact of taxes. Suppose the US tax rate is 25%, a
number we use purely for illustration. Then the after-tax (net) return is 4.0%. If the
tax is eliminated, the capital-output ratio that generates the same after-tax return is
2.78, a significant increase over 2.5. More generally, the magnitude of the impact will
depend on the elasticity of substitution, which is one in this case.

   Real-world taxes raise a number of issues that go beyond our example, including
our focus on business taxes. Among them are


   • Personal taxation. Most governments tax capital income received by individu-
      als, including interest receipts, dividends, rent, and capital gains. Tax-sheltered
      pensions and personal saving mitigate the impact of personal taxes on capital

                                                 4
  income in most countries, but the degree of mitigation is an open issue. Owner-
  occupied housing goes the other way, with many countries subsidizing it relative
  to other housing. In practice, it’s difficult to measure the effective personal tax
  rate on capital income alone, since personal income tax systems typically lump
  capital and labor income together. Moreover, taxation at the personal level is
  more likely to be based on the location of the investor (residence-based) than
  the investment (source-based).
  Personal taxes also raise issues about the integration of personal and business
  taxes. In the US, for example, dividends are taxed at both the corporate and
  individual levels, while interest payments are not. In contrast, many other
  countries credit individuals with any taxes paid by corporations on dividends.

• Heterogeneous treatment of producers. We focus on international differences in
  tax rates, but there are also important differences across producers in the same
  country. One such difference is legal structure: corporations, privately-held
  firms, partnerships, and nonprofits are taxed at different rates in many coun-
  tries. In the US, the income of traditional “C” corporations is taxed directly,
  but the income of “S” corporations (typically smaller firms with fewer share-
  holders) is treated as individual income but not taxed at the corporate level.
  Some tax rates depend on the industry of the producer. And differences in the
  technology of production (capital intensity and depreciation, for example) or in
  the method of financing (debt, equity, or retained earnings) can lead to different
  effective tax rates even when the statutory rates are the same.

• Taxation of multinational corporations. Producers who operate in more than
  one country face multiple tax authorities as a result. There are no general
  rules about how these tax systems interact; where multinational tax agreements
  exist, they often differ across pairs of countries. In the worst case, the overall
  tax rate can be higher than the highest individual rate. But firms typically
  have numerous opportunities to shift revenue and expenses across countries:
  transfer pricing, issuing debt in high-tax countries, collecting royalties in low-tax
  countries, and so on, which can reduce overall effective tax rates substantially.


                                        5
      It’s hard to say where this leaves incentives to invest in physical capital.


These issues and more are discussed at length by Auerbach (2006), Congressional Bud-
get Office (2005), Devereux (2006), Devereux, Griffith, and Klemm (2002), Jorgenson
(1993), King and Fullerton (1984), McGrattan and Prescott (2005), Mintz (1995),
and Poterba and Summers (1985). Most of these papers include extensive references
to the relevant literature. Our first-order approximation is Auerbach (1979) and King
(1974): firms finance investment with retained earnings at the margin and corporate
taxation alone affects investment decisions.



3     The allocation of capital in practice

After Feldstein and Horioka (1980) wrote their celebrated paper on international
capital mobility, economists realized that net capital flows had played little role in
the allocation of capital across developed countries in the 1960s. Countries with
high saving rates also had high investment rates. Equally striking but less celebrated
were the large differences in those rates: average investment rates ranged from 19%
in the UK and the US to 26% in France and an astounding 37% in Japan. (These
numbers are averages for 1960-74, reported in their Table 1.) Even with differences in
output growth rates and the prices and composition of investment goods, this range
of investment rates must surely reflect substantial differences in capital-output ratios.

    Since then we have witnessed a dramatic increase in the scale and scope of interna-
tional financial transactions, and even some weakening of the link between saving and
investment. Has there been a parallel tendency toward convergence of capital-output
ratios across countries? Figure 1 and Table 1 suggest not. It’s apparent in both that
capital-output ratios continue to vary across countries, and in some cases across time
as well.

    In Figure 1, we describe capital-output ratios for OECD countries for the period
1980 to 2004. The top panel summarizes the cross-country evidence with “spaghetti
plots:” a time series plot of 15 countries over the whole period. The countries (here


                                           6
and throughout the paper) are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Finland, France,
Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK, and the US.
Individual countries are not identifiable in the figure, but the plot gives us a sense of
both dispersion across countries and changes over time. The bottom panel tells the
same story with time series of cross-section means and standard deviations. Over this
period the mean fell and the standard deviation rose, but both changes have been
small. We find the lack of convergence somewhat surprising, given the globalization
of capital markets over the last 25 years, but it’s a robust feature of the data.

   We find the behavior of individual countries equally interesting, if not necessarily
representative. In the US, the capital-output ratio has been between 2.4 and 2.8 since
1970. In France, the capital-output ratio rose from 2.6 to 3.1 during the 1970s, but
has been between 3.0 and 3.2 ever since 1980. In Japan, by contrast, the capital-
output ratio has risen steadily, from 2 in 1970 to 3 in 1980 to almost 4 in 2005[??].
The investment rate fell in the 1990s, but slower growth in output led to further
increase in the ratio of capital to output. In Ireland, the capital-output ratio fell
from 3.0 in 1986 to about 1.8 in 2005, a period of rapid growth and (apparently) low
corporate tax rates. The standard deviations bottom panel of the figure remind us
that increase in dispersion suggested by Ireland and Japan is not representative, but
they are interesting examples in their own right.

   In Table 1, we report the same data in different form. There we see, for example,
that the variation in total capital-output ratios in our panel is substantial: the overall
standard deviation is 0.45, about 15% of the mean of 3.1. The standard deviation
between countries (the standard deviation of the country means) is almost as large
(0.41), suggesting that most of the variation in our panel is between countries. The
components of capital are similar: government, housing, and business capital all show
considerable variation, with difference between countries accounting for most of it.

   The capital stocks on which these tables and figures are based are computed from
real investment series in the OECD’s Economic Outlook Database. The database
includes three categories of investment: government, private housing, and other pri-
vate investment (business plant and equipment). We construct stock series for each


                                            7
component by the perpetual inventory method using depreciation rates specific to
each category starting with values for 1970 (our starting point) reported by Kamps
(2006). Sources and methods are described further in Appendix A. Extensive exper-
imentation with differences in depreciation schedules suggests to us that none of the
specifics matter much as long as countries are treated the same way.

   This approach to capital measurement is the industry standard, but there are
nevertheless some issues to consider. One is that the composition of business capital
has changed over time, and may differ across countries as well. In the US, there’s been
a shift in business investment from structures to equipment and software, with the
result that the average depreciation rate has risen. See, for example, the discussion
in Gomme and Rupert (2007). The OECD data do not have enough detail to allow
us to account explicitly for differences in composition; we try to account for this
by using depreciation rates for business and government capital that increase over
time. A related issue is that the definition of capital goods differs somewhat across
countries, with the US including software and most other countries not. Intangibles,
such as patents, brand equity, and databases, are disregarded uniformly. There is
little we can do about either with existing data. A third issue is that real investment
is based on official price indexes, whose quality varies across countries. In the US,
price indexes incorporate large adjustments for quality improvements, which raises
measures of real investment. Some observers think this is done less successfully in
other countries, so that their real investment series are understated.

   All of these issues are worth mentioning, but we nevertheless think there is more
signal than noise in observed capital-output ratios. Countries with high capital-
output ratios are generally those with high investment rates, so it would take an
amazing congruence of measurement errors to eliminate or reverse the ranking of
capital intensities across countries.




                                          8
4     Taxes in practice

The next step is to examine data on tax rates. Taxes have virtually unlimited poten-
tial for complexity, but our hope is that reasonable summary measures will capture
some of the tax incentives to purchase and use physical capital. We focus on corporate
tax rates for reasons outlined in Section 2.

    There are two common approaches to measuring tax rates, on capital and oth-
erwise. One is based on official tax rates, the other on tax revenue. We look at
both. So-called effective corporate tax rates are based on official rates. The current
state-of-the-art for corporate taxation starts with King and Fullerton (1984), who
summarized the many features of existing tax systems in a one-dimensional measure.
Effective tax rates take statutory rates and make adjustments that bring them closer
to the rates relevant for investment decisions. One is accelerated depreciation. Many
countries allow companies to subtract depreciation at a faster rate, which reduces the
tax burden on capital by bringing the depreciation allowance forward in time. Some
countries even allow investments to be “expensed,” making depreciation effectively
immediate for tax purposes and possibly eliminating the incentive effects of the tax
(Abel, 2007). Another adjustment is tax credits: tax reductions or even subsidies
for some kinds of investment. A third is debt. Most countries allow companies to
subtract interest on debt from taxable income, which reduces the effective tax rate
on investments financed by debt. The impact of this change depends on the nominal
interest rate, hence inflation.

    We use Devereux, Griffith, and Klemmm’s (2002) implementation of this method-
ology. We take three of their measures: the statutory corporate tax rate, the marginal
effective rate, and the average effective rate. All of these tax rates vary, in princi-
ple, across industries and regions within countries, so the reported rates require some
judgement about what a typical company would pay. In Table 1, we see that rates of
all kinds differ substantially across countries. The statutory corporate tax rate in our
sample has a mean of 38% and a standard deviation of 11%. The standard deviation
of country means is 8%, so about half the total variance is between countries. Effec-


                                           9
tive marginal and average rates are lower, on average, but exhibit similar variation.
Again, much of the variation is between countries, although not to the extent we saw
with capital-output ratios.

   Figure 2 shows, however, that there has also been significant variation over time
in the effective marginal tax rate. In the top panel, we see both a decline in the
overall level of tax rates and a decline in dispersion. Both show up in the bottom
panel, where we see that the mean tax rate has fallen from about 30% to below 20%.
The cross-section standard deviation has declined by two-thirds over the same period.
Both of these features are documented by Devereux, Griffith, and Klemmm (2002).
Statutory and effective average tax rates (not shown) have similar properties.

   The second approach to measuring tax rates is to base them on tax revenues.
If we have information on tax revenues and the tax base, then we can compute
a tax rate as the ratio. Mendoza, Razin, and Tesar (1994) is the template, and
Carey and Rabesona (2002) is a recent extension and refinement. In the case of
capital taxation, taxes are paid by individuals through the personal income tax and
businesses through corporate or other business taxes. In some cases, there are direct
levies on capital that should also be included: property taxes, wealth taxes, and
so on. The idea behind this approach is that by looking at taxes paid we get a
realistic picture of the tax burden. There are also some well-known problems. One
is that we have, by construction, a backward measure of the average tax rate, not
the marginal rate applied to current investments. Another is that it’s often difficult
to find reliable data on the relevant tax base. For example, in the case of personal
taxation of capital income, it’s not clear from standard data sources how much of the
revenue from the personal income tax comes from taxes on capital income rather than
labor income. Similarly, for corporate taxes it’s difficult to find measures of taxable
corporate income that correspond to reported tax revenue. Finally, revenue-based
tax measures typically make no distinction between average and marginal tax rates.

   We construct several revenue-based tax measures from data collected by the
OECD and reported in its Revenue Statistics of OECD Member Countries. Per-
sonal taxes are reflected in revenue collected from individual income taxes expressed


                                          10
as a fraction of GDP. Tax rates are likely higher than this, since the tax base is
smaller than GDP, but it’s not clear how to approximate the relevant tax base. Table
1 shows that the average has been 11% with a standard deviation of 3%. Corporate
taxes are reflected in revenue from corporate income taxes. We express this revenue
as a ratio to GDP and as a ratio to a crude approximation to gross capital income,
which we describe next.

   We approximate gross capital income, capital’s share of GDP, and the average
product of capital with income data from the OECD’s Annual National Accounts.
The central difficulty is that these accounts do not contain detailed breakdowns of
gross domestic income that translate directly into labor and capital income. The
category “gross operating surplus and mixed income” includes, among other things,
corporate income (presumably capital) and mixed income (what US accounts refer to
as “proprietors’ income,” a combination of labor and capital income). We divide this
into its components — operating surplus and mixed income – using average shares
in the US: 35% operating surplus and 65% mixed income. Next we divide mixed
income between labor and capital using the same shares as other income. Finally,
we disregard taxes and subsidies in both factor income and total income, computing
factor shares from what’s left. The factor shares are then applied to gross domestic
income to produce factor incomes. This calculation leads to the measures summarized
in Table 1. Capital’s share is 34%, on average, with standard deviations of 4% overall
and 3% between countries. The average product of capital, measured as a ratio of
capital’s share to the capital-output ratio, is 11%, with a standard deviation of 2%
both overall and across countries.

   The striking feature of our two revenue-based tax measures — ratios of corporate
tax revenue to GDP and gross capital income — is how different they are from
the effective rates. The revenue-based tax rate (the ratio of corporate tax revenue to
capital income) is much smaller, perhaps because the tax base is too large: it includes
depreciation and the income of noncorporate business, neither of which is part of the
corporate tax base. This level effect does not explain, however, the large difference in
time series behavior. While the effective rates have fallen and converged over the last
25 years, Figure 3 shows that the revenue-based tax rate has increased, on average,

                                          11
with little change in the dispersion across countries. Devereux (2006) documents a
similar discrepancy between effective tax rates and corporate tax revenue expressed
as a fraction of GDP.

    In short, tax rates based on the tax code and tax revenues give much different
pictures of recent history.



5     Capital and taxes in practice

We’ve now seen international evidence on capital, in the form of capital-output ratios,
and taxes, in the form of effective tax rates on corporate income and revenue-based
measures of personal and corporate income taxes. Both exhibit substantial variation
across countries. We can now address our question: are cross-country differences in
capital intensity related to differences in tax rates? Certainly theory suggests that
an increase in tax rates will reduce the amount of capital used in production. Is that
what we see in the data? We look at the data in two ways: with bivariate correlations
and panel regressions.


Correlations

In Table 2, we report correlations between pairs of the same variables we described in
Table 1: capital-output ratios, tax measures, and some other variables. The essence
of our findings is apparent in the correlations between capital-out ratios and taxes.

    For effective tax rates, the correlations are consistently positive: countries with
high tax rates also have high capital-output ratios on average. For example, the cor-
relation of the effective marginal corporate tax rate with the total capital-output ratio
is 0.41. If high tax rates discourage capital formation, there is little evidence of it in
this data. The positive correlation between tax rates and capital intensity is puzzling,
especially given the amount of variation in each. One possibility is that our definition
of the capital stock (total capital) is too broad: certainly government capital, and
perhaps housing, are not subject to the same tax incentives facing business capital.

                                           12
Yet when we look at business capital alone, the result is the same: capital and tax
rates are positively correlated.

   The positive correlation between capital and taxes reflects both time series and
cross section dimensions of the data, but we’ll see shortly that the cross section is
central. France, for example, has a high capital-output ratio, but also a high tax rate.
Even in the time series, there is little evidence of a negative relationship. We’ve seen
that corporate tax rates have declined, on average. We might therefore expect to see
an increase in capital-output ratios. We don’t. Average capital-output ratios have
been flat. Ireland, for example, has the lowest tax rates in our sample, but in recent
times has also had a low capital-output ratio. Ireland also experienced a sharp drop
in corporate tax rates, yet its capital-output ratio has fallen. Moreover, a substantial
drop in France’s corporate tax rate has been associated with virtually no change in its
capital-output ratio. This pattern holds whether we look at statutory corporate tax
rates or any of the effective tax rates computed by Devereux, Griffith, and Klemm
(2002). It seems that the state-of-the-art in modern public finance is of little help in
explaining differences in the global allocation of capital.

   In contrast, revenue-based tax rates are negatively correlated with capital inten-
sity. For example, the correlation of corporate tax revenue, expressed as a ratio
to capital income, with the total capital-output ratio is –0.37. Note, too, that the
revenue-based tax rate is negatively correlated with the effective tax rate.

   Evidently it makes a big difference which tax measure we use, but many of the
details matter less. Note, first, that the three “official” corporate tax rate series are
highly correlated: the statutory tax rate, the effective marginal tax rate, and the
effective average tax rate. The three are based on similar inputs, and lead to similar
measures of tax rates as a result. Second, the correlations of these tax rates with
revenue-based measures are small or even negative. For example, the correlation be-
tween the effective marginal tax rate and the ratio of corporate tax revenue to GDP
is 0.16. The two measures are clearly picking up different things. Third, the capital
series are highly correlated, especially total capital and business capital. For this
reason, it makes little difference whether we look at total capital, business capital, or


                                           13
private capital (business plus housing). Finally, capital-output ratios are positively
correlated with our three measures of corporate tax rates, but negatively with corpo-
rate tax revenue. This last finding is directly related to the role of taxes in the global
allocation of capital, and therefore worth a closer look.


Regressions

The correlations between capital and tax measures are suggestive, but panel data
regressions shed additional light on both the source of the correlation (time series or
cross section?) and its magnitude (are the numbers reasonable given our theory?).
Put more concretely: These regressions allow us to vary the source of information by
using time and country fixed effects. They also allow us to interpret the coefficients as
the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, allowing us to judge whether
the magnitude is reasonable.

    We estimate a relation between capital-output ratios and tax rates that follows
from our theoretical example. If we allow countries to have different production
functions, then equations (2) and (3) imply

        (1 − τit ) [ωi (kit /yit )ν−1 − δ] = (1 − τjt ) [ωj (kjt /yjt )ν−1 − δ] = rt−1 ,

where ωi is a country-specific capital share. We refer to (1 − τ ) as the “tax wedge.”
If δ (τjt − τit ) is small, then

                     ∆ log (kit /yit ) ≈ σ ∆ log (1 − τit ) + σ ∆ log ωi ,                 (4)

where the notation ∆xj refers to the difference in variable x for country j relative to
the US (so that ∆xj ≡ xj − xU S ). This differencing is equivalent to using fixed effects
for time, eliminating (in our example) the impact of variation in the world interest
rate. As before, σ = 1/ (1 − ν) is the elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor. Country-specific share parameters ωi lead to country fixed effects.

    One implication of equation (4) is that the variation in tax rates is too small to
account for the variation we see in capital-output ratios. Suppose, for example, that

                                              14
σ = 1 (the Cobb-Douglas case) and all countries have the same capital share ω. Then
the log-difference in capital-output ratios must equal the log-difference in tax wedges.
The variances are related in general by

                    Var [∆ log (kj /yj )] = σ 2 Var [∆ log (1 − τj )] .

In our data, the cross-country variance of the left-hand side 0.03. The cross-country
variance of the right-hand side is about 0.01 for effective tax rates, and much less
for revenue-based tax rates. With a plausible elasticity of substitution, it’s clear that
these tax rates do not vary enough across countries to account for a large share of
the variance of capital-output ratios in our data.

   We report estimates of equation (4) with a variety of tax measures in Table 3.
The dependent variable in each case is the log-difference in (total) capital-output
ratios. The message is similar to what we found with correlations. With effective tax
rates, the impact of taxes on the capital-output ratio depends on whether we include
country effects. Without them [regression (B)], the coefficient estimate is –0.34. With
them [regression (C)], the estimate is 0.14. It appears, then, that it’s the cross-section
information that drives the estimate to be negative: when we introduce country fixed
effects, the sign changes. Even in this case the magnitude is small, particularly if
we interpret it as an elasticity of substitution. With our revenue-based tax rate, the
coefficient estimate is positive both with and without country effects [regressions (H)
and (I), respectively]. Moreover, the magnitudes (1.38 and 1.04) are consistent with
something like a Cobb-Douglas production function.

   The broad features of this evidence survive when we confront them with a battery
of sensitivity tests (not reported). They include:


   • Private capital. Our theory has implications for private capital decisions, yet
      we reported regressions using total capital. If we use the ratio of business cap-
      ital to GDP, or of private capital (business plus housing) to GDP, very little
      changes. We might also use the ratio of business private capital to the compa-
      rable measure of output, but that poses a challenge of measurement challenge:
      we do not have direct measurements of private GDP. We therefore approximate

                                            15
      it by subtracting government purchases. With this approximate measure, the
      estimated coefficients are often larger, but the stark difference between effective
      and revenue-based tax rates remains.

   • Stability over time. Some have argued that capital mobility, which underlies our
      theory, is a better approximation in the second half of our sample than the first.
      If we split the sample in two — 1980-1992 and 1993-2005 — the coefficients are
      more precisely estimated in the second half of the sample. If we include country
      fixed effects, the coefficient of the effective marginal tax rate in the second half
      of the sample remains small and the coefficient of the revenue-based tax rate
      rises. The changes are small in both cases, but the latter might suggest that
      there has been an increase in the degree of capital mobility over our sample
      period.

   • Business cycles. Another modification is to eliminate the high-frequency or
      business cycle variation in the data, possibly because we think taxes operate
      over longer periods of time. If we use five-year averages of the variables in our
      regressions, the changes in coefficient estimates are modest but the standard
      errors increase substantially.


No doubt others will think of more ways to interpret the data, but it seems to us that
the features we’ve described are reasonably robust to a broad range of variation in
statistical methodology.

   The bottom line? Both correlations and regressions show significant relations
between capital-output ratios and corporate tax rates. The difficulty is that the sign
of the relation depends on how we measure tax rates. With effective tax rates, then
higher taxes are associated with higher capital-output ratios. But with revenue-based
tax rates, higher taxes are associated with lower capital-output ratios. The latter are
easier to rationalize, but both are resilient features of our data.




                                           16
6     Discussion

The data give us two different messages: effective tax rates are positively correlated
with capital-output ratios, while revenue-based tax rates are negatively correlated. A
reasonable person could emphasize either one, or perhaps neither. We lean toward
the evidence from revenue-based taxes (high tax rates discourage capital formation),
but it’s worth further discussion.

    Measurement error. None of our data are measured without error: capital-output
ratios, tax rates, and so on. Could measurement error account for some or all of
what we’ve found? Classical measurement error of capital would tend to reduce its
correlation with all variables, which hardly explains why our two tax measures have
correlations of opposite sign. However, we can imagine more complicated arguments
in which the same measurement error has the opposite effect on capital and tax
rates. One such example is measurement error in income/output, which might (so the
story goes) increase income tax revenues and decrease capital-output ratios, thereby
generating a negative correlation between the two. There is, in fact, a tendency for
tax revenues to rise in booms, perhaps through a distribution effect on firms: the
percentage of loss-making firms falls, raising measured average tax rates. It’s not
clear whether this effect is large enough to generate the correlation we see in the
data, but it’s a possibility.

    Reverse causality. Another possibility is that the correlations we’ve documented
are right, but are delivered by a different mechanism. Here’s one such story. Suppose
capital owners lobby to influence the taxes they pay. Then they would likely lobby
more when the capital-output ratio is high, possibly generating lower taxes in such
cases. This produces the negative correlation between capital and tax rates we de-
scribed earlier, but the causality works the other way: high capital intensity leads to
lower tax rates. Alternatively, we might imagine that the political process balances
the adverse incentive effects of capital taxation against their ability to raise revenue.
The latter is likely to be more important when capital intensity is high, which could
generate a positive association between capital tax rates and capital-output ratios.


                                           17
Hassler, Krusell, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2004) provide an illustration of this mech-
anism. Both show that the relation between capital and taxes can be more complex
than the example we described in Section 2.

    Micro and macro evidence. In the investment literature, studies generally find
little impact of taxes with aggregate data, but substantial impact when they use firm
or industry data. See, for example, Hassett and Hubbard’s (2002) survey. Gordon
and Hines (2002) and and Hines (1999) describe a similar difference between macro
and micro evidence in the international tax literature. From this perspective, our
suggestion of a significant impact of taxes in aggregate data is unusual. Whether it
represents an improvement in measurement or something entirely different remains
to be seen.



7     Final thoughts

We’ve examined the role of taxes, particularly corporate taxes, on the global allocation
of physical capital in a sample of OECD countries between 1980 and 2004. The results
are mixed. If we take the state-of-the-art in public finance — various measures of
effective corporate tax rates — there’s little relation between capital and taxes. If
we take corporate tax revenue as an indicator of tax rates, the results are stronger:
countries that collect a lot of tax revenue also have less capital, on average. Even
these results raise some questions. One question is why differences across countries
are so large. Even the most optimistic interpretation of the evidence leaves a large
fraction of the variation in capital-output ratios unexplained. Another is why the two
measures of tax variables are so different.

    In some ways, our difficulty in disentangling the impact of taxes from other factors
reflects a similar difficulty that public finance economists have had with firm-level
data. Despite overwhelming anecdotal evidence that taxes affect firm decisions, it’s
taken both effort and imagination to detect this impact in the data. Devereux (2006),
Gordon and Hines (2002), and Hines (1999) list numerous examples that show that
we’re not alone in this respect. Like them, we are left with some suggestion that the


                                           18
evidence may support our premise, but also with the feeling that the factors that
affect investment decisions go well beyond taxes.




                                         19
A      Data sources

Tables and figures are based on data from the following sources:

    • Devereux-Griffith-Klemm Corporate Tax Rate Data. This is an updated version
      of the data used in Devereux, Griffith, Klemm (2002). We use the statutory
      tax rate (sheet A1), the effective marginal tax rate (sheet A8), and the effective
      average tax rate (sheet A12).

    • OECD, Tax Revenue Database: Revenue Statistics of OECD Member Coun-
      tries. This includes government tax revenue by category of tax. We use two
      components of “taxes on income, profits, and capital gains”: taxes on individ-
      uals (1100) and taxes on corporations (1200). We also use “taxes on property”
      (4000).

    • OECD, Economic Outlook Database. We use GDP and its expenditure compo-
      nents. Real investment data are used to construct capital stocks by the perpet-
      ual inventory method. We decompose real investment into housing, government,
      and business components and apply different depreciation rates to each. The
      depreciation rate for private residential capital is constant and equal to 1.5%.
      The depreciation rate for government capital increases linearly from 3% in 1970
      to 4.15% in 2004. The depreciation rate for business capital increases linearly
      from 5.25% in 1970 to 8.50% in 2004.

    • OECD, Annual National Accounts. This is our source for the components of
      gross domestic income that we use to approximate capital income.

The OECD data are available through SourceOECD.org. The Devereux-Griffith-
Klemm data are from the website of the Institute for Fiscal Studies.




                                           20
References
Abel, Andrew B., 2006, “Optimal capital income taxation,” manuscript, April.
Auerbach, Alan J., 1979, “Wealth maximization and the cost of capital,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 93, 433-446.
Auerbach, Alan J., 2006, “The future of capital income taxation,” manuscript, Sep-
     tember.
Carey, David, and Josette Rabesona, 2002, “Tax ratios on labour and capital income
      and on consumption,” OECD Economic Studies 35, 129-174.
Congressional Budget Office, 2005, “Taxing capital income: effective rates and ap-
     proaches to reform,” October.
Devereux, Michael P., 2006, “Developments in the taxation of corporate profit in the
     OECD since 1965: rates, bases, and revenues,” manuscript, May.
Devereux, Michael P., Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm, 2002, “Corporate in-
     come tax reforms and international tax competition,” Economic Policy, 450-
     495; link to updated tax data.
Feldstein, Martin, and Charles Horioka, 1980, “Domestic saving and international
      capital flows,” Economic Journal 90, 314-329.
Gomme, Paul, and Peter Rupert, 2007, “Theory, measurement and calibration of
    macroeconomic models,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 460-497.
Gordon, Roger H., and James R. Hines, 2002, “International taxation,” in A.J. Auer-
     bach and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, New York: Elsevier
     Science BV.
Hassett, Kevin A., and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2002, “Tax policy and business invest-
      ment,” in Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3 , A.J. Auerbach and M.
      Feldstein, eds., 1293-1343.
Hassler, John, Per Krusell, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2004, “On the
      timing of optimal capital taxation,” CEPR Working Paper 4731.
Hines, James R., 1999, “Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation,”
      National Tax Journal 52, 305-322.
Jorgenson, Dale W., 1993, “Introduction and summary,” in D.W. Jorgenson and R.
      Landau, eds., Tax Reform and the Cost of Capital , Washington DC: Brookings
      Institution.
Kamps, Christophe, 2006, “New estimates of government net capital stocks for 22
    OECD countries, 19602001,” IMF Staff Papers 53, 120-150; link to capital

                                         21
      stock data.
King, Mervyn A., 1974, “Taxation and the cost of capital,” Review of Economic
      Studies 41, 21-35.
King, Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton, 1984, “The theoretical framework,” in M.A.
      King and D. Fullerton, eds., The Taxation of Income from Capital , Chicago,
      IL: University of Chicago Press.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2005, “Taxes, regulations, and the
    value of US and UK corporations,” Review of Economic Studies 72, 767-796.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Assaf Razin, and Linda L. Tesar, 1994, “Effective tax rates in
     macroeconomics: Cross-country estimates of tax rates on factor incomes and
     consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics 34, 297-323.
Mintz, Jack, 1995, “The corporation tax: a survey,” Fiscal Studies 16, 23-68.
Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985, “The economic effects of divi-
      dend taxation,” in Recent Advances in Corporate Finance, edited by E. Altman
      and M. Subrahmanyam, 227-284. Homewood, IL: Irwin.




                                        22
                Table 1: Capital and taxes: summary statistics

                                                            Standard Deviation
Variable                                          Mean   Overall   Betw. Countries

Capital
Total capital (ratio to GDP)                      3.11    0.45          0.41
Government capital (ratio to GDP)                 0.56    0.19          0.19
Housing capital (ratio to GDP)                    1.30    0.25          0.25
Business capital (ratio to GDP)                   1.26    0.22          0.20

Taxes
Statutory corporate rate                          0.38    0.11          0.08
Effective marginal corporate rate                 0.23    0.10          0.07
Effective average corporate rate                  0.28    0.09          0.06
Personal tax revenue (ratio to GDP)               0.11    0.03          0.03
Corporate tax revenue (ratio to GDP)              0.03    0.01          0.01
Corporate tax revenue (ratio to capital income)   0.07    0.03          0.03

Other
Investment (ratio to real GDP)                    0.20    0.03          0.03
Capital’s share of income                         0.34    0.04          0.03
Average product of capital                        0.11    0.02          0.02




                                       23
                                            Table 2: Capital and taxes: correlations

                                                1     2      3      4   5     6        7   8    9      10   11    12     13

     Capital
     1. Total capital (ratio to GDP)            1
     2. Government capital (ratio to GDP)       0.42 1
     3. Housing capital (ratio to GDP)          0.67 −0.29   1
     4. Business capital (ratio to GDP)         0.89 0.29    0.46   1

     Taxes




24
     5. Statutory corporate rate                 0.41 0.10 0.33 0.35 1
     6. Effective marginal corporate rate        0.36 0.04 0.27 0.37 0.72 1
     7. Effective average corporate rate         0.41 0.05 0.34 0.39 0.93 0.93 1
     8. Personal tax revenue (ratio to GDP) −0.01 −0.35 0.12 0.14 0.00 0.07 0.04 1
     9. Corp. tax revenue (ratio to GDP)        −0.12 0.13 −0.21 −0.12 0.08 0.16 0.13 −0.11     1
     10. Corp. tax revenue (ratio to cap. inc.) −0.37 −0.69 0.15 −0.32 −0.22 −0.20 −0.20 0.27   0.28   1

     Other
     11. Investment (ratio to real GDP)        0.25 0.51 −0.28 0.36 0.00 0.13 0.06 −0.29        0.23 −0.44 1
     12. Capital’s share of income            −0.11 −0.17 0.00 −0.07 −0.27 −0.19 −0.25 0.00     0.21 0.16 0.08    1
     13. Average product of capital           −0.81 −0.34 −0.56 −0.70 −0.51 −0.40 −0.49 −0.02   0.20 0.32 −0.07   0.60   1
     Table 3: Regressions: accounting for capital-output ratios. This table reports regressions with our panel of countries
     over the period 1980-2004. Each is an estimate of equation (4) with a particular tax rate — or, in some cases, multiple
     tax rates. All tax rates are included as tax wedges: (1 − τ ) rather than τ . Numbers in parentheses are t-ratios. The
     coefficients have the (approximate) interpretation as the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. Some
     regressions include country fixed effects.

      Explanatory variables                     (A)       (B)       (C)       (D)       (E)       (F )      (G)       (H)       (I)      (J)       (K)


      Statutory corporate rate                   −0.40
                                                (−9.43)
      Effective marginal corporate rate                    −0.34      0.14
                                                          (−6.16)    (3.86)




25
      Effective average corporate rate                                         −0.55      0.16
                                                                              (−8.60)    (3.13)
      Personal tax revenue (ratio to GDP)                                                          −0.03                                  −0.28 −0.62
                                                                                                  (−0.15)                                (−1.48) (−2.87)
      Corp. tax revenue (ratio to GDP)                                                                        1.20
                                                                                                             (1.83)
      Corp. tax revenue (ratio to cap. inc.)                                                                            1.38     1.04      1.45      0.96
                                                                                                                       (6.51)   (6.99)    (6.69)    (6.44)
      Country fixed effects                       no        no       yes        no       yes        no       no        no        yes       no       yes

      R2                                          0.21    0.10    0.79    0.18    0.79    0.00    0.01    0.10    0.83    0.11    0.83
      BIC                                      −396.52 −353.34 −766.05 −384.39 −760.93 −337.75 −341.07 −378.09 −902.01 −374.38 −904.64
      Number of observations                    333     333     333     333     333     366     366     366     366     366     366
Figure 1: Capital-output ratios. In the top panel, each line represents the total
capital-output ratio for a specific country. In the bottom panel, the lines are the
mean and standard deviation across countries.
                        4
   Capital−Output Ratio
     1     2  0  3




                            1980   1985   1990           1995                 2000   2005
                        4
   Capital−Output Ratio




                                                                      Mean
           2     3




                                                                Standard Deviation
     1        0




                            1980   1985   1990           1995                 2000   2005
                                                  Year




                                                 26
Figure 2: Effective marginal corporate tax rates. In the top panel, each line represents
the tax rate for a specific country. In the bottom panel, the lines are the mean and
standard deviation across countries.
       .5
       .4
   Tax Rate
    .2  .3
       .1
       0




              1980    1985           1990           1995                 2000     2005
       .5
       .4
   Tax Rate
        .3




                                                                 Mean
    .2




                                                           Standard deviation
       .1
       0




              1980    1985           1990           1995                 2000     2005
                                             Year




                                            27
Figure 3: Revenue-based corporate tax rates. In the top panel, each line represents
the tax rate (ratio of corporate tax revenue to capital income) for a specific country.
In the bottom panel, the lines are the mean and standard deviation across countries.
         .2 .15
   Tax Rate
      .1 .05
         0




                  1980   1985       1990           1995                 2000     2005
         .2 .15
   Tax Rate




                                                                Mean
      .1 .05




                                                          Standard Deviation
         0




                  1980   1985       1990           1995                 2000     2005
                                            Year




                                           28
