NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION, SCHOOL CHOICE, AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM TWO EXPERIMENTS
Justine S. Hastings
Jeffrey M. Weinstein
Working Paper 13623
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13623

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

We would like to thank the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Public School District for allowing us to study
public school choice in the district. Jason Ghassemi, Jacob Gramlich, and Hillary Gramlich provided
excellent assistance creating and distributing the information sheets. We would also like to thank Joseph
Altonji, Judy Chevalier, Stefano Della Vigna, Alan Gerber, Edward Glaeser, Donald Green, Caroline
Hoxby, Dean Karlan, Lawrence Katz, Jeffrey Kling, Michael Kremer, Sendhil Mullainathan, Douglas
Staiger, Rebecca Thornton, Ebonya Washington, and anonymous referees for valuable input. We gratefully
acknowledge support from the Smith Richardson Foundation and the Institution for Social and Policy
Studies at Yale University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Justine S. Hastings and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments
Justine S. Hastings and Jeffrey M. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13623
November 2007, Revised February 2008
JEL No. D83,H0,I2,I28
ABSTRACT
We analyze two experiments that provided direct information on school test scores to lower-income
families in a public school choice plan. We find that receiving information significantly increases the
fraction of parents choosing higher-performing schools. Parents with high-scoring alternatives nearby
were more likely to choose non-guaranteed schools with higher test scores. Using random variation
from each experiment, we find evidence that attending a higher-scoring school increases student test
scores. The results imply that school choice will most effectively increase academic achievement for
disadvantaged students when parents have easy access to test score information and have good options
to choose from.

Justine S. Hastings
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
justine.hastings@yale.edu
Jeffrey M. Weinstein
Yale University
P.O. Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
jeffrey.weinstein@yale.edu

I. Introduction
Several urban public school districts are currently experimenting with public school choice
plans, and the federal No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) of 2001 includes a choice provision
allowing students in failing schools to choose to attend non-failing schools outside of their
neighborhood. The goal of these choice plans is to increase academic outcomes for
disadvantaged students by allowing them to attend higher-performing schools and by creating
pressure on failing schools to improve through the threat of losing students, implicitly assuming
that parents select schools for academics when offered the opportunity to do so. However, recent
work on parental choice has found that low-income families place much less weight on
academics when choosing schools, decreasing the immediate academic gains for those exercising
choice (Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2007), as well as the pressure for low-performing schools to
improve academic achievement (Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2006).1

It may be the case that, all else equal, low-income families place lower weights on school test
scores because they rationally expect lower returns to education for their children. Alternatively,
these families may place a high value on academic outcomes but find it more costly to act on
those preferences, leading to lower expressed preferences for academic achievement. Several
recent papers have explored how salience and cognitive costs affect consumer decisions in a
wide-range of markets, including retail purchases, Medicare plans, credit cards, and retirement
investments (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft [2007], Kling et al. [2008], Ausubel [1991], Hastings
and Tejeda-Ashton [2008], respectively). If lower-income families face higher costs of gathering
and interpreting statistics on academic achievement, they may choose schools based on easier-todetermine characteristics such as proximity, instead of school test scores.

1

In addition to these papers, Schneider and Buckley (2002) monitored the search behavior of parents on an Internet
web site for public schools in Washington, DC, and show that academics are more important search criteria for
college-educated parents. Fossey (1994) and Armor and Peiser (1998) studied the characteristics of school districts’
gaining and losing students in a Massachusetts interdistrict choice program and find that non-minority students and
students with high-test scores were more likely to change districts. On the other hand, Jacob and Lefgren (2007)
examined parental choices of individual teachers within schools and find that higher-poverty and minority parents
are less likely to actively select a teacher, but conditional on choosing a teacher, parents in higher-poverty and
minority schools place more emphasis on measures of teachers’ ability to raise achievement, rather than student
satisfaction.

2

If this is the case, policy interventions that reduce the cost of acquiring and analyzing
comparative information on school academic achievement may result in more parents choosing
higher-performing schools within a public school choice plan.2 This paper uses a natural
experiment and a field experiment in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Public School District (CMS) to
examine the degree to which transparent and easily accessible information on school-level
academic performance impacts the schools that parents choose for their children, the importance
they place on academic achievement when choosing schools, and the impact that attending
higher-performing schools has on subsequent student outcomes.

Each spring since 2002 parents in CMS could submit their top three school choices for their
children for the next school year. In order to find information on schools, they could reference a
100-plus-page school choice guide with self-descriptions of the positive aspects of each school.
However, to access objective statistics on student achievement, parents would have to search the
CMS website and make a comparison school by school. In the summer of 2004, after the annual
school choice process had been completed, CMS re-sent choice forms along with a three-page
spreadsheet printout of test scores at every school in the district (sorted alphabetically by name)
to each family with a child enrolled at an NCLB-sanctioned school in order to comply with
NCLB regulation.3 We use this implementation of NCLB as a natural experiment, comparing the
choices parents made in the spring with no direct test score information to the choices they made
in the summer with the NCLB-mandated test score information, to estimate the impact of
information on parents’ school choices.

We then analyze data from a field experiment we conducted during the 2006-2007 school choice
process. Working with CMS, we provided information sheets with the school choice forms to
parents with children in randomly selected schools serving primarily low- to middle-income
neighborhoods.4 The sheets provided either clear statistics on academic achievement for each
school in the child’s choice set or information on academic achievement coupled with estimated
2

Making information more salient can be represented as lowering decision-making costs in the terminology of
Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2007).
3
This was the first year that any school could be categorized as “Title I improving” under NCLB in CMS. Each
state completed a Consolidated State Application Accountability Workbook for NCLB, and states may have varied
in the specifics of how they would implement the broad goals of the regulation. In Section III we will outline how
Title I status and AYP are determined in the state of North Carolina and in CMS.
4
We will discuss restrictions placed on the field experiment by CMS in Section IV.

3

odds of admission. The information presented was simpler than the NCLB-mandated information
in that it appeared in a one-page format, was sorted by the academic ranking of schools (instead
of alphabetically), and contained only information on the schools relevant for the child’s choice
(e.g., only elementary schools for elementary school children). The simplified information was
given to students at unsanctioned schools, where the control group received no direct information
on test score performance, as well as at NCLB-sanctioned schools where the control group
received the NCLB-mandated three-page spreadsheet. This allows us to estimate the impact that
the simpler one-page format had over no direct information, as well as the added impact it had
over the NCLB-mandated information.

In both of these experimental settings, we find that providing parents with direct information on
school test scores resulted in significantly more parents choosing higher scoring schools for their
children. Both the three-page NCLB-mandated information and our one-page information format
increased the proportion of parents choosing non-guaranteed schools by 5 to 7 percentage points
and increased the average test score of schools chosen by 0.05 to 0.10 student-level standard
deviations, relative to the control group that received no direct information on test scores. We do
not find evidence that our simpler one-page format had substantial added impact over the NCLB
format, suggesting that gains from simplified information flatten out eventually.

The overall impact of receiving information on the test score of the school chosen represents the
average impact of receiving information across parents who still chose their guaranteed school
(zero impact) and parents who selected schools with significantly higher test scores. For
example, the 16% of parents who responded to NCLB-mandated information in 2004 by
choosing an alternative school chose schools with 0.5 student-level standard deviations higher
test scores than the schools they had chosen in the spring. In both settings, we find that a key
predictor of both responding to information by choosing an alternative school and the test score
of the school chosen is proximity to high-scoring school alternatives. This is consistent with a
model where parents choose schools to maximize utility, which is increasing in expected
academic achievement but decreasing in time and travel costs, and implies that, even with
transparent information, school choice can only be as effective as the options offered to parents.

4

Next, we examine if an increase in the test scores of the schools parents chose led to
improvements in their children’s own academic performance. We use instrumental variables
approaches, exploiting random variation generated by each experiment in the test score of the
school attended to estimate the impact of attending a higher-scoring school on student academic
outcomes. In both experiments, we find large but marginally significant impacts of the test score
of the school attended on own test scores. The point estimates imply gains in own test scores of
0.37 - 0.41 student-level standard deviations from attending a school with a one standard
deviation higher average test score. We compare our findings to those from prior studies that
have examined the impact on own achievement of attending a school with higher average test
scores in the context of choice without simplified information (Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt 2006;
Cullen and Jacob 2007; Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2007) and in the context of student
assignment without choice (Hoxby and Weingarth-Salyer 2005; Hastings and Weinstein 2008).

II. Background Description of the CMS School Choice Plan
Before the introduction of a school choice plan in the fall of 2002, the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Public School District (CMS) operated under a racial desegregation order for three decades. For
the 2002-2003 school year, CMS moved to a district-wide school choice plan in response to a
court order to cease busing for racial integration. In the spring of 2002, parents were asked to
submit their top three choices of school programs for each child. Each student was assigned a
“home school” in her neighborhood. This school was typically one of the closest schools to her,
and she was guaranteed admission to this school. Admission to non-guaranteed schools was
granted based on a lottery. In the initial implementation of the school choice program, CMS
underwent a large redistricting of home school assignments; approximately 50% of parcels lost
property rights to the school they had rights to under busing.

In the first year of choice, the district required every parent to submit a choice form, and it
achieved a 95% compliance rate. In each year after the initial choice year, only parents of
students in rising grades (K, 6th, 9th), new students to the district, students affected by the
opening of new schools, and parents who wished to change their children’s school were required
to submit choice forms. Each year a significant fraction of schools in the district is

5

oversubscribed.5 The lottery process for assigning students to oversubscribed schools has
continued since the introduction of school choice in 2002. Under the lottery system, students are
first assigned to priority groups by school and grade. The priority groups have varied from year
to year but generally have given priority to higher-poverty and lower-performing students who
choose lower-poverty and higher-performing schools.6 Within each priority group, admission is
determined by randomly assigned lottery number alone.

In order for parents to determine which schools to choose, CMS provided several resources.
First, each year CMS produced a school choice guide that was approximately 100 pages long. It
contained detailed instructions on how to complete the school choice form and how to submit it,
along with a brief description of the lottery process.7 The bulk of the choice book was devoted to
written descriptions of each school and program, from pre-school through high school. There are
approximately 120 elementary, 40 middle, and 30 high school choice options in the district. The
descriptions were written by the schools, describing the positive features each school offered to
students. Objective measures of school characteristics, such as average test score performance,
suspension rates, or racial compositions, were not included.

In addition, CMS provided a Family Application Center that parents could phone or visit in order
to ask questions about the school choice process. The staff members at the Family Application
Center emphasized the positive aspects of each school during their discussions with parents. In
particular, staff members were supposed to respond to questions like “Which school is the best
school?” by advising parents to discuss with their children what their needs were and then to visit
the different school options in order to determine which school was the best for their children,
since what a “good” school is depends on each individual child.8 It is important to note that this

5

In the first year, approximately one third of the schools were oversubscribed due to CMS’s commitment to expand
capacities at schools in an effort to give parents one of their three choices. In subsequent years, two thirds of the
schools have been oversubscribed as capacities were fixed.
6
The priority group definitions were initially based on free- and reduced-lunch status and the concentration of freeand reduced-lunch recipients at a school. Since the use of lunch recipient status has recently received negative
attention, CMS moved to use test score performance as a priority instead. Students performing below average on end
of year exams are given priority for admission to schools performing at or above the district average on standardized
exams.
7
Parents were not told how the lottery was run (e.g., first-choice maximizer) or how the “priority boosts” were
implemented.
8
Information from interviews and conversations with Family Application Center staff.

6

advice may be correct, as the relationship between school average test scores and student
achievement has not been strongly established. However, it suggests to parents that identifying a
“good” school takes a substantial and potentially daunting investment of time and effort.

CMS also offers an extensive website. On this website, parents can review objective statistics for
each school. Individual “school profile” pages provide statistics, such as physical locations,
standardized test score performance, suspension rates, racial compositions, and attendance rates.
Parents would have to view statistics for each school separately; hence, obtaining objective
information on schools might involve a significant web search and comparison.

On top of this information regime, two exogenous changes in information on school test scores
were introduced: NCLB-mandated information in 2004 and our field experiment in 2006.
Begining in 2004, families with children at NCLB-sanctioned schools were provided with
NCLB-mandated information, which consisted of a three-page, alphabetically sorted printout of
test score performance for every school in CMS (regardless of grade level). Our experiment in
2006 provided a one-page table of test scores, sorted by score, for only relevant choice options to
students at both NCLB-sanctioned and unsanctioned schools. Figure I presents a timeline of
events for reference throughout the discussion of the two experiments and empirical results. It is
important to note that both experiments exclude the highest-income families in CMS; this is by
definition in the case of NCLB and by stipulation in the case of our field experiment.9 Table I
gives average characteristics of each experimental group, relative to the district-wide average.
While families in both experiments are more likely to be African American, receive lunch
subsidies, and have children with lower average test scores, these families are representative of
families that many school choice plans, and NCLB in particular, are intended to help.

III. NCLB – A Natural Experiment in Transparent Information on Academics
Beginning in the summer of 2004, CMS began the first phase of sanctions for Title I schools that
failed to make Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) for two years in a row. As defined by CMS, a
school is a Title I school (receives federal Title I funds) if 75% or more of its students qualify for
9

We will discuss the design of the field experiment in detail in Section IV.

7

federal lunch subsidies. As defined by North Carolina under NCLB compliance, a school needs
to satisfy certain academic targets for ten subgroups of students in order to make AYP.10 If just
one target was missed for one subgroup, then the school failed to make AYP. Thus if a school is
both Title 1 for two years in a row and also fails to make AYP for two years in a row it is
classified as Title 1 Improving and thus subject to NCLB regulation.11

Sixteen schools satisfied both constraints in 2004 and entered into regulation under NCLB. The
regulation mandated that parents be notified of the NCLB status of their school and offered the
choice to attend an alternative school. In addition, parents had to be given information on the
academic achievement at the schools they could select.12 CMS provided a three-page spreadsheet
printout, sorted by school name, with the percent proficient for every school in the district, as
well as a list of Title I Improving schools, since students exercising choice under NCLB are not
allowed to choose another Title I Improving school. Thus, the NCLB legislation provided clear
statistics to parents on the academic achievement at their school and at every other school in the
district, as well as notification that their school had failed to meet AYP.13 For families with
children at these schools, we observe the choices they submitted in the Spring 2004 choice plan
with no direct information on school test scores and the choices they submitted in July 2004 after
receiving the NCLB-mandated test score information. Students of parents who chose alternative
schools in July were then entered into a school choice lottery.

Parents were told, just like in the regular spring lottery, that if they wanted to remain at their
current school, they did not have to fill out a form. Of 6,695 students in our sample who received

10

For a list of subgroups and detailed description of AYP targets and requirements, please see the Consolidated
State Application Accountability Workbook for North Carolina (2005), which provides federal NCLB guidelines
along with North Carolina’s implementation of these guidelines.
11
Schools that satisfied either the Title I requirement or the AYP requirement, but not both, were not subject to
regulation under NCLB. For example, thirteen schools were Title I in both the 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 school
years but made AYP in at least one of those years and hence were not subject to regulation under NCLB. Similarly,
21 schools did not make AYP in either of the two school years but were not Title I and thus were not subject to
regulation under NCLB.
12
United States Department of Education, Public School Choice. (Washington, DC: United States Department of
Education, 2004). Available at www.ed.gov/policy/elsec/guid/schoolchoiceguid.pdf. p. 18.
13
Importantly, this information is only provided to parents of students slated to attend a NCLB school in the
subsequent school year.

8

NCLB notification, 1,149 responded by submitting a form in July.14 Of the parents who did fill
out a form in July, 57 of them listed their current NCLB school as their first choice, which they
did not need to do in order to remain at their NCLB school. Thus, 1,092 parents filled out a form
in July and chose a school different than their current NCLB school.

Given the number of responders alone, it appears that NCLB notification had a significant
impact on parental choice. Table II presents mean choice behavior for parents at NCLB schools
before and after receiving NCLB-mandated information. If we include all parents (those that
chose their NCLB school in the spring choice round and those that did not), we see that, after
receiving NCLB information, the fraction of parents that chose an alternative school increased by
5.1 percentage points relative to a base of 11%. The average test score of the school chosen
increased by a statistically significant 0.047 student-level standard deviations. If we consider
only parents who chose their NCLB school first in the spring, the fraction of parents choosing an
alternative school increased from 0% to 14.5%. The average test score of the school chosen
increased by 0.088 student-level standard deviations.

The average difference in the test score at the chosen school between the spring and the summer
implies that parents who submitted forms in the summer chose schools with much higher average
test scores. Figure II shows a kernel density estimate of the difference in the test score of the
first-choice school in July and the NCLB school for parents who did not choose the NCLB
school first in July. On average, responders selected first-choice schools with 0.62 student-level
standard deviation higher test scores than the NCLB school. A small fraction of parents chose
schools that were close to or slightly worse performing than the NCLB school, while another
minority of parents chose some of the highest-performing schools in the district; schools that
outperformed the NCLB school by over one student-level standard deviation in test score.

Rows 1 and 2 of Table III show the average test score at the first-choice school in the spring
versus in July for parents who chose an alternative school in July. They indicate a 0.485 (-0.017
14

We began with the 8,284 students who received NCLB notification, of which 1,363 responded by filling out a
form in July. We exclude from the analysis students who were not active in CMS at the time of the spring lottery
(221 students), students with special needs or those being retained (1,245 additional students), and students who had
missing demographic information (123 additional students).

9

versus -0.502) student-level standard deviation increase in the average test score of the school
chosen after receiving the NCLB-mandated information. This change in choice behavior was not
mechanically generated by the fact that NCLB parents could not select another NCLB school in
July. Rows 3 and 4 demonstrate this point. These rows show that the average test scores of
available schools within five miles only increased by 0.075 (-0.247 versus -0.322) student-level
standard deviations by excluding other NCLB schools from the choice set. Hence if parents
chose schools at random from the set of schools within five miles in the spring and in july, we
would expect only a 0.075 increase in average score of the school chosen. Hence almost all of
the gain in the average test score of the chosen school came from a change in choice behavior.

Table IV examines which types of parents were more likely to respond to NCLB-mandated
information by choosing an alternative school, and of those parents, which ones were more likely
to choose higher-scoring schools. Suppose that, once a parent is fully informed about the
academic performance at each choice option, they select a school to maximize utility which is
increasing in expected academic achievement but decreasing in commuting costs to schools.
Simplified information on test scores may lower information costs, increasing the implicit weight
parents place on academics when choosing a school. However, parents may still face trade-offs
from time and transportation costs that censor the impact of information on observed choice
behavior. We might expect to see the largest impact of information on parental choice where
these other costs of choosing a school are lowest, for example, where there are proximate highscoring school alternatives.

Table IV presents regressions of the form:

y i = α + X i' β + Ri'δ + ε i

(1)

where yi is an indicator for whether the parent chose an alternative to their NCLB school
(columns (1) and (2)) or the average test score at the first-choice school conditional on having
chosen an alternative school in July (columns (3) and (4)), Xi is a vector of student
characteristics, Ri are NCLB school and program fixed effects, and ε i is a random error term that
allows for clustering at the NCLB school-program and grade level. Columns (1) and (3) present
results for the entire sample, while columns (2) and (4) present results for the sub-sample of
families who chose their NCLB school in the spring.
10

The results imply that proximity to high-scoring schools with one student-level standard
deviation higher test scores increases the probability of responding to information by choosing
an alternative school by 9.1 – 11.0 percentage points (columns (1) and (2)). Columns (3) and (4)
show that, conditional on choosing an alternative school, parents with higher-scoring schools
within five miles choose significantly higher-scoring alternatives (0.186 – 0.233 student-level
standard deviation increase). Although the average score of and distance to schools within five
miles are relatively ad hoc measures of choice set characteristics, they do have the impact on
choice behavior we would expect to see if parental choice response to simplified information
were constrained by factors that affect the cost of choosing high-performing schools.

In addition to choice set characteristics, demographic characteristics are also significant
determinants of the response to information. Both parents with a single child in CMS and parents
of rising-grade children were more likely to choose out in July; however, conditional on
choosing out, they did not choose significantly higher-scoring schools.15 This is consistent with
the hypothesis that these characteristics may lower the costs of choosing an alternative school,
but they may not be associated with a higher implicit value for academic achievement. African
American parents were more likely to choose out in July; however, conditional on choosing out,
both African Americans and parents of free-and-reduced lunch recipients selected significantly
lower performing schools.16 Interestingly, both high-scoring students and those with past
suspensions were more likely to choose out in July. While high- and low-performing students
sought to attend alternative schools, conditional on choosing out, test scores and suspension rates
had no significant effect on the test score of the school chosen. Unexcused absences, on the other
hand, decrease significantly the probability of choosing out, as well as the test score of the school
chosen, although the magnitudes of the coefficients are small. As we might expect, the
regression results in columns (1) and (3) also show that parents who chose out in the spring were
15

We define a student as a single child if there are no other children registered in CMS with the same last name and
street address. While this may not capture all siblings, it at least captures those for whom schooling decisions are
made from the same residential address and within the same family unit. It is also the definition used by CMS when
defining sibling status. Rising grade students are those who going into Kindergarten, 6th, or 9th grade and will
therefore be changing school locations for the next school year as they transition to the next education level.
16
This may reflect the trade-off between school average test score and fraction minority that African American
parents face when choosing a school. However, it is important in interpreting these results to remember that this
sample of students is almost 90% lunch subsidy recipients and over 77% African American.

11

also significantly more likely to choose out in July and, conditional on choosing out, selected
higher-scoring schools.

Overall, the NCLB-mandated information facilitated the choice of a higher-performing
alternative school for a significant fraction of parents. Importantly, we find that proximity to
high-performing schools is a key factor in determining the probability of responding to
information by choosing an alternative, higher-scoring school.

IV. A Field Experiment in the 2006-2007 School Choice Plan
Working with CMS, we designed simplified information sheets to attach to parents’ school
choice forms for the 2006-2007 school choice round to test if simplified information has a
similar effect on parental choice outside of the NCLB sub-population and also if moving to a
simpler one-page format has an added impact over the three-page NCLB-mandated test score
information. The field experiment was limited by the district in several important ways. First,
students attending the same school and living in the same choice zone had to receive the same
type of information. Hence, information was randomized at the school and choice-zone level
(school-zone).17 Second, the set of schools was restricted to NCLB schools and non-NCLB
schools serving low- to middle-income neighborhoods, and we were asked to limit the number of
forms provided to non-NCLB students to a few thousand. As in prior years, choice forms were
provided to all students slated to attend NCLB schools (to comply with the choice requirements
of the law), to rising grade students (going into Kindergarten, 6th, or 9th grade in the next school
year), and to students whose home-school assignments for the 2006-2007 school year were
affected by the opening of new schools. Our simplified information sheet was attached to this
choice form, so grade restrictions held as well.

17

The district was split into 4 quadrants called “choice zones”. Parents could choose from any school in the district,
but their child would only receive free transportation to schools in their choice zone. For the 2006-2007 school year,
CMS significantly redrew the boundaries of the choice zones so that each zone contained a range of possible schools
given the new restricted choice set. Hence, it was often the case that students attending the same current school lived
in different 2006-2007 choice zones, even though they would have been in the same choice zone under the prior
choice zone boundary definition. In addition the randomization was done separately for school-zones in 11
randomization blocks created from high-school feeder zones to make sure that treatments were geographically
spread since we had relatively few observations to randomize over.

12

In addition, we were restricted to providing information on test scores and odds of admission.
After the first year of school choice, a significant number of schools in the district were oversubscribed, admitting few, if any, students each year. Despite this fact, demand for these schools
did not decline.18 We combined odds of admission with test scores to examine how, if at all,
parents would react to clear information on admit chance. We randomly selected school-zones to
receive either Score forms (test score information only) or Odds forms (test scores coupled with
odds of admission) subject to the constraints listed above. The randomization was done
separately for each of the segments of schools: pre-K (rising kindergarten), 5th graders (rising
6th), 8th graders (rising 9th), and NCLB students. There were 6,328 non-NCLB students in 46
school-zones (39 schools) who were part of the field experiment, and 10,134 NCLB students in
31 school-zones (19 schools).19

The simplified information forms were specialized for each child. They contained a list of
schools in the student’s choice set, which depended on the student’s choice zone and her home
school assignment for the 2006-2007 school year. Figures III and IV provide examples of the
simplified information forms. The forms list the schools in the choice set, along with programspecific school average scores (and odds of admission where applicable).20 The scores were
calculated from the prior year’s average performance of students in that school and program on
standardized tests and then re-scaled to correspond to a percentage score that looks like a grade.21

18

This led the district to limit the available schools for choice in the 2006-2007 school choice plan to those with a
positive probability of admitting students, in order to mitigate parental discontent. Despite the change in the schools
offered for choice, there were many school options with a wide range of academic performance for families to
choose from. For further discussion of the 2006-2007 school choice plan, what information the district provided on
school capacity constraints, as well as summary statistics on the 2006-2007 school choice offerings, please see
Hastings, Van Weelden, and Weinstein (2007).
19
Note that the number of NCLB schools increased since 2004; however, they were all still elementary and middle
schools. There were nineteen NCLB schools expected for the 2006-2007 school year. After the 2006 test score
results were completed in July 2006, two more schools ended up being classified as Title I Improving, resulting in
21 total NCLB schools for the 2006-2007 school year.
20
Two types of each form were given: one with only numeric information on test scores and one with a graphical
apple rating that represented the numeric scores in addition to the numbers themselves. The graphical addition was
randomized within school and homeroom, since it technically added no new information. We did not find that
further simplification affected choices, so we pool the choice forms with and without graphics for this analysis.
21
The schools in each information table were sorted by test score. The guaranteed school option for each child was
presented separately in its own line below the test score table. This was done to facilitate personalizing the
information sheets for each child and to match the way the choices were listed on the actual choice form. Typically,
the guaranteed choice was open to lottery choices, so it would be listed in test-score-order within the table as well.
However, in some instances where the guaranteed choice was not open for students to choose in, it only appeared as
a separate line below the choice table. This was the case, for example, in Figure IV but not in Figure III.

13

The odds of admission were calculated based on the prior year’s admission rates. The
information sheets incorporated the CMS logo and its graphic themes and were designed to look
as if they were made by and came from the school district. The school district approved the final
design. The staff at the Family Application Center reported seeing parents with their simplified
information sheets in hand, with notes written on the forms as they made their decisions.

Tables V and VI examine the effect that simplified information had on aggregate choice
behavior. The outcome measures of interest are aggregated or averaged at the school-zone level,
that is, the level at which the treatment was assigned. Table V shows that average baseline
characteristics are balanced across treatment and control groups. The first three columns give the
means of the dependent variables (baseline characteristics) for the treatment and control groups.
The last two columns give the coefficient from a regression of each dependent variable on
whether the school-zone received Score or Odds forms, controlling for randomization-block
fixed effects:22

y S = α + θTS1 + φTS2 + RS' δ + ε S

(2)

where TS1 and TS2 are indicators for whether students in school-zone S received the Score form
or the Odds form, respectively, and RS are randomization-block fixed effects. All of the
coefficients are insignificant, implying that baseline characteristics are balanced across treatment
and control groups.

Table VI presents regression results from specification (2), where the dependent variables are the
fraction of parents listing a non-guaranteed school as their first choice and the average difference
between the test score of the first-choice school and the test score at the guaranteed school (test
score gain). Panel 1 presents results pooled across non-NCLB and NCLB school-zones. Panels 2
and 3 present results separately for non-NCLB and NCLB school-zones, respectively, since the
information available to the control groups differs across those two samples. Within each panel,
the first two rows report the treatment effect of receiving a Score form or an Odds form, while
the third row presents the pooled treatment effect of receiving either type of form. Columns (1)
and (2) provide ordinary least squares estimates, while columns (3) and (4) provide weighted
22

Because the randomization was done separately within the different grade levels for non-NCLB schools and
zones, and since class sizes vary across these zones, we control for randomization-block fixed effects (Rouse 1998).

14

least squares estimates, where each school-zone observation is weighted by the number of
students in that school-zone.

The first panel of estimates shows no significant overall impact of transparent information on
parental choice behavior pooled across the non-NCLB and NCLB observations. However, the
second panel shows that among the non-NCLB school-zones, where the control group received
no direct information on test scores, information had a significant impact on choices. Receiving
information on test scores increased the fraction of parents who chose a non-guaranteed school
by about 7 percentage points, off of a base of 31%. This implies that simplified information on
test scores increased demand for non-guaranteed schools by an economically significant 23%.
Receiving information on odds of admission and test scores did not have a significant impact on
the fraction of parents choosing non-guaranteed schools, although the point estimates are similar
in magnitude to the point estimates on Score form.23 Both forms have similar effects on the
average difference between the test score of the first-choice school and the test score at the
guaranteed school; Score forms and Odds forms caused an increase of about 0.10 student-level
standard deviations (a 70% increase relative to the mean of 0.14). If we pool the receipt of a
Scores or an Odds form into one indicator for received information, the overall impact on
parental choice is similar and slightly more significant. Hence, in the non-NCLB group, parents
respond to information by choosing alternative schools with significantly higher test scores.

These results are similar in magnitude to the results in Table II from the 2004 NCLB natural
experiment. This suggests that our information may have no additional effect over the NCLBmandated information. Indeed, the third panel of results in Table VI presents estimates of the
effects on aggregate choice behavior in the NCLB sample of school-zones. Here the control
group received the three-page NCLB-mandated information; insignificant results imply that our
simplified information had no effect above and beyond the NCLB-mandated information. This
suggests that the impact of providing easy-to-access and transparent information flattens out
23

Hastings, Van Weelden, and Weinstein (2007) find that simplified information on test scores also affected the
average number of choices that parents listed. School-zones receiving Score forms had a significant 24% increase in
the average number of choices listed, relative to the control group. However, school-zones receiving Odds forms had
no significant average increase in the number of choices listed relative to the control group. This implies that
knowing the odds of admission along with the test score of each choice decreased the number of choices listed
relative to receiving information on test scores alone.

15

eventually, and most of the effect on choices may come from providing clear statistics at the time
of choice, rather than the exact format those statistics appear in.24

As in the 2004 NCLB natural experiment, we can use student-level data to examine which
families were more likely to respond to our information sheets by choosing substantially better
schools. Figure V shows a kernel density estimate, by treatment and control groups, of the test
score of the school chosen relative to the guaranteed school for parents who chose alternative
schools. Because mean impacts of scores and odds were similar, we combine the treatments into
“Received_Information” and plot the choices of those families versus the choices of control
group families. There are two interesting things to note. First, receiving information almost
eliminates the density of parents who pick schools with lower average test scores than their
guaranteed option (density to the left of zero). Second, receiving information more than doubles
the density of parents choosing schools with average test scores more than one student-level
standard deviation higher than their children’s guaranteed school. This gain represents moving
from a school in the lower quartile of the distribution of test scores across schools to one in the
upper quartile.

Table VII presents results for the non-NCLB sample from regressions of the form:

y i = α + θTi + Ti Z i' λ + X i' β + Ri'δ + ε i

(3)

where Xi is a vector of student characteristics such as race and lunch recipient status, as well as
characteristics of the student’s choice set that might affect her choices, such as the average test
score at local schools and the average distance to local schools. The Ri are randomization-block
fixed effects. We combine the forms into one treatment for “received information”, Ti, which is
an indicator for whether the child received a Score form or an Odds form, and ZiTi is a vector of
interactions between baseline characteristics and the treatment indicator. Standard errors are
clustered at the school-zone and grade level.

Column (1) shows the interaction effects of receiving information on the gain in the score of the
first-choice school relative to the guaranteed school, and column (2) shows the same regression
24

Alternatively, it may be the case that this group of parents is relatively inert. Parents who would have responded
to NCLB information and notification may have already responded by choosing out in prior years. Hence the
remaining students have parents who are not responsive to information on academic outcomes.

16

restricted to the sample of students that chose a non-guaranteed school. Both columns show that
the average impact of receiving information on the score of the school chosen is significantly
increasing in the average test score of schools within five miles, implying that simplified
information will have the largest impact on observed choices where the cost of choosing higherscoring schools is lowest. These results are similar to the results found using the 2004 NCLB
natural experiment and emphasize that, while simplified information may have a large impact on
the implicit weight parents place on academics, this impact will only be expressed through
changes in observable choice behavior for families whose costs of choosing good schools, once
they can identify them, are relatively low.25

Among the interactions with demographics, we again find that parents of children with no other
identifiable siblings in CMS were more likely to respond to information by changing their choice
behavior. This may be because these families face fewer transportation constraints that may
inhibit them from sending a child to a non-guaranteed school or a school that is further away.26
We also find that African American parents are more likely to respond to transparent information
by choosing higher-scoring schools. The opposite was true in the 2004 NCLB natural
experiment, where African Americans and free-lunch recipients who selected alternative schools
in response to NCLB information chose slightly lower-scoring schools than other responders.
There is much more variation in socio-economic status in this sample than in the 2004 NCLB
natural experiment, which may generate the difference in results.

Taken together, the results from the 2004 NCLB natural experiment and the field experiment we
conducted in 2006 imply that receiving transparent information on school academic achievement
has a significant impact on parental choice. It increased demand for non-guaranteed schools, as
25

Hastings, Van Weelden, and Weinstein (2007) estimate the impact that simplified information had on the implicit
weight placed on academics in a random-utility model of school choice. They find that information doubled the
importance placed on test scores, a change in expressed preferences equivalent to that of a $65,000 increase in
family income. Using these preference estimates, they simulate the change in demand for non-guaranteed schools if
the entire sample were given simplified information. They find an 8 percentage point increase in demand, very
similar to the reduced-form treatment effect identified in Table VI. The random utility model incorporates the
characteristics of each family’s choice set, such as distance to each school and distance to the guaranteed school.
Thus a very large impact on preferences for academics may only results in an 8 percentage point increase in
demand, due to the fact that families still face other trade-offs, such as relative transportation costs, when choosing a
school. Our measure of average distances and test scores of schools within five miles is a reduced-form way of
capturing these trade-offs.
26
All students in this setting are rising-grade students, so we cannot include an indicator for rising-grade students.

17

well as the test scores of the schools families chose. The fact that overall results were similar
across the two experiments suggests that the degree of simplification is not as important as just
providing information on school test scores to parents at the time of choice. Furthermore, across
the two samples, families with high-scoring schools in close proximity are the most likely to
choose better schools, as we would expect if parents face trade-offs between utility gains from
academics versus proximity when choosing schools.

V. Impact on Test Scores
While simplified information on school test scores resulted in more parents choosing higherscoring schools, it is not clear if students benefit academically from attending those schools. A
handful of recent papers have examined the impact of attending first-choice schools on academic
outcomes using lottery assignments in school choice plans to generate random variation in the
test score at the school attended.27 Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) examine lottery outcomes for
high school choice in the Chicago Public Schools, and Cullen and Jacob (2007) examine similar
lotteries for elementary school students. Neither finds a significant impact of attending a firstchoice school on test scores. This may be in part caused by the fact that, on average, attending a
first-choice school results in only small increases in the test score of the school attended (0.019
percentile points or about 0.1 student-level standard deviations).28 It also may be the case that
parents are picking particular schools for different reasons, leading to heterogeneous treatment
effects that average towards zero. Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2007) use lottery assignments
from the first round of school choice in CMS (Spring 2002) and find that parents pick schools for
different reasons and that students of parents who place high implicit weights on academic
achievement experience significant gains in test scores as a result of attending their first-choice
school.

27

Angrist, Bettinger, and Kremer (2006) examine a voucher program in Colombia that provided one half of
secondary school tuition by lottery to low-income high school students. Continuation of the voucher after the first
year was predicated on sufficient academic progress. They find significant impacts of winning a voucher lottery on
graduation rates and other measures of academic performance.
28
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) also examine subgroup impacts for students who picked high-performing schools.
In that subgroup, winning a lottery increased the score of the school attended by 0.043 percentile points or about
0.18 student-level standard deviations. They do not find significant subgroup impacts on scores.

18

The two experiments in this paper provide an opportunity to examine the impact of attending
higher-scoring schools on own academic achievement for parents who were much more directed
in choosing schools based on academic dimensions, as a result of receiving transparent
information on test scores.29 The experiments have two slightly different designs, so we will
analyze them separately. In the field experiment, we will focus on the non-NCLB students and
instrument for the test score at the school attended with the random assignment of information
and its interactions with baseline characteristics that lower the expected costs of responding to
information by choosing a higher-scoring school. In the 2004 NCLB natural experiment,
treatment and control groups were the same set of families before and after receiving NCLBmandated information, so we do not see eventual academic outcomes for both treatment and
control groups, as we do in the field experiment. However, since students of parents who chose
alternative schools were subjected to a lottery admission process, we can use the lottery
assignments to generate random variation in the score of the school attended.

2006 Field Experiment: The effect of attending a higher-scoring school on test score outcomes
Table VIII presents estimates from instrumental variables regressions of the test score of the
school attended on student academic performance for the 2006-2007 academic year. We present
results using both school-zone aggregate data and student-level data. Each column presents
regressions of the form:

Y = θS + Xβ + ε
S = ZΠ + ν

(4)
(5)

where the dependent variable, Y, is a vector of test score outcomes, S is the endogenous average
test score of the school attended in the 2006-2007 school year measured in student-level standard
deviation units, X is a matrix of covariates that include randomization-block fixed effects as well
as student-level baseline characteristics in specifications using student-level data. Equation (5)
specifies the test score of the school attended as a function of the exogenous regressors. The
excluded instrument is receiving information, and in specifications using student-level data, we
will add as additional instruments interactions between receiving information and baseline
29

Using a random utility model, Hastings, Van Weelden, and Weinstein (2007) show that receiving information in
the field experiment doubles parental preferences for test scores. Comparing mean preferences to those in Hastings,
Kane, and Staiger (2007), we see that receiving information effectively turned low-preference-for-academics
families into high-preference-for-academics families.

19

characteristics that decrease the cost of attending a higher-scoring alternative school. Because
standardized testing begins in third grade, we do not have outcome measures for kindergarteners,
so we drop them from the analysis. This leaves us with 3,280 students in 33 school-zones.
Limited Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML) results are reported for each specification.
Standard errors are clustered at the school-program and grade attended for all specifications
using student-level data.

The successive columns of the table show how the point estimates change with aggregation and
the set of instruments used. The first column uses data aggregated at the school-zone level to
examine the impact of the school-zone averaged score of the school attended on school-zone
averaged test score outcomes. We instrument for the averaged score of the school attended using
an indicator for whether the school-zone block received information. Because only 36% of
students who chose alternative schools were admitted, receiving information is a weak predictor
of the score of the school attended.30 The point estimate on the score of the school attended is
0.336 but highly insignificant, with a standard error of 0.550. The p-value of the excluded
instrument is only 0.09. The second column reports results for the same specification in column
(1) but uses student-level data and adds baseline student-level controls for academic
achievement, demographics, and choice-set characteristics. The instrument is still weak, with a
p-value of 0.10. The point estimate on the test score of the school attended (0.183) is similar to
that in column (1) but remains highly insignificant with a standard error of 0.398.

The third column has the same specification as column 2 but adds additional instruments that
measure how easily a parent could choose a high-scoring alternative school. In particular, we
include the average test score of schools within five miles and an indicator for whether the child
is a single child in CMS, both interacted with receiving information. This increases the p-value
of the excluded instruments to 0.04, the point estimate increases to 0.355, but it is not quite
significant at the 10% level. The fourth column of Table VIII adds in the average distance to
30

Once parents submitted their choice forms, admission to oversubscribed schools was granted based on a lottery
process. Because of this lottery, only 36% of students were admitted to their first-choice school. Approximately the
same fraction attended their chosen school. This comes both from students who won lotteries and attended their
chosen school as well as students who were admitted off of waitlists into their chosen school over the summer as
seats became available due to student mobility. Receiving information still increases the test score of the school
attended versus the home school, but the effect is half of the magnitude for the score of the school chosen (0.05
instead of 0.10).

20

schools within five miles and the distance to the guaranteed school, both interacted with
receiving information, as further instruments to adjust for the degree to which a family might be
relatively far or close to all of its school options. This increases the p-value of the excluded
instruments to 0.01 and results in a significant point estimate for the score of the school attended
of 0.409. This implies that increasing the score of the school attended by one student-level
standard deviation results in an expected gain in own test score of about 0.4 student-level
standard deviations. The estimated effect is large, but the standard errors are large as well, with
95% confidence interval lower-bound of 0.017.

2004 NCLB Natural Experiment: The effect of attending a higher-scoring school on test score
outcomes
The 2004 NCLB natural experiment provides a second opportunity to examine if there are
academic gains for children of parents that chose substantially better schools in response to
receiving transparent information on test scores. Because all families were treated with the
NCLB-mandated information, we will use the summer 2004 random lottery admissions to
chosen schools to create treatment and control groups.

Once choice forms were submitted in July 2004, admissions were determined by lottery. The
lottery was run based on the number of seats made available for each grade and school-choice
combination. The lottery number was the concatenation of two priority numbers followed by a
random number. Priority was given to students performing below grade level and to students
who qualified for free or reduced lunch, in order to satisfy the NCLB requirement that the
lowest-performing and poorest students be given the first right to attend an alternative school.
We will use only the priority group (if any) in each grade and choice combination for which
some students won and some students lost that lottery; that is, we include only students for
whom lottery number alone determined admission. This leaves us with a very small sample of
227 students, since many students were in priority groups for which everyone was either
admitted or denied admission for that particular grade and choice.31

31

For further discussion of the lottery process and the construction of this sample, see Hastings and Weinstein
(2007).

21

Table IX presents regression results of the form:

y i = α + θwi + L'i δ + ε i

(6)

where wi is an indicator for whether student i won the lottery to attend her chosen school and Li
is a vector of lottery fixed effects (Rouse 1998). The dependent variables are listed as rows in
Table IX, and each cell reports the coefficient and standard error for θ. Standard errors are
clustered at the attended school program and grade level. The results show that winning a lottery
to attend a chosen school had no significant impact on student baseline characteristics; however,
it did significantly increase the probability of attending a chosen school by 0.60 and the score of
the school attended by 0.34 student-level standard deviations.32

Table X presents instrumental variables regressions of the form:

y i = α + θS i + X i' β + L'i δ + ε i

S i = μ + φwi + λwi si + X i' β + L'i γ + ν i

(7)
(8)

where yi is student i’s combined test score outcome in student-level standard deviations; Si is the
average test score of the school attended in the 2004-2005 school year measured in student-level
standard deviation units; and Xi is a vector of student baseline characteristics, including baseline
test score, race, lunch status, and level effects for all included interactions. Li is a vector of
lottery fixed effects. Excluded instruments are an indicator for whether the student won the
lottery, wi, and its interaction with the test score of the chosen school relative to the guaranteed
school, si. Standard errors are clustered at the school-program and grade attended.

The first column of Table X shows a large but insignificant impact of the test score of school
attended on own test score outcomes when we use only indicator if the student won the lottery to
attend her chosen school as an instrument. Column 2 adds the interaction of winning the lottery
with the difference between the scores of the chosen school and guaranteed school as an
additional instrument, allowing the treatment effect to vary with the size of the treatment.33
When we add this instrument, the coefficient on the score of the school attended increases in size

32

In addition, the score of the school attended increases by about half the score of the school chosen, reflecting the
fact that winning the lottery increases the probability of attending the chosen school by about 50%.
33
Note that this is a valid instrument since we control for lottery fixed effects, and lottery number is randomly
assigned within each school choice lottery.

22

and becomes marginally significant. The point estimate implies that attending a school with one
student-level standard deviation higher test scores results in a 0.37 student-level standard
deviation increase in own test scores. This result is similar in magnitude to the results from the
2006-2007 information field experiment and is marginally significant despite the small sample
size.

Taken together, the results of these two experiments imply that providing clear information on
school test scores within a choice plan increases the proportion of parents choosing higherscoring schools for their children. These changed choices appear to have generated measurable
improvements in academic outcomes.34 The impact on own test scores for attending a school
with higher average test scores is similar to the heterogeneous treatment effect that Hastings,
Kane, and Staiger (2007) find for students whose parents selected schools with a strong implied
preference for academics (‘self-informed’ parents). In their study, the impact of winning the
school choice lottery for families in upper quartile of the preference-for-test-score distribution
was 0.082 student-level standard deviations, and winning the lottery resulted in them attending
schools with 0.16 student-level standard deviation higher average test scores (a 0.51 impact).35

It is important to note that these results do not imply that moving a random low-achieving child
to a school with high average test scores will result in academic gains for that child. This study
identifies the impact of the test score of the school attended off of parents who respond to school
choice with information on test scores, through choosing an alternative school with an emphasis
on academic achievement.36 Other recent studies have estimated the impact of moving a child to
a school with higher average test scores using exogenous changes in school assignments
generated by busing for integration programs (Hoxby and Weingarth-Salyer 2005; Hastings and
Weinstein 2008). These studies find significant impacts of 0.16 – 0.25 student-level standard
34

In addition, average test score of the school attended is positively correlated with other school characteristics, such
as attendance, safety, average peer income levels, and, potentially, teacher and staff quality. Thus, the impact on
own academic outcome of moving from a low-performing school to a high-performing school should not be
interpreted as the impact of test scores alone but rather of a potential bundle of school quality measures that are all
correlated with higher average test scores. Future research may be able to determine the optimal type of information
to provide to parents to increase test score outcomes.
35
From author’s calculations using predicted test score gains from results in Table X, row 2 of Hastings, Kane, and
Staiger (2007) for the upper quartile of the preference-for-test-scores in the sample used for the lottery analysis.
36
The results from Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2007) can be seen as identifying the impact among families with
high preferences for academics, that is, families who are informed and choose for academics on their own.

23

deviations on own test scores from attending a school with one student-level standard deviation
higher average test score. This suggests that the impact of attending a higher-performing school
is larger for students of parents who are informed and seeking academics, than it is for an
average student. Letting parents self-select and providing information so that they can make fully
informed choices may be an important benefit of school choice over student assignment for a
student’s own academic outcome.37

VI. Conclusions

The goal of a public school choice plan is to increase academic outcomes for disadvantaged
students by allowing them to attend higher-performing schools and by creating pressure on
failing schools to improve through the threat of losing students. This implicitly assumes that
disadvantaged families are fully informed about school academic performance and choose
higher-performing schools when offered the opportunity to do so. This paper used two
experiments in a public school choice plan to show that information and decision making costs
play important roles in parental choice among low-to-middle income families. Providing clear
statistics on school test scores with parents’ choice forms resulted in significantly more parents
choosing higher-scoring schools for their children. The impact of information on observed
choice behavior was largest for families with higher-scoring schools in relatively close
proximity, implying that school choice and information are most effective when parents have
quality alternatives within a reasonable distance. Using the random variation in the test score of
the school attended generated by each experiment, we find evidence that attending a higherscoring school results in significant gains to own test score outcomes.

The results in this study suggest that simplified information on school academic achievement
may have a significant impact on the efficacy of school choice plans for disadvantaged families.
First, providing simplified information to families at relatively underperforming schools resulted
in immediate academic gains from attending an alternative school. Second, because direct
37

Notice that this does not imply that measures of overall student achievement will necessarily be higher under
school choice. To understand this, one would need a model of achievement for each student who does not select a
higher-performing school, as well as a supply-side model of school closures and openings as a district responds to
choice by offering different products in order to maximize student achievement.

24

information on school test scores increased the fraction of parents choosing higher-scoring
alternatives, policies that incorporate simple and direct information on academics may increase
pressure on under-performing schools to improve achievement through the threat of losing
students. These results add to growing evidence that the provision and framing of information
may be an important tool that policy makers can use when choice is introduced to increase
efficiency in public goods markets (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian 2006; McFadden 2006; Winter
et al. 2006; Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton 2008; Kling et al. 2008).

The results also highlight the potential problems with incentives to provide information. In
private markets with a standard rating, firms have the incentive to disclose ratings since highrated firms will gain an increase in demand and low-rated firms will self-reveal if they do not
post their ratings.38 In public schooling, high-quality providers may not have an incentive to
voluntarily post their scores if they only attract uniformed parents whose children may be
relatively more costly to educate than those of informed parents.39 Thus in such settings,
incentives for voluntary advertising and disclosure may break down, potentially requiring
additional incentive structures or mandates for information provision, as was the case for NCLB.
Yale University and National Bureau of Economic Research
Yale University

38

Mandatory disclosure and voluntary disclosure yield the same outcome, as long as the information is costlessly
verifiable. Discussions of this information unraveling principle can be found in Grossman (1981) and Milgrom
(1981).
39
For example, children of self-informed parents may be less costly to educate if those parents are more likely to
participate and volunteer in school activities and education.

25

REFERENCES
Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer, “Long-Term Educational Consequences of
Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia,”
American Economic Review, 96 (2006), 847-862.
Armor, David J., and Brett M. Peiser, “Interdistrict Choice in Massachusetts,” in Learning from
School Choice, Paul E. Peterson and Bryan C. Hassel, eds. (Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press, 1998).
Ausubel, Lawrence M., “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” American
Economic Review, 81 (1991), 50-81.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
NBER Working Paper No. 13330, 2007.
Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Why Does the Law of One Price Fail?
An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds” NBER Working Paper No. 12261, 2006.
Cullen, Julie Berry, and Brian A. Jacob, “Is Gaining Access to Selective Elementary Schools
Gaining Ground? Evidence from Randomized Lotteries?,” NBER Working Paper No.
13443, 2007.
Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob, and Steven Levitt, “The Effect of School Choice on
Participants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries,” Econometrica, 74 (2006), 19911230.
Fossey, Richard, “Open Enrollment in Massachusetts: Why Families Choose,” Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 16 (1994), 320-334.
Grossman, Sanford J., “The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about
Product Quality,” Journal of Law and Economics, 24 (1981), 461–483.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger, “Parental Preferences and School
Competition: Evidence from a Public School Choice Program,” NBER Working Paper
No. 11805, 2006.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger, “Preferences and Heterogeneous
Treatment Effects in a Public School Choice Lottery,” NBER Working Paper No. 12145,
2007.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, “No Child Left Behind: Estimating the Impact on
Choices and Student Outcomes,” NBER Working Paper No. 13009, 2007.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, “Does Gender Influence Gains from Increased
Academic Opportunity?” mimeo, Yale University, 2008.
26

Hastings, Justine S., and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton, “Financial Literacy, Information, and Demand
Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence,” mimeo, Yale University, 2008.
Hastings, Justine S., Richard Van Weelden, and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, “Preferences,
Information, and Parental Choice Behavior in Public School Choice,” NBER Working
Paper No. 12995, 2007.
Hoxby, Caroline M., and Gretchen Weingarth-Salyer, “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School
Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects,” mimeo, Stanford University, 2005.
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren, “What Do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical
Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122 (2007), 1603-1637.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel,
“Confusion and Choice in Medicare Drug Plan Selection,” mimeo, Harvard University,
2008.
McFadden, Daniel, “Free Markets and Fettered Consumers (Presidential Address to the
American Economic Association),” American Economic Review, 96 (2006), 5-29.
Milgrom, Paul R., “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications,”
Bell Journal of Economics, 12 (1981), 380-391.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena, “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1998), 553602.
Schneider, Mark, and Jack Buckley, “What do Parents Want from Schools? Evidence from the
Internet,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24 (2002), 133-144.
United States Department of Education, North Carolina Consolidated State Application
Accountability Workbook. (Washington, DC: United States Department of Education,
2005). Available at
www.ncpublicschools.org/docs/nclb/federal/consolidated/20050630workbook.pdf.
United States Department of Education, Public School Choice. (Washington, DC: United States
Department of Education, 2004). Available at
www.ed.gov/policy/elsec/guid/schoolchoiceguid.pdf.
Winter, Joachim, Rowilma Balza, Frank Caro, Florian Heiss, Byung-hill Jun, Rosa Matzkin, and
Daniel McFadden, “Medicare Prescription Drug Coverage: Consumer Information and
Preferences,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103 (2006), 7929-7934.

27

Table I
Summary Statistics for Students in 2004 NCLB Natural Experiment and 2006 Field Experiment
2003-2004 school year

2005-2006 school year
Field
experiment:
Field
Non-NCLB
experiment:
panel
NCLB panel
(4)
(5)
0.570
0.665
(0.495)
(0.472)

All students1
(1)
0.428
(0.495)

In NCLB
natural
experiment2
(2)
0.840
(0.366)

All
students
(3)
0.429
(0.495)

Lunch recipient4

0.421
(0.494)

0.863
(0.343)

0.461
(0.498)

0.608
(0.488)

0.837
(0.369)

Student’s combined test score5

0.003
(0.946)

-0.568
(0.772)

0.006
(0.948)

-0.339
(0.850)

-0.518
(0.827)

Income6

56,271
(27,346)

32,058
(13,253)

56,764
(26,915)

48,767
(21,278)

35,194
(14,943)

Number of unexcused absences7

3.933
(7.070)

5.663
(6.717)

4.116
(7.152)

3.449
(6.004)

4.387
(6.002)

Number of suspensions8

1.180
(4.440)

2.281
(6.485)

1.126
(4.489)

1.500
(5.550)

1.809
(5.882)

Number of students

115,716

6,695

125,313

6,328

10,134

Variable
African Amercian3

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. 1In columns (1) and (3), we exclude 2,071 and 141 students, respectively, with missing address data.
2
There were 8,284 students who received NCLB-mandated information in 2004. We began with the 8,284 students who received NCLB-mandated
information. We exclude inactive students (221), special needs students and retentions (1,245), and students with missing demographics (123).
3
Indicates whether student’s race is coded as African American in the administrative dataset. 4Indicates whether student received free- or reducedlunch subsidies according to administrative data. 5Average of test score in reading and math for North Carolina End of Grade exams, standardized by
the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. Since only students in grades three through eight take exams, samples sizes are
50,182; 4,646; 62,759; 3,920; and 6,117, respectively, in columns (1) through (5). 6Based on student residential locations, we computed each
student’s income as the median income in the 2000 Census for people of a student’s own race living in a student’s block group. 7Computed from end
of year tabulations of absences in the administrative database. Sample sizes for absences and suspensions are 115,699; 6,695; 125,285; 6,322; and
10,132, respectively, in columns (1) through (5), since not all students remain through the end of the year. 8Computed from end of year tabulations of
in-school and out-of-school suspensions in the administrative database.

28

Table II
Effect of 2004 NCLB-Mandated Information on Parental Choice Behavior
Spring 2004
choice round1
(1)

July 2004 NCLB
choice round1
(2)

Difference:
July – Spring2
(3)

All parents of NCLB students3
Fraction choosing school and program other than
NCLB school and program first

0.112
(0.315)

0.163
(0.369)

0.051***
(0.006)

Test score of first-choice school and program
minus test score of NCLB school and program4

0.053
(0.207)

0.100
(0.267)

0.047***
(0.004)

6,695

6,695

6,695

Variable

Number of students

Parents who chose NCLB school and program first in Spring 2004 choice round5
Fraction choosing school and program other than
0
0.145
NCLB school and program first
-(0.353)
Test score of first-choice school and program
minus test score of NCLB school and program
Number of students

0.145***
(0.005)

0
--

0.088
(0.251)

0.088***
(0.003)

5,946

5,946

5,946

Notes: 1Standard deviations are in parentheses. 2Standard errors from a t-test of the equality of Spring 2004 and July 2004 means are in
parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). 3We began with the 8,284 students who received NCLB-mandated
information. We exclude inactive students (221), special needs students and retentions (1,245), and students with missing demographics
(123). 4School and program test scores are school and program means of student-level average test scores in reading and math for the North
Carolina End of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. 5Sample excludes parents
who did not choose their NCLB school and program first in Spring 2004.

29

Table III
Differences in Choice Characteristics Between Spring 2004 Choice Round and July 2004 NCLB
Choice Round
All
students1
(1)

African
American2
(2)

Not African
American
(3)

Test score at first-choice school and program3
Spring 2004 choice round
July 2004 NCLB choice round

-0.502
-0.017

-0.513
-0.034

-0.421
0.108

Average test score of schools and programs within five miles4
Spring 2004 choice round
July 2004 NCLB choice round

-0.322
-0.247

-0.328
-0.253

-0.277
-0.206

Number of students

1,092

963

129

Variable

Notes: 1This sub-sample includes students whose parents’ first choice in July 2004 was a school and program other than their NCLB
school and program. 2Sub-sample of students whose race is coded as African American in the administrative dataset. 3School and
program test scores are school and program means of student-level average test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina End
of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. 4We computed the driving
distance (in miles) from each student’s residence to each school that the student could choose. This variable is the average test score
defined in footnote 4 for all schools within five miles. For the five students in the spring and the fifteen students in July with no schools
within five miles, we used the average test score of schools and programs within ten miles.

30

Table IV
Characteristics that Influenced Response to NCLB-Mandated Information
Variable
Choice set characteristics
Distance to NCLB school6
Average distance to schools within five miles7
Average test score of schools within five miles8
Student characteristics
Single child in CMS9
Rising grader10
African American11
Lunch recipient12
Female13
Demeaned income14
Baseline number of unexcused absences15
Baseline number of suspensions16
Baseline test score17
Chose non-NCLB school and program first in spring

Constant

Mean of dependent variable
Number of students
Adjusted R-squared

Dependent variable:
Chose non-NCLB school and
program first in July 2004
(1)2
(2)3

Dependent variable:
Average test score at first-choice school
and program in July 20041
(3)4
(4)5

0.003
(0.003)
0.002
(0.007)
0.091***
(0.033)

0.004
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.008)
0.110**
(0.041)

-0.015***
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.016)
0.233***
(0.057)

-0.016***
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.017)
0.186***
(0.062)

0.032***
(0.011)
0.033***
(0.010)
0.051***
(0.017)
0.022
(0.016)
-0.004
(0.011)
-0.0002
(0.0004)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.016**
(0.008)
0.133***
(0.024)

0.024**
(0.011)
0.035***
(0.013)
0.062***
(0.016)
0.029**
(0.014)
-0.007
(0.011)
-0.0001
(0.0004)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.014*
(0.008)
---

-0.006
(0.020)
-0.052*
(0.028)
-0.079***
(0.028)
-0.070**
(0.032)
-0.027
(0.024)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.025
(0.015)
0.104***
(0.023)

-0.002
(0.023)
-0.039
(0.030)
-0.081**
(0.036)
-0.082**
(0.037)
-0.025
(0.024)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.004*
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.032*
(0.018)
---

0.092**
(0.038)

0.108**
(0.043)

0.316***
(0.068)

0.300***
(0.073)

0.176
4,646
0.04

0.155
4,022
0.03

0.618
818
0.14

0.608
623
0.14

Notes: OLS estimation with NCLB school-program fixed effects. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the level of the NCLB school–program and grade
level. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). 1School and program test scores are school and program means of student-level average
test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade
level. 2Sample includes students in grades three through eight who took the North Carolina End of Grade exam. 3Sample includes all students in column
(1) who did not choose NCLB school and program first in the spring. 4Sample includes all students in column (1) who did not choose NCLB school and
program first in July. 5Sample includes all students in column (2) who did not choose NCLB school and program first in either choice round. 6Driving
distance (in miles) from each student’s residence to her NCLB school. 7We computed the driving distance (in miles) from each student’s residence to each
school that the student could choose. We then calculated the mean distance for all schools and programs within five miles of the student’s residence. For
the 76, 67, 15, and 11 students in columns (1) through (4), respectively, with no schools within five miles, we used the driving distance to the closest
school. 8We computed the driving distance (in miles) from each student’s residence to each school that the student could choose. We then calculated the
mean test score for all schools and programs within five miles of the student’s residence (see footnote 1). For the 76, 67, 15, and 11 students in columns
(1) through (4), respectively, with no schools within five miles, we used the average test score of schools and programs within ten miles. 9Indicates
whether student does not have a sibling in CMS. 10Indicates whether student is entering kindergarten or sixth grade in the fall. 11Indicates whether
student’s race is coded as African American in the administrative dataset. 12Indicates whether student received free- or reduced-lunch subsidies according
to administrative data. 13Indicates whether student is female according to administrative data. 14Based on student residential locations, we computed each
student’s income as the median income in the 2000 Census for people of a student’s own race living in a student’s block group. Demeaned income is
obtained by subtracting the countywide average income of $51,000 and dividing by 1,000. 15Computed from end of year tabulations of absences in the
administrative database. 16Computed from end of year tabulations of in-school and out-of-school suspensions in the administrative database. 17Average of
the test score in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each
grade level.

31

Table V
Averaged Baseline Characteristics: Treatment and Control Groups, 2006 Field Experiment
School-zone averaged variable

Fraction African American students2

Sample means and standard
deviations
Received Received
score
odds
Control
form
form
group
0.641
0.548
0.620
(0.162)
(0.186)
(0.215)

Regression-adjusted
mean differences1
Received Received
score
odds
form
form
0.0006
-0.044
(0.042)
(0.064)
[0.989]
[0.494]

Fraction lunch recipients3

0.763
(0.128)

0.748
(0.144)

0.716
(0.229)

0.046
(0.038)
[0.237]

0.029
(0.059)
[0.625]

Average income4

41725
(8996)

41573
(8456)

43334
(13598)

-1811
(2289)
[0.432]

-2417
(3504)
[0.493]

Average test score5

-0.404
(0.248)

-0.452
(0.191)

-0.426
(0.281)

0.019
(0.059)
[0.751]

-0.123
(0.081)
[0.136]

Average number of unexcused absences6

3.932
(1.994)

4.139
(2.192)

4.220
(2.673)

-0.515
(0.460)
[0.267]

0.406
(0.704)
[0.566]

Average number of suspensions7

1.922
(2.652)

1.569
(2.483)

1.912
(2.602)

-0.100
(0.530)
[0.850]

-0.624
(0.811)
[0.444]

33

11

33

77

77

Number of school-zones

Notes: 1All regressions include randomization-block fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses, and p-values are in brackets.
Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). 2School-zone fraction of students whose race is coded as African
American in the administrative dataset. 3School-zone fraction of students received free- or reduced-lunch subsidies according to
administrative data. 4Based on student residential locations, we computed each student’s income as the median income in the 2000
Census for people of a student’s own race living in a student’s block group. 5School-zone average of the student mean test score in
reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for
each grade level. Since only students in grades three through eight take North Carolina End of Grade exams, the samples sizes for
this variable are 28 school-zones that received Score forms, 11 school-zones that received Odds forms, and 25 school-zones that
were in the control group. 6School-zone average of student end of year tabulations of absences in the administrative database.
7
School-zone average of student’s number of out-of-school suspensions in the administrative database.

32

Table VI
Impact of Receiving Information on Aggregate Parental Choice in 2006 Field Experiment
Dependent variable:

Ordinary Least Squares1
Fraction
Average difference in
choosing nontest score between firstguaranteed
choice and guaranteed
option first3
option4

Panel 1: Sample includes all school-zones
Regression with scores and odds separately
Scores
Odds
Regression with scores and odds pooled
Received information

Mean of dependent variable
Number of school-zones

0.026
(0.028)
0.008
(0.043)

0.039
(0.026)
0.055
(0.040)

0.007
(0.026)
0.0003
(0.039)

0.013
(0.025)
0.023
(0.037)

0.021
(0.026)

0.043
(0.024)

0.006
(0.024)

0.016
(0.023)

0.258
77

0.136
77

0.237
77

0.142
77

0.097***
(0.029)
0.107**
(0.046)

0.073*
(0.036)
0.079
(0.060)

0.101***
(0.027)
0.104**
(0.043)

0.100***
(0.026)

0.075**
(0.032)

0.101***
(0.023)

0.142
46

0.305
46

0.136
46

-0.037
(0.042)
-0.020
(0.062)

-0.026
(0.037)
-0.039
(0.054)

-0.030
(0.038)
-0.020
(0.055)

-0.033
(0.039)

-0.029
(0.035)

-0.027
(0.035)

0.128
31

0.195
31

0.146
31

Panel 2: Sample includes non-NCLB school-zones only
Regression with scores and odds separately
Scores
0.066*
(0.036)
Odds
0.045
(0.057)
Regression with scores and odds pooled
Received information
0.061*
(0.032)
Mean of dependent variable
Number of school-zones

0.319
46

Panel 3: Sample includes NCLB school-zones only
Regression with scores and odds separately
Scores
-0.027
(0.044)
Odds
-0.044
(0.065)
Regression with scores and odds pooled
Received information
-0.031
(0.041)
Mean of dependent variable
Number of school-zones

Weighted Least Squares2
Fraction
Average difference in
choosing nontest score between
guaranteed
first-choice and
option first
guaranteed option

0.168
31

Notes: All regressions include randomization-block fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05,
***=.01).1Each column presents separate OLS regressions of aggregated choice behavior on indicators for whether the school-zone received a Score
form or an Odds form (Scores and Odds Separately) or an indicator for whether the school-zone received any type of information (Scores and Odds
pooled), controlling for randomization-block fixed effects. 2Weight by the number of students in each school-zone. 3A guaranteed option is the school
and program in which the student was currently enrolled, or, in the case of rising-grade students, her home school. 4School and program test scores
computed by taking school and program means of student-level average test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams,
standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. For high school choices, we used the results of the English I End of
Course exam, taken by most ninth grade students.

33

Table VII
Impact of Information on Student-Level Choice Behavior:
Non-NCLB Sample in 2006 Field Experiment
Dependent variable:
Difference between test score at first-choice option and guaranteed option1

All
students
(1)

Sub-sample choosing nonguaranteed option first
(2)

0.017
(0.047)

0.189
(0.141)

-0.015*
(0.008)
0.015
(0.010)
0.109*
(0.060)
0.030
(0.070)

-0.045***
(0.015)
0.026
(0.018)
0.243*
(0.122)
-0.052
(0.126)

0.026*
(0.016)
0.060**
(0.022)
0.035
(0.038)

0.014
(0.038)
0.018
(0.075)
0.040
(0.071)

0.014
(0.022)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)

0.011
(0.029)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.003
(0.004)

Number of students
Adjusted R-squared

3,920
0.17

1,222
0.33

Joint P-value for information and interactions

0.0000

0.0000

Main effect
Received information2
Interactions with choice-set characteristics
Information * Distance to guaranteed option3
Information * Average distance to schools within five miles4
Information * Average test score of schools within five miles5
Information * Test score at guaranteed option
Interactions with demographics
Information * Single child in CMS6
Information * African American
Information * Lunch recipient
Interactions with baseline academic performance
Information * Test score7
Information * Number of absences8
Information * Number of suspensions9

Notes: Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). First column includes students in grades three through eight who took the North
Carolina End of Grade exam in the spring of 2006. Second column includes all students in column (1) who chose their non-guaranteed option
first. Each column includes controls for level effects (distance to guaranteed option, average distance to schools within five miles, average test
score of schools within five miles, test score at guaranteed option, indicator if student is a single child in CMS, an indicator if the student is
African American, indicator if the student receives lunch subsidies, student’s baseline combined test score, baseline number of absences, baseline
number of out-of-school suspensions, an indicator if the student was in a magnet program) as well as randomization-block fixed effects. All
school and program test scores are school and program means of student-level average test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina End
of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. For high school choices, we used the results
of the English I End of Course exam, taken by most ninth grade students. 1A guaranteed option is the school and program the student was
currently enrolled, or, in the case of rising-grade students, her home school. 2Indicates whether student received a Score or Odds form. 3Driving
distance (in miles) from each student’s residence to her guaranteed option. 4We computed the driving distance (in miles) from each student’s
residence to each school that the student could choose. We then calculated the mean distance for all schools and programs within five miles of the
student’s residence. For the 179 to 473 students with no schools within five miles, we used the driving distance to the closest school. 5Average
test score for all schools and programs within five miles of the student’s residence (see footnote 4). For the 179 to 473 students with no schools
within five miles, we used the average test score of the closest school and program. 6A student is a single child in CMS if there are no other
students in CMS with the same last name and address. 7Average of the test score in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams,
standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. 8Computed from end of year tabulations of absences in the
administrative database. 9Computed from end of year tabulations of out-of-school suspensions in the administrative database.

34

Table VIII
Limited Information Maximum Likelihood Estimates of Effect of Test Score at School Attended
on Own Test Score: Non-NCLB Students in 2006 Field Experiment
Dependent variable:
Mean of reading and math test score in
2007
Test score of attended school and
program

Model 1
0.336
(0.550)

Model 2
0.183
(0.398)

Model 3
0.355
(0.232)

Model 4
0.409**
(0.200)

33
0.62

3,280
0.70

3,280
0.69

3,280
0.69

Excluded instruments for test score of
attended school and program:

(a) Received
information

(a) Received
information

Joint P-value for excluded instruments

0.092

0.100

Number of observations
R-squared

(a) Received information
(b) Info * Single child
(c) Info * Average test score
of schools within five miles

0.038

(a) Received information
(b) Info * Single child
(c) Info * Average test score
of schools within five miles
(d) Info * Average distance to
schools within five miles
(e) Info * Distance to
guaranteed school
0.007

Notes: Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). Column 1 presents LIML results for school-zone averaged test score of school attended on
school-zoned averaged test score outcomes. There were 33 non-NCLB school-zones in the experiment where students were old enough to take
standardized exams. The instrument for school-averaged score of school attended is an indicator if the school zone received Scores or Odds forms.
Regression controls for randomization-block fixed-effects. Columns 2-4 present LIML results using student-level data. Coefficient reported is the impact
of the test score at the attended school and program on own combined test score. Each regression controls for randomization block fixed effects and the
following baseline covariates: indicator if the student is a single child in CMS, average test score of schools within five miles, average distance to schools
within five miles, driving distance from each student’s residence to her guaranteed option, an indicator if the student is African American, an indicator if
the student receives lunch subsidies, average of the standardized test score in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams, number of
absences, number of out-of-school suspensions, and an indicator for whether the student had at least one out-of-school suspension. The instruments for test
score of the school attended are listed in each column. School and program test scores computed by taking school and program means of student-level
average test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each
grade level. For high school choices, we used the results of the English I End of Course exam, taken by most ninth grade students. Own test score is
average of the standardized test score in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams taken in Spring 2007, or for ninth grade students,
standardized test score on English I End of Course exam. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the attended school-program and grade
level in the 2006-2007 school year.

35

Table IX
Characteristics of 2004 NCLB Lottery Winners and Lottery Losers
Variable
Baseline characteristic
African American1

Coefficient on won lottery
0.057
(0.052)

Lunch recipient2

-0.018
(0.013)

Female3

-0.001
(0.068)

Income4

2,024
(1,793)

Number of unexcused absences5

-1.787
(1.207)

Number of suspensions6

0.704
(1.044)

Test score7

-0.051
(0.056)

School characteristics
Attended chosen school8
Test score of attended school and program9

Number of students

0.602***
(0.075)
0.336***
(0.068)
223

Notes: Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). We restrict our sample to only students for whom lottery number alone determined
admission. Of the 1,092 students who submitted a choice form in July 2004, 227 students fall into such priority groups. Four students left CMS before Fall
2004. Each row reports the coefficient on an indicator for whether the student won the lottery from separate regressions with dependent variable given by
the row title. Each regression controls for lottery fixed effects. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the level of the 2004-2005 school year attended
school-program and grade. 1Indicates whether student’s race is coded as African American in the administrative dataset. 2Indicates whether student
received free- or reduced-lunch subsidies according to administrative data. 3Indicates whether student is female according to administrative data. 4Based
on student residential locations, we computed each student’s income as the median income in the 2000 Census for people of a student’s own race living in
a student’s block group. 5Computed from end of year tabulations of absences in the administrative database. 6Computed from end of year tabulations of
in-school and out-of-school suspensions in the administrative database. 7Average of the test score in reading and math for the North Carolina End of
Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. Because only students in grades three through eight take
End of Grade exams, the sample size for this regression is 178. 8Indicates whether student attended her chosen school in 2004-2005 school year. 9School
and program test scores computed by taking school and program means of student-level average test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina
End of Grade exams, standardized by the district-wide mean and standard deviation for each grade level.

36

Table X
Instrumental Variables Estimates of Effect of Test Score of School Attended on Own Test Score for
Students in 2004 NCLB Lottery
Dependent variable:
Mean of reading and math test score in 2005
Test score of attended school and program

Number of observations
R-squared
Excluded instruments for test score of attended school and program:

Model 1
0.172
(0.299)

Model 2
0.372*
(0.206)

161
0.69

161
0.67

(a) Won lottery

(a) Won lottery
(b) Won lottery * (Test score at chosen school

and program - Test score at NCLB school and
program)
Joint P-Value for Excluded Instruments

0.0016

0.0019

Notes: Asterisks indicate significance (*=.10, **=.05, ***=.01). We restrict our sample to only students for whom lottery number alone
determined admission. Of the 1,092 students who submitted a choice form in July 2004, 227 students fall into such priority groups. Four students
left CMS before Fall 2004. Of the 227 students, 161 took North Carolina End of Grade exams in math and reading in both Spring 2004 and
Spring 2005 (only students in grades three through eight take exams in each year). School and program test scores computed by taking school and
program means of student-level average test scores in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams, standardized by the districtwide mean and standard deviation for each grade level. Own test score is average of the standardized test score in reading and math for the North
Carolina End of Grade exams taken in spring 2005. Each column reports the coefficient from an instrumental variables regression of own
outcome test score on the test score of the attended school and program, controlling for lottery-block (grade and choice; see footnote 1) fixed
effects and the following baseline covariates: an indicator if the student is African American, an indicator if the student receives lunch subsidies,
an indicator for female, average of the student’s baseline standardized test score in reading and math for the North Carolina End of Grade exams,
number of absences, an indicator for five or more absences, number of in-school and out-of-school suspensions, and an indicator if the student
had at least one suspension, income (based on student residential locations, we computed each student’s income as the median income in the 2000
Census for people of a student’s own race living in a student’s block group), and the difference in test score between the chosen school and
program and the NCLB school and program. The excluded instrument(s) for the test score of the attended school and program are listed in each
column. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the attended school-program and grade level in the 2004-2005 school year.

37

Title 1 Improving
schools identified,
July 2004 NCLB
choice occurs

Spring ‘02
st

1 year
E23r23
choice
forms
submitted.

Fall ‘02

Spring ‘03
nd

2 year
choice forms
submitted.

Fall ‘03

Spring ‘04
rd

3 year
choice forms
submitted.

No direct information on test scores provided to parents

Fall ‘04

June 2005: test
scores after 1st year
of NCLB lottery
assignments

Spring ‘05
th

4 year
choice forms
submitted.

Fall ‘05

1-Page Format
Information field
experiment forms
provided with choice
forms to students at
selected NCLB and
non-NCLB schools

Spring ‘06

Fall ‘06

June 2007: test scores
after 1st year of school
assignments for 20062007 school choice
field experiment.
Spring ‘07

Fall ‘07

th

5 year
choice forms
submitted.

Parents of children at NCLB-sanctioned schools receive NCLB-mandated
3-page spreadsheet of test scores at all schools in district.

Figure I
Timeline of Events and Information Regimes

38

1.5
1
Density
.5
0
-.5
0
.5
1
1.5
2
Difference in Test Score Between July First-Choice School and NCLB School
Kernel density estimate
Normal density
Note: We use the Epanechnikov kernel and the optimal width as computed by default in Stata.

Figure II
Kernel Density Estimate of Difference in Test Score Between July First-Choice School and
NCLB School for Parents Who Chose Out in July, 2004 NCLB Natural Experiment

39

Figure III
Example of a Score Form

40

Figure IV
Example of an Odds Form

41

.8
.6
.4
.2
0
-1
-.5
0
.5
1
1.5
Difference in Test Score Between First-Choice School and Guaranteed School
kdensity Received_Information

kdensity Control_Group

Note: We use the Epanechnikov kernel and the optimal width as computed by default in Stata.

Figure V
Kernel Density Estimate of Difference in Test Score Between First-Choice School and
Guaranteed School for Parents Who Chose Out, 2006 Field Experiment

42

