                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   MIGRATION AND TRADE IN A WORLD OF TECHNOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES:
THEORY WITH AN APPLICATION TO EASTERN-WESTERN EUROPEAN INTEGRATION

                                            Susana Iranzo
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                        Working Paper 13631
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13631


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We thank Gustavo Ventura for sharing with us some unpublished results from his work and Gregory
Wright for his suggestions. Peri acknowledges the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Susana Iranzo and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Migration and Trade in a World of Technological Differences: Theory with an Application
to Eastern-Western European Integration
Susana Iranzo and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 13631
November 2007
JEL No. F16,F22,J31,J61,O52

                                              ABSTRACT

Two prominent features of globalization in recent decades are the remarkable increase in trade and
in migratory flows between industrializing and industrialized countries. Due to restrictive laws in the
receiving countries and high migration costs, the increase in international migration has involved mainly
highly educated workers. During the same period, technology in developed countries has become progressively
more skill-biased, increasing the productivity of highly educated workers more than less educated
workers. This paper extends a model of trade in differentiated goods to analyse the joint phenomena
of migration and trade in a world where countries use different skill-specific technologies and workers
have different skill levels (education). We calibrate the model to match the features of the Western
European countries (EU-15) and the new Eastern European members of the EU. We then simulate
the effects of freer trade and higher labor mobility between the two regions. Even in a free trade regime
the removal of the restrictions on labor movements would benefit Europe as a whole by increasing
the GNP of Eastern and Western Europe. Interestingly, we also find that the resulting skilled migration
(the so-called "brain drain") from Eastern European countries would not only benefit the migrants
but, through trade, could benefit the workers remaining in Eastern Europe as well.


Susana Iranzo
Universitat Rovira Virgili,
Avda. Universitat 1,
Reus 43204, Spain
susana.iranzo@urv.cat

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1      Introduction

International migrations between less developed and industrialized countries have increased substantially in the
last decades. As of 2005, 190 million people lived outside their country of origin, whereas in 1970 this number
was only 82 million.1 However, migratory flows increased very little when compared to trade, foreign direct
investment and financial capital flows, which represent the other major aspects of globalization. As of 2000,
countries overall were selling and buying abroad a value equal to 27% of their gross domestic product and were
investing about 20% of their total savings abroad. Yet, as measured by Docquier and Marfouk (2005), in 2000
only 1.8% of the world population was living in an OECD country that was not their country of birth. These
diﬀerences are to a large extent the result of migratory policies. While developed and, increasingly, developing
nations have moved towards greater freedom of trade and capital movements, countries still consider it part of
the normal exercise of their sovereignty to restrict drastically the access of immigrants to the domestic labor
market. In general, the few successful attempts to relax immigration restrictions have been in the direction of
allowing entry to a larger number of highly educated immigrants (e.g., H1B visas in the U.S., the point system
in Canada and Australia, and the ”Highly Skilled Workers Program” in the UK). Highly educated migrants are
also the fraction of the labor force with the highest degree of international mobility and, we argue in this study,
are the most poised to gain from migration. Some representative statistics in Table 1 show that the segment
of highly educated individuals coming from less developed countries have been more internationally mobile,
and increasingly so in recent decades. The table reports the emigration rates by educational group for several
countries2 . Emigration rates are calculated as the stock of people residing abroad divided by the working-age
population of the country of origin. The table distinguishes between less educated (0 to 8 years of schooling),
those with intermediate education (9 to 12 years of schooling) and the highly educated (13 years of schooling
or more). The upper part of Table 1 reports emigration rates and their changes for five representative rich
countries. The rates are mostly small and exhibit small changes during the last decade with no clear pattern
across educational groups. Overall, advanced countries do not have much emigration in any educational group,
and that did not change much during the 1990s. By contrast, the set of less developed countries shows larger
emigration rates, especially for the highly educated, and faster growth of those rates during the 1990s. This
tendency is particularly strong for China and India where the emigration rate among the highly educated is ten
times larger than among the other groups. For Romania, a typical Eastern European economy, and for Eastern
Europe as a whole, the emigration rates of the highly educated are two to three times the emigration rates of
the less educated. Most of the highly educated Eastern European migrants are now in Western Europe and, as
barriers to labor mobility are dismantled as the transitional arrangements of the accession treaty come to an
    1 Thenumbers relative to overall world migration reported in this section are from Freeman (2006).
    2 Thedata are from Docquier and Marfouk (2005) who collected information from censuses of resident populations in OECD
countries in the year 2000.



                                                            2
end,3 the flow of highly educated workers to the West is expected to increase.
    The migration of highly skilled workers, often called ”brain drain”, has attracted the attention of policy-
makers and economists (see Beine et al., 2001). The cost of losing the best educated workers is considered to
be high for the sending countries. At the same time, though, several economists recognize that from a world
perspective international restrictions on labor mobility are one of the most costly economic distortions (e.g.,
Klein and Ventura 2007, Kremer and Watts 2006, Benhabib and Jovanovic 2007). Yet, we still lack a clear
economic theory that explains migration incentives for the highly educated and their eﬀect in a world with
trade and technological diﬀerences across countries. This paper develops such a model, calibrates it to match
existing economies, and simulates it to obtain some comparative statics results that illustrate the eﬀects of
removing barriers to labor mobility.
    We propose a two-country (”Rich” and ”Poor”), two-sector (”Traditional” and ”High-tech”) model with
heterogeneous workers and skill-specific technological diﬀerences across countries. In particular, the Rich country
has higher overall TFP as well as a more advanced technology, complementary to highly educated workers, in
the high-tech sector that produces a diﬀerentiated good. In autarky (i.e., with no trade and no migration) the
technology of each country determines its productivity and income. By contrast, opening up to trade allows
each country to specialize, as well as to increase the production of (and obtain access to) more varieties of
the diﬀerentiated good. However, due to technological diﬀerences across countries trade does not equalize real
wages. Thus, even under free trade, lifting the restrictions on the free movement of workers would induce
migratory flows. An important feature of the model is that it accounts for diﬀerent skill levels (schooling) of
workers and consequently allows us to analyze the wage eﬀects of migration and trade for workers of diﬀerent
educational levels. In order to understand how large migration flows would be, and who would migrate were
the migration costs to be reduced, we need to account for the interaction of three crucial factors. First, the
TFP diﬀerential between countries introduces incentives to migrate for all workers in the Poor country. Second,
there are reasons to believe that even in the absence of legal migratory barriers there are significant migration
costs associated with the loss of specific human capital (Borjas 1996) as well as psychological costs that reduce
the mobility of all workers. Third, the complementarity between technology and highly educated workers in the
high-tech or modern sector implies that highly educated workers have the greatest incentive to migrate from the
Poor to the Rich country. Yet, contrary to the pessimistic predictions, such emigration is beneficial to the Rich
country as well as to the less educated workers of the Poor country who are left behind. This is because the
higher productivity of the expatriates in producing diﬀerentiated consumption goods allows the whole world,
and the citizens of the Poor country in particular, to benefit from increased varieties and lower prices.
   3 The accession treaty that admitted to the EU ten new countries in 2004 and Romania and Bulgaria in 2007 contains transitional

arrangements that allow the old EU members to postpone the opening of their labour markets for at least two years and at most
seven years. A detailed description of the labor market restrictions in place and of the provision of transitional agreements can be
found in Boeri and Brucker (2005).



                                                                 3
    We use the model to study the labor market integration between Western and Eastern European countries.
The accession to the EU of twelve economies (mostly from Eastern Europe) between 2004 and 2007 culminated
the process of trade liberalization between EU countries which Western Europe initiated in the 1990s with the
signature of free trade agreements (the so-called Europe Agreements). However, fear of high migration flows
from the East led the old EU members to keep the restrictions on labor mobility during a transitional period
of up to 7 years. As the transitory measures are phased out, full access of Eastern European workers to the
Western labor markets will follow and a substantial ”brain drain” from Eastern Europe towards Western Europe
is to be expected. Our model, calibrated to match the schooling distribution, productivity levels, and relative
size of Eastern and Western Europe shows the following. First, we find that labor allocation is currently highly
distorted by the presence of large barriers to labor mobility. In the absence of such barriers, as much as 27% of
the Eastern European population (mostly highly educated) would work in the west. Second, one might think
that keeping those highly skilled workers in Eastern Europe would at least be beneficial for those countries, if
not for Europe as a whole, but this is not the case. Given the current technological disparities between East
and West, keeping the highly educated in the East pushes many of them to work in less advanced sectors with
much lower productivity (TFP) levels and no production externalities. By contrast, if they were allowed to
work in Western Europe, they could be employed in the more advanced high-tech sector where they would be
more productive. Third, and perhaps most surprisingly, with trade and migration Eastern Europeans that are
left behind would also benefit from highly skilled migration. This is so because, thanks to trade, they would
have access to a larger set of diﬀerentiated goods and services, and at a lower cost. Less educated Western
Europeans would also benefit for the same reason. The group that would be somewhat hurt by free migration
would be the highly educated in the West, who would suﬀer from competition with the highly educated workers
arriving from the East.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing literature. Section 3 describes
the model and the equilibrium in autarky. Section 4 compares the autarky equilibrium with the equilibria with
trade and then trade and migration. The calibration of the model to the data for Eastern and Eastern Europe
is detailed in Section 5 where the model is also simulated to evaluate the (comparative static) welfare gains
from trade and free migration. Section 6 summarizes the main results and concludes.



2     Literature Review

Most of the models that analyze the determinants and eﬀects of international migration use a very simplified
framework based on the Heckscher-Ohlin model or the specific factor model.4 In a world where land is an
   4 See for instance chapter 7 of Krugman and Obtsfeld (2006), still the most popular textbook on International Economics, and

also Mundell (1957), Jones et al. (1986) and Wong and Yip (1999).




                                                              4
important factor of production these models still provide some useful insights (e.g., Hatton and Williams 2005
and 2006 use factor-endowments models with land and labor to analyze the migration from Europe to the US
in the early 20th century). The model could also be helpful if we simply want to explain overall migration
tendencies to capital-abundant (rich) countries from capital-scarce (poor) countries. Neither model, however,
is particularly well suited to analyze migration and trade together, mainly because in these models trade and
migration are substitutes for each other.5 Moreover, once we consider highly educated and less educated
workers as diﬀerent factors of production, the factor endowment model wrongly predicts the direction of highly
skilled migration: educated migrants should move from rich (skill abundant) to poor (skill scarce) countries.
The interaction of technology, skills and trade is crucial in order to identify the incentives and patterns of
migration as well as the gains (and losses) from it. Yet, to our knowledge, there is no model that considers
international migration together with intra-industry trade of the type generated by diﬀerentiated products (new
trade theories), country-specific technology and heterogeneous workers. The present paper attempts to fill this
gap.
   There is, however, a vast literature on the ”brain drain”. This has traditionally emphasized the costs for
the sending country of losing the most educated portion of their labor force. Among others, the following costs
have been identified: the ”fiscal loss” from the flight of high income earners (Bhagwati and Hamada 1974), the
negative growth eﬀect of the loss in human capital (Wong and Yip 1999) and the loss of potential positive human
capital externalities in productivity (Benhabib and Jovanovic 2007). On the other hand, a number of sources
of gains to the sending country have also been pointed out: better productivity opportunities for the skilled
migrants (Bhagwati and Rodriguez 1975; Bhagwati and Hamada 1974), the creation of international networks
(diaspora) to channel transfers of knowledge and to stimulate trade (Rauch and Trinidade 2002), the possibility
of return of skilled workers (Kapur and McHale 2006) and the incentives for human capital formation that
migration generates (Stark 2004). From an empirical point of view, the collection of detailed data on migration
is crucial to analyze the nature and the eﬀects of such phenomena. Docquier and Marfouk (2005) combined
national Censuses and Labor Force Surveys, allowing for a more careful measure of the stock of emigrants and
their educational level. This data shows significant migration outflows among the highly educated, a feature
especially prominent for some Latin American and African countries.
   This paper provides a framework that explains why the highly educated are more likely to migrate. Fur-
thermore, our model is able to analyze the aggregate output gains as well as the welfare gains from migration
for specific groups of individuals, which suggests a very important channel through which the brain drain can
benefit the world as a whole and the workers left behind in the sending country in particular. Migration of
highly educated workers results in productivity gains that all consumers enjoy, namely an increase in the num-
  5 Or   also, because there is only one good being produced and thus there is no trade at all.




                                                                  5
ber of varieties of goods being produced and reduced prices. These benefits of migration are likely to spread
between countries with relatively free trade (as in the European Union).6 However, even our model is subject
to the existence of fiscal losses if fiscal redistribution is in place. While the less educated workers in the sending
country are better oﬀ (pre-tax), the fleeing of highly educated workers certainly reduces government revenues
and, in the presence of redistribution, it may reduce post-tax income for less educated workers.
    Another important contribution of this paper is that it analyzes migration in a framework that can easily be
compared to the steady state version of Acemoglu (1998, 2002), Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) or Caselli and
Coleman (2006). Those models emphasize the skill-specificity of technology and, in particular, the tendency
for rich countries to have large shares of educated workers as well as high skill premia. While Acemoglu (2002)
allowed for the possibility of trade, he did not examine potential migration. Unlike his model, ours does not
endogenize technology but allows it to be skill-specific and draws comparative static implications when trade
and migration are allowed.
    Finally, we analyze the East-West European economic integration. Klein and Ventura (2006) also use a
dynamic model with TFP diﬀerences and migration to analyze the eﬀects of removing migration restrictions
in Europe. Although in a comparative static context, our model considers trade, skill-specific technology and
imperfect substitution between workers, features that are absent in Klein and Ventura (2006). Moreover, we
consider trade liberalization between Eastern and Western Europe and its eﬀects as well as higher labor mobility.



3     The Model

The model developed here resembles Iranzo and Peri (2006) which in turn builds on Yeaple (2005) . We start by
presenting the main setup in the absence of trade and migration. That is, we characterize the preferences and the
technology of each country and determine the equilibrium prices, wages and workers’ productive specialization
when the two countries are in autarky. Then in Section 4.1 we allow countries to open up to trade and in section
4.2 we also allow for international migration.


3.1     Preferences and Demand

We consider two countries labelled 1 (Rich) and 2 (Poor) whose residents have identical preferences but may
diﬀer in their skill distribution and the production technologies they use. Two goods are being produced
and consumed in each economy: a homogeneous good Y and a diﬀerentiated good X. The preferences of the
representative consumer are described by a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) utility function over goods
   6 Kuhn and McAusland (2006) develops a theoretical model of gains from brain drain based on externalities due to the knowledge

creation of the highly educated in the rich country that spills over to the sending country. While the eﬀect is not too diﬀerent from
ours, that paper emphasizes market size diﬀerences (rather than productivity diﬀerences) between the sending and the receiving
country and knowledge creation (rather than the production and trade of diﬀerentiated goods) as the channel of diﬀusion.



                                                                 6
X and Y :
                                           h                     θ−1              θ−1
                                                                                        i θ−1
                                                                                           θ

                                        U = (1 − β)Y              θ    + βX        θ            θ>1                                           (1)

The composite good X is in turn represented by a CES aggregator over a continuum of varieties, indexed by i:

                                     ⎛Nj        ⎞ σ−1
                                                   σ
                                      Z
                                           σ−1
                                 X = ⎝ x(i) σ di⎠                                   σ>θ>1           j = 1, 2                                  (2)
                                                 0


where x(i) represents the amount of variety i consumed and Nj are the varieties of good X produced in country
j. Taking good Y as the numeraire in each country and defining Ej as the aggregate expenditure in country j,
one can derive the total good demands in country j, XjD and YjD , and the demand for each variety of good X,
xD
 j (i):
                                       ³         ´−θ                                                  ³        ´−θ
                                 E         PXj                                                  E
                      XjD = β θ Pjj         Pj                                  YjD = (1 − β)θ P jj       1
                                                                                                          Pj         j = 1, 2
                                                                                                                                              (3)
                                 ³               ´³             ´−σ
                                     s(PXj )Ej         pj (i)
                      xD
                       j (i) =          PXj            PXj

                                                                                                                       ⎡Nj           ⎤ 1−σ
                                                                                                                                        1

              h                       i 1−θ
                                         1                                                                              Z
where Pj = β θ PXj
                1−θ
                    + (1 − β)θ                is the overall price index for country j, PXj                          = ⎣ pj (i)1−σ di⎦     is the
                                                                                                                          0
price of the composite good X, and pj (i) is the price of variety i produced and consumed in country j. Finally
           ³        ´ h                   i
S(PXj ) = β θ PXj
                1−θ
                     / β θ PXj
                            1−θ
                                + (1 − β)θ is the share of expenditure devoted to purchasing good X in country
j.


3.2       Production

There is only one factor of production, labor, and workers diﬀer in their skill level, Z ∈ [0, 1]. The distribution of
workers skills in country j is given by the cumulative density function Gj (Z) that represents the share of total
population with skill level less than or equal to Z. We assume a total mass of workers or population size Mj for
each country j = 1, 2. We call Wj (Z) the wage (in terms of the numeraire) that a worker of skill Z receives in
country j. As labor is the only factor of production, the aggregate labor income of workers in country j equals
its GDP and, given the static closed-economy nature of the model, it is also equal to aggregate expenditure Ej :

                                                                       Z1
                                                       Ej = Mj              Wj (Z)dGj (z)                                                     (4)
                                                                       0


     We assume that good Y is produced using a constant returns to scale technology. This technology is described
by the function AY j (Z) which expresses the amount of good Y produced by a worker of skill Z in country j.
As indicated by the subscript, the production technology for good Y might diﬀer across countries. Similarly,


                                                                            7
AXj (Z) indicates the amount of good X produced by a worker of skill Z using this technology in country j.
In both countries, technology X is relatively more productive for highly skilled workers than technology Y and
this relative advantage is more pronounced in country 1. At the same time, there is an overall TFP diﬀerential
between the two countries captured by a larger Hicks-neutral technological parameter in country 1 (the Rich
country). These assumptions are summarized by the functional forms and parameter restrictions described in
the matrix below:


 Technology:    Country 1                    Country 2
 Sector Y       AY 1 (Z) = Λ1 exp(gY 1 Z)    AY 2 (Z) = Λ2 exp(gY 2 Z)
 Sector X       AX1 (Z) = Λ1 exp(gX1 Z)      AX2 (Z) = Λ2 exp(gX2 Z)         with gX1 > gX2 > gY j   and Λ1 > Λ2


   Another diﬀerence between the traditional and the modern sector is that each variety of good X requires a
fixed cost in the form of output that cannot be sold (we should think of this as a product development fixed
cost). This fixed cost is FX1 and FX2 in country 1 and 2 respectively, with FX1 > FX2 . Intuitively, country
1 uses a technology in sector X that is more sophisticated and expensive (with higher fixed costs) than the
one used in country 2 but is also more productive, particularly in combination with more skilled workers. By
contrast, no fixed costs are required in sector Y . Finally, there is free entry in sector X and each firm in this
sector produces one and only one variety x(i).


3.3    Wage Schedule

Labor markets are assumed to be perfectly competitive so that each worker is paid the value of her marginal
product and the wage distribution over skills, Z, adjusts in order to equalize the unit cost of all firms using the
same technology. Given the technologies described above, the costs of producing one unit of good Y and one
unit of (any variety of) good X in country j are respectively:


                                    CY j = WY j (Z)/ [Λj exp(gY j Z)] j = 1, 2
                                                                                                               (5)
                                    CXj = WXj (Z)/ [Λj exp(gXj Z)] j = 1, 2


   Perfect competition in sector Y ensures that prices are equal to unit costs which, given the choice of good
Y as the numeraire, implies 1 = PY 1 = PY 2 = CY . Workers choose to work in the sector where they receive
the highest wages. As Yeaple (2005) proves there is a worker indiﬀerent between working in one sector or the
other and whose skill level, denoted as Z j , is found via the inter-industry wage equalization condition:


                                         WY j (Z j ) = WXj (Z j ) j = 1, 2                                     (6)




                                                         8
Workers below the cut-oﬀ skill level receive a higher wage in sector Y than in sector X and thus choose to
work in the former, while workers endowed with skills above the cut-oﬀ level are better oﬀ working in sector X.
Consequently, the equilibrium wage schedule in country j = 1, 2 is given by:
                                            ⎧                                   ⎫
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎨                                   ⎪
                                                                                ⎬
                                                Λj exp(gY j Z) 0 < Z ≤ Z j
                                 Wj (Z) =                                                                       (7)
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎩ Λj CXj exp(gXj Z) Z j ≤ Z < 1 ⎪
                                                                            ⎭


where CXj = exp(gY j Z j )/ exp(gXj Z j ). The value of the threshold Z j is endogenously determined in equilibrium,
and with it the whole wage schedule can be characterized. Figure 1 illustrates the log wage schedules for countries
1 and 2. The kinked lines represent the natural logarithm of the wage expressed in units of the numeraire in
country 1 (upper graph) and country 2 (lower graph) as functions of the skill level Z ∈ [0, 1]. By virtue of the
assumptions on technology gXj > gY j , the wage schedule in each country is flatter in sector Y (to the left of
the threshold Z) than in sector X. The intercept of the wage schedule with the vertical axis equals ln (Λj ). We
standardize Λ2 = 1 in Figure 1 so that for country 2 that intercept is zero and the positive intercept for country
1 reflects the assumption of higher TFP in the Rich country (Λ1 > Λ2 ). The wage schedules also capture the
assumption gX1 > gX2 with a steeper schedule to the right of Z in the upper graph relative to the bottom one.
Although not shown in the graphs, notice that the vertical intercept of the (log) wage schedule relative to sector
X would be negative. This means that CXj < 1 which in turn implies that in any equilibrium where good Y
is produced the wage of workers with skill level equal to 0 has to be higher in sector Y than in sector X. The
relative price of good X, PXj , will be determined in equilibrium (see below) to ensure that this condition holds.
The real wage schedule in each country (in logarithms) is obtained by subtracting the price index ln(Pj ) from
ln(Wj (Z)).
   Aggregating over workers with diﬀerent skills and dividing by the mass of workers we obtain the average
wage in country j, which is equal to its per capita income in terms of the numeraire, and is given by:

                                  ⎛                                           ⎞
                                   ZZj                      Z1
                                  ⎜                                           ⎟
                         W j = Λj ⎝ exp(gY j Z)dGj (Z) + CXj exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)⎠                                 (8)
                                       0                          Zj



3.4    Equilibrium

In autarky we solve separately for the equilibrium in each country j = 1, 2. Profit maximization and free entry
yield the following optimal price and quantity for each variety i of good X:


                                      σ
                          pj (i) =       CXj      xj (i) = (σ − 1)FXj      for i ∈ [0, Nj ]                     (9)
                                     σ−1




                                                         9
In the symmetric equilibrium the varieties of diﬀerentiated good X are sold at the same price pj (i) = pj and
produced in equal amounts xj (i) = xj . Hence the price index PXj simplifies to the following expression:

                                                                         µ         ¶
                                                                    1
                                                                              σ
                                                  PXj = Nj1−σ                          CXj                                   (10)
                                                                             σ−1

Given the free entry condition and the total resource constraint the number of varieties produced in equilibrium
equals:

                                                                   Z1
                                                   Mj Λj
                                              Nj =                      exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)                                    (11)
                                                   σFXj
                                                                   Zj


   The model is closed with the market clearing conditions in sector Y :7

                                                                              Zj
                                                                              Z
                                     [1 − S(PXj )]Mj W j = Mj Λj                   exp(gY j Z)dGj (Z)                        (12)
                                                                              0

   Substituting (8), (10) and (11) as well as CXj = exp(gY Z j )/ exp(gXj Z j ) into (12) and simplifying, we
obtain one implicit function = (.) that defines the equilibrium cut-oﬀ value Z j for each country as a function of
the parameter values and the distribution of skills Gj (Z):


                      =[Z j , gY , gXj , β, σ, θ, Mj , FXj , Gj (Z)] =
                      Zj
                      Z                           ³         ´θ ³         ´θ−1 ³            ´ σ−1
                                                                                             θ−1
                                                      1−β           σ              σFXj
                           exp(gY j Z)dGj (Z) −        β           σ−1             Mj Λj           exp[θ(gY j − gXj )Z j ]
                       0                                                                                                     (13)
                      ⎛                  ⎞ σ−θ
                                           σ−1
                       Z1
                      ⎜                  ⎟
                      ⎝ exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)⎠     =0
                           Zj


   It is interesting to use equation (13) to conduct some comparative statistics on the eﬀect of parameter
changes on the productive specialization of a country. Using the implicit function theorem and given that
£       ¤
 ∂=/∂Z j > 0, it is easy to show that ∂Z j /∂FXj > 0 (see the Appendix). The intuition for this result is as
follows. As the fixed cost of producing varieties of the high-tech good increases, in order to break even firms
in sector X need to pay lower wages per unit of skill. Therefore the wage of the marginal worker in sector X
decreases inducing her to move to sector Y. As a result, the new marginal worker has a higher skill level, and
given that the skill distribution is the same, the size of the high-tech sector decreases. To the contrary, we
have ∂Z j /∂Mj < 0. This is because a larger market size (recall Mj is the mass of workers or country size) can
support more firms in sector X, and the larger number of varieties increases aggregate income by more than
  7 By   Walras’ Law the clearing of market Y ensures the clearing of market X as well.




                                                                        10
the decrease in the demand per variety resulting from the higher competition among firms. This allows firms
to pay higher wages per unit of skill, attracting a marginal worker with a lower skill level. Finally, a shift in the
distribution of skills, Gj (Z) that implies a larger mass of workers among the highly-skilled (i.e., with skill level
higher than the original Z j ) would increase Z j . This happens because average income increases and so does the
demand for Y . However, the productivity of workers in sector Y remains unchanged, and so prices need to
adjust. In particular, the relative price of X decreases relative to that of Y , which moves the marginal worker
towards sector Y and thus increases the skill level of the new marginal worker Z j .
    Figure 1 shows two countries with diﬀerent technologies but similar skill level cutoﬀs, Z 1 and Z 2 . Country 1
(the Rich country) has higher gXj and higher TFP as well as more workers in the high skill range. In light of the
comparative static results discussed above, the property of equal skill level cutoﬀs across countries implies that
the Rich country must also have higher fixed costs, FX1 > FX2 , which is consistent with our earlier assumption
in section 3.2. While the TFP diﬀerences imply that country 1 has higher wages (in terms of the numeraire)
than country 2 for each skill level, the highly skilled workers in country 1, i.e., the workers with skills above the
cut-oﬀ level Z j , have a relatively larger wage premium.



4      Diﬀerent Trade and Migration Regimes

Maintaining the structure of technologies and tastes described above, we now analyze how the equilibrium
changes when we allow for (costly) trade and migration. While more complex, the model with trade and
migration costs is also more interesting and, once those costs are calibrated, it allows us to simulate the eﬀects
of trade liberalization and freer labor mobility between Eastern and Western Europe. The equilibrium with
costless trade is computed as a special case providing us with a useful benchmark. We present the model’s main
equilibrium conditions and some intuition for the results in this section, while the next section describes the
parametrization of the model to match the features of Eastern and Western Europe and provides the simulation
results.


4.1    Trade without Migration

Consider the same two economies described in section 3 and allow them now to trade with each other. For
simplicity we assume that good Y is costlessly traded across the border so that any price diﬀerence can be
arbitraged away and pY 1 = pY 2 = pY . Good X, however, is traded at a cost: we assume that for 1 unit of good
X to arrive τ ≥ 1 units must be shipped. Consumers in country j can now buy varieties of good X produced




                                                         11
in either country. The demands for local (j) and imported (i) varieties are respectively:

                                        µ             ¶µ           ¶−σ
                                            s(PXj )         pj
                            xjj    =                                     Ej      j = 1, 2                     (14)
                                             PXj           PXj
                                        µ             ¶µ           ¶−σ
                                            s(PXj )        pi .τ
                            xij    =                                     Ej      i, j = 1, 2 i 6= j
                                             PXj           PXj

where pj is the price of the varieties produced in country j, while pi .τ is the price paid for imported varieties.
The expression s(PXj ) is the expenditure share that consumers in country j devote to the composite good X
and Ej is aggregate expenditure in country j. Its value is pinned down by the assumption of balanced trade
between the two countries. In a model with no capital accumulation this implies that total expenditure on
goods equals total income, Ej = Wj , j = 1, 2. Finally, PXj is the price of the composite good X in country j
and is given by:
                                £                          ¤ 1
                           PXj = Nj pj 1−σ + Ni (pi .τ )1−σ 1−σ                   i, j = 1, 2 i 6= j          (15)

   On the production side, profit maximization yields the equilibrium prices pj for each variety of good X sold
domestically, which is equal to a mark-up on marginal costs CXj

                                                             σ
                                                  pj =          CXj                                           (16)
                                                            σ−1

                                                                   T
   The cut-oﬀ skill levels in each country, denoted by Z j (with the superscript indicating the trade equilibrium),
are determined separately for each country and can be found from the inter-industry wage equalization condition:

                                            ³ T´      ³ T´
                                        WY j Z j = WXj Z j                       j = 1, 2                     (17)


which implies:
                                                h               T
                                                                  i
                                       CXj = exp (gY j − gXj )Z j                  j = 1, 2                   (18)

   As before, the free entry (zero-profit) condition yields the scale of production of each firm, which now
amounts to:
                                  xj = xjj + xji = (σ − 1)FXj                 i, j = 1, 2 i 6= j              (19)

From (19) we can compute the equilibrium number of firms and varieties produced in country j:

                                                  Z1
                                        Mj Λj
                                   Nj =                exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)             j = 1, 2                 (20)
                                        σFXj
                                                   T
                                                  Zj




                                                                   12
Consequently, the price for the composite good X in each country is given by:

                ⎡                                                                                                ⎤ 1−σ
                                                                                                                    1

                                 Z1                                                  Z1
          σ ⎢ ⎢ Mj Λj C 1−σ                                   Mi Λi                                        ⎥
                                                                                          exp(gXi Z)dGi (Z)⎥
                                                                             1−σ
PXj =                                 exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z) +           (τ CXi )                                                  i, j = 1, 2 i 6= j
        σ − 1 ⎣ σFXj Xj                                       σFXi                                         ⎦
                                 T                                                    T
                                Zj                                                   Zi
                                                                                                                                      (21)
There are three sets of market-clearing conditions: the market clearing condition for the homogeneous good Y ,
for each variety of good X produced in country 1 and for each variety of good X produced in country 2. Once
we incorporate the trade-balance conditions (E1 = M1 W 1 , E2 = M2 W 2 ) and the free-entry condition (19) the
market-clearing conditions can be written as follows:

                                                                                 T                                        T
                                                                                Z
                                                                                Z1                                       Z
                                                                                                                         Z2
               [1 − s(PX1 )] M1 W 1 + [1 − s(PX2 )] M2 W 2          = M1 Λ1           exp(gY 1 Z)dG1 (Z) + M2 Λ2              exp(gY 2 Z)dG2 (Z)
                                                                                 0                                       0
                 µ          ¶                    µ      ¶
                     p1−σ
                      1                     (p1 .τ )1−σ
s(PX1 )M1 W 1         1−σ + s(PX2 )M2 W 2        1−σ      = (σ − 1)FX1 p1                                                                    (22)
                     PX1                       PX2
              µ             ¶                  µ 1−σ ¶
                (p2 .τ )1−σ                       p2
s(PX1 )M1 W 1        1−σ      + s(PX2 )M 2 W 2      1−σ   = (σ − 1)FX2 p2
                  PX1                            PX2

Notice that by Walras’ Law only two of the above three market clearing conditions are linearly independent
                                                                                      T         T
and can be solved for the equilibrium cut-oﬀ levels in each country, Z 1 and Z 2 .8
   It is interesting to analyze the case of costless trade (i.e., when τ = 1). The most important implication
of free trade is price equalization for the composite good X, PX1 = PX2 = PX , and thus equalization of the
overall price indices, P1 = P2 = P. This result simplifies substantially the last two equations of (22), which
when divided one by the other and using (18) reduce to the following expression:

                                                 h                 i
                                                                 T
                                              exp (gX1 − gY 1 )Z 1    µ     ¶1
                                                                        FX1 σ
                                                 h               T
                                                                   i=                                                                 (23)
                                              exp (gX2 − gY 2 )Z 2      FX2


   The market clearing condition for Y becomes then

                                                             T                                       T
                                                            Z
                                                            Z1                                      Z
                                                                                                    Z2
                         ¡               ¢
             [1 − s(PX )] M1 W 1 + M2 W 2 = M1 Λ1                exp(gY 1 Z)dG1 (Z) + M2 Λ2              exp(gY 2 Z)dG2 (Z)           (24)
                                                             0                                      0


                                                                                                T            T
Equations (23) and (24) provide the equilibrium conditions that determine Z 1 and Z 2 in the case of costless
trade. This case serves as a useful benchmark as it allows us to interpret the model predictions according to
                                                                                                    FX1
the powerful concept of comparative advantage. For given relative fixed costs                       FX2   the larger the comparative
  8 Adding   the last two conditions in (22) and plugging in (19) and (20) yields the first equilibrium condition.




                                                                  13
                                                                                                                   (gX1 −gY 1 )
advantage of country 1 in sector X relative to country 2 (i.e., the larger the ratio                               (gX2 −gY 2 ) )   the larger will
be the share of workers of country 1 working in sector X relative to country 2; that is, the lower the value
       T                    T                                                                  FX1
of Z 1 relative to Z 2 .9 Notice also that given gX2 > gY 2 , whenever                         FX2   > 1 there can be no equilibrium in
                                                                          T
which country 1 fully specializes in sector X (i.e., Z 1 = 0). However, there can be equilibria in which country
                                              T                                              (gX1 −gY 1 )
2 fully specializes in sector Y (Z 2 = 1) which occurs when the ratio                        (gX2 −gY 2 )   is particularly large. Intuitively,
                       (gX1 −gY 1 )                                                                                                        T
a large value of       (gX2 −gY 2 )   implies large comparative advantage of country 1 in sector X. This pushes Z 1 down
                                                                                                                      T
but also increases the overall demand for good Y from the Rich country. Eventually Z 2 is pushed to a corner
                T                                                             T                                                            T
solution Z 2 =1. In that case the cut-oﬀ skill level Z 1 can be obtained from (24) by substituting Z 2 = 1.
Hence, suﬃciently large inter-sector technological diﬀerences between countries can lead to complete productive
specialization in country 2. The above intuition and results carry over to the case with trade costs.
     Figure 2 shows the wage schedule in the equilibrium with trade (red line) superimposed on the wage schedule
in autarky (black line). Notice that once trade is allowed each country specializes in the sector where it enjoys
a comparative advantage. This implies that when going from autarky to trade there is an expansion of sector
                           T          A
X in country 1 (Z 1 < Z 1 with the workers with skills between the two thresholds moving from sector Y to
                                                                 T       A
X) while sector Y expands in country 2 (Z 2 > Z 2 with the workers with skills between the two thresholds
moving from sector X to Y ). The opening up to trade also leads to an increase in the relative (nominal) wages
of workers in sector X in country 1 and a decrease in country 2. With large diﬀerences between countries in
the relative productivity in sector X (gX1 >> gX2 ) the shift downwards of the wage schedule of sector X in
country 2 can be large. In particular, it might lie below the wage schedule in Y for the whole range Z ∈ [0, 1],
               T
so that Z 2 would be equal to 1. That is, as argued above, it might be the case that country 2 completely
specializes in sector Y. Finally, in addition to the changes in nominal wages illustrated in Figure 2, trade also
brings about a change in the relative prices of goods Y and X. The larger set of varieties of X produced and
available through trade reduces the aggregate price index and consequently in the equilibrium with trade real
wages in each country receive a positive boost. This overall price eﬀect will turn out to be very relevant in the
simulations below.


4.2        Trade and Migration

Suppose now that countries 1 and 2 allow the movement of their workers across the border as well as the trade
of their goods. We consider three types of migration costs: those linked to the loss of country-specific skills,
those generated by the legal barriers to international migration and the psychological costs of living away from
the country of origin. In eﬀect, migrants suﬀer a loss in human capital since part of the skills of a worker are
    9 Alternatively,                          (gX1 −gY 1 )
                       for a given relative   (gX2 −gY 2 )
                                                           ,   a larger fixed cost in the modern sector in country 1 relative to that in country
2   (FX1 )
     FX2
             would reduce the share of workers in sector X in country 1 relative to that share in country 2 (that is, there will be an
                   T             T
increase in Z 1 relative to Z 2 ).



                                                                              14
specific to her country of origin (e.g., language, knowledge of the local laws, norms and people). Therefore we
assume that a worker who moves to another country is subject to a productivity (and consequently wage) loss
by a fraction δ H ∈ (0, 1) with respect to the productivity of a native worker of comparable education. Legal
restrictions on international mobility are harder to model. Yet, it is obvious that for several skill groups those
costs are close to being prohibitive (which eliminates altogether the possibility of migrating), and even when
they are not prohibitive they entail a significant amount of resources (in terms of paperwork and administrative
costs) that are ”wasted” or unproductive. Furthermore, in many instances the legal barriers to migration also
imply a reduction of skills for the migrants as academic and professional qualifications from some countries
are not recognized in others. Thus, we model these costs as a further reduction in a migrant’s productivity
by a fraction δ B ∈ (0, 1). Finally, the psychological costs of migrating might not translate as a reduction of
output and productivity but they certainly decrease the utility that a worker derives from moving to another
country. Translating this utility reduction in consumption-equivalent terms, we model such costs as a percentage
reduction δ P ∈ (0, 1) in the wage enjoyed by the migrants that is, however, not dissipated in terms of output.
In sum, the migration costs described above are modeled as a reduction of a fraction δ = (δ H + δ B + δ P ) < 1 in
the consumption wage enjoyed by the migrants with two of these costs (the human capital losses and the legal
barriers to migration) also decreasing the workers’ productivity and thus potential output. It is important to
notice that even if all legal barriers to international migration were removed, there would still remain migration
costs (the human capital losses and the psychological costs) that would prevent perfect mobility. As we argue
in section 5.1 below there is strong empirical evidence of the existence of those costs and some measures can be
found in the existing literature.
   Once we allow for labor mobility, the migratory patterns between countries 1 and 2 are dictated by the
cross-country technological diﬀerences and, in the presence of trade costs, also by the price diﬀerentials across
countries. Recall that country 2 has lower TFP than country 1 which contributes to overall lower real wages in
that country. In addition, country 2 uses a less advanced technology in sector X (gX2 < gX1 ), what results in
particularly low wages of the highly skilled in that country. Hence, the high-skilled workers in country 2 have
the strongest incentives to move to country 1 and such incentives increase with the skill level Z. More precisely,
                                                                      T MH
all the workers with skill levels higher than a certain threshold, Z 2       , will migrate. The cut-oﬀ skill level
 T MH
Z2      is given by the condition of equalization of (migration-cost adjusted) real wages across countries:

                                 ³ T MH ´                                   ³ T MH ´
                               W2 Z 2            [1 − (δ H + δ B + δ P )] W1 Z 2
                                             =                                                                (25)
                                    P2                           P1

An interesting feature of the model is that if gY 2 > gY 1 and Λ1 > Λ2 , the model can also generate migration of
the least skilled workers. As we argue in section 5.1 below, recent work by Caselli and Coleman (2006) shows



                                                        15
that lower income countries (represented by country 2 here) have an overall productive disadvantage vis a vis
rich ones (country 1), that is, Λ1 > Λ2 . At the same time, they seem to use a relatively more eﬃcient technology
in the low-skill traditional sector (i.e., gY 2 > gY 1 ) while rich countries use relatively more eﬃcient technology
in the high-skill sector (gX2 < gX1 ). These two facts imply that the wage schedule in country 2 (illustrated
in Figure 2) has a lower intercept at Z = 0 than in country 1; however, it has a steeper slope in sector Y and
then a flatter one in sector X. As the incentives to migrate are given by the (real) wage diﬀerential minus the
migration cost (equal for all workers), from the comparison of the wage schedules across countries it is clear
that the incentives to migrate are the highest among the very highly skilled, followed by the very low skilled,
with workers of intermediate skills having the smallest incentives. This point is also illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3 shows the superimposed (migration-cost adjusted) real wage schedules for the two countries under
free trade. We obtain them by subtracting the logarithm of the price level from both wage schedules, and in
the case of country 1 we also subtract the logarithm of migration costs.10 It is important to note that the
migration costs used to draw Figure 3 are those that would make the worker in country 2 with skill level Z = 0
indiﬀerent between migrating and remaining in her country of origin. The real wage schedule in country 2 is
drawn in red while the purple line represents the real wage schedule (net of migration costs) in country 1. The
vertical distance between the two schedules measures the incentives to migrate. As is evident from the Figure,
                                         T
for workers with skill level below Z 1 the incentives to migrate from country 2 to country 1 are non-positive and
decrease with the skill level (as the wage schedule for country 1 is below that in country 2). More precisely,
                                                                      ∗
according to Figure 3 no worker with skill level below Z will migrate to country 1, while workers with skill
levels above this threshold will migrate. Notice also that for migration costs δ = (δ H + δ B + δ P ) slightly smaller
than those illustrated in Figure 3, the purple (migration-cost adjusted) wage schedule would lie a bit above
while the red wage schedule would not change. This would generate some positive incentives to migrate also for
workers with skill levels in the proximity of Z = 0. In particular, workers in country 2 with skill levels below
                         T ML                                              T ML
a certain threshold Z 2         would migrate to country 1, with Z 2              being determined by a condition similar to
(25):                                 ³ T ML ´                                     ³ T ML ´
                                    W2 Z 2              [1 − (δ H + δ B + δ P )] W1 Z 2
                                                    =                                                                           (26)
                                          P2                              P1
                                                                                                    T
Interestingly, the group of workers with intermediate skills (in the proximity of Z 1 in Figure 3) is the least
likely to migrate. Unless migration costs are so low that all workers want to leave Eastern Europe (which seems
unlikely in our calibration) workers with intermediate skill levels would not gain from migration.
                                                                                    TM
    The other relevant cut-oﬀ skill level is the threshold, denoted Z 1                  , that determines the assignment of
workers across sectors in country 1. This is determined by the market-clearing conditions. For the parameter
  10 Sincethe real wage, net of moving costs, would be (1 − δ) W1
                                                               P1
                                                                  , in logarithmic terms this is obtained by subtracting ln(P1 ) from
ln(W1 ) and adding the term ln(1 − δ) which is negative as (1 − δ) < 1.



                                                                 16
set calibrated to the European case, the opening up to trade entails the full specialization of country 2 in sector
Y and in this case the market clearing condition for good Y reduces to the following expression:

                                                         ⎛      TM                                                          T ML                   ⎞
                                                               ZZ
                                                                1                                                          Z 2Z
                                                       ⎜                                                                                             ⎟
[1 − s(PX1 )] W1 + [1 − s(PX2 )] W2               = Λ1 ⎝M1           exp(gY 1 Z)dG1 (Z) + [1 − (δ H + δ B )] M2                    exp(gY 1 Z)dG2 (Z)⎠ +
                                                                 0                                                            0
                                                                T MH
                                                               Z2
                                                                Z
                                                      +Λ2 M2           exp(gY 2 Z)dG2 (Z)                                                           (27)
                                                                T ML
                                                               Z2


where total wages in countries 1 and 2 are given respectively by:

               ⎡                   TM                                                        T ML
                                                                                                                                      ⎤
                                  ZZ
                                   1                                                        Z 2Z
            ⎢                                                                                                                         ⎥
            ⎢    M1    exp(gY 1 Z)dG1 (Z) + [1 − (δ H + δ B )] M2   exp(gY 1 Z)dG2 (Z)+                                               ⎥
            ⎢                                                                                                                         ⎥
            ⎢      ⎛                                                                     ⎞                                            ⎥
    W1 = Λ1 ⎢                                                                                                                         ⎥
                     0                                            0
            ⎢          Z1                                           Z1                                                                ⎥
            ⎢                                                                                                                         ⎥
            ⎢ +C ⎜                                                                       ⎟                                            ⎥
            ⎣   X1 ⎝M1    exp(gX1 Z)dG1 (Z) + [1 − (δ H + δ B )] M2     exp(gX1 Z)dG2 (Z)⎠                                            ⎦
                                       Z1
                                          TM                                                        T MH
                                                                                                   Z2
                                                                                                                                          (28)


                     T MH
                    Z 2Z

    W2 = Λ2 M2               exp(gY 2 Z)dG2 (Z)
                     T ML
                    Z2


                                                                            TM     T ML             T MH
Conditions (25), (26) and (27) determine the thresholds Z 1                      , Z2      and Z 2          which allow us to compute the
number of varieties N1 and the price of composite good X in each country, given by the following expressions:
                             ⎛                                                                                                    ⎞
                                          Z1                                                        Z1
                      Λ1     ⎜                                                                                              ⎟
       N = N1 =      σFX1    ⎝M1               exp(gX1 Z)dG1 (Z) + [1 − (δ H + δ B )] M2                   exp(gX1 Z)dG2 (Z)⎠
                                          TM                                                        T MH
                                        Z1                                                         Z2
                     ³            ´ 1−σ
                                     1       h               TM
                                                                i
                σ           Λ1
       PX1 =   σ−1         σFX1           exp (gY 1 − gX1 )Z 1    ∗
        ⎛                                                                                                     ⎞ 1−σ
                                                                                                                 1                        (29)
               Z1                                                             Z1
         ⎜                                                                                               ⎟
       ∗ ⎝M1          exp(gX1 Z)dG1 (Z) + [1 − (δ H + δ B )] M2                         exp(gX1 Z)dG2 (Z)⎠
                TM                                                            T MH
               Z1                                                           Z2

       PX2 = τ .PX1


Notice that, as argued above, only the human capital losses and the costs associated with legal restrictions on
migration (but not the psychological costs) reduce the productivity and thus potential output of those workers
who move from country 1 to country 2 in expressions (27) and (28). Depending on the magnitude of migration
                                                                                                                   T ML
costs, there might be no migration of low skilled workers (in which case we would have Z 2                                = 0 in expressions
                                                                       T ML                   T MH
(27) and (28) above) or even no migration at all (i.e., Z 2                   = 0 and Z 2               = 1). Figure 4 illustrates the wage
schedules and the migration patterns in the relevant case when one allows for trade and international migration


                                                                       17
(blue lines). For comparative purposes, in the same figure we also show the wage schedules with trade only (red
lines). As for the parameter set calibrated to the European case, trade entails full specialization of country 2
in sector Y, so that the wage schedule for country 2 is the straight line with slope equal to gY 2 . Relative to
that situation, free international labor mobility leads to the migration of workers from country 2 to country 1
                                                               T ML                  T MH
at the two ends of the skill distribution, i.e., below Z 2            and above Z 2         . By contrast, the workers with
                                   T ML         T MH
intermediate skills (between Z 2          and Z 2      ) remain in country 2. With respect to the case of no migration,
the migration of the highly skilled of country 2 increases the overall production of good X while its relative
price (and thus the wages in terms of numeraire for sector X) decreases. This is illustrated in Figure 4 by the
shift downwards of the wage schedule for sector X in country 1. As a result, the inter-sector cut-oﬀ skill level
in country 1 increases and some native workers switch from sector X to Y.



5     Economic Integration between Eastern and Western Europe

We use the model described above to study the eﬀects of the economic integration between Western European
countries (EU-15) and Eastern European countries, in particular, those that became new EU members in 2004
and in 2006.11 This constitutes a very interesting example of transition from no trade to free trade, and from
no labor mobility to (eventually) free labor mobility. In eﬀect, until the fall of the wall in the late 1980s, the
relation between Eastern and Western Europe corresponded roughly to the autarky scenario: Eastern Europe
was separated from the West by the Iron Curtain with very little trade and migration between the two regions.
During the 1990s the signature of several Free Trade Agreements initiated a process of trade liberalization that
culminated with the entry to the EU in 2004 and 2006. Trade liberalization, however, did not bring along the
free movement of workers between Eastern and Western Europe,12 and so the current period is characterized
by relatively free trade but still very restricted labor mobility. As the transitional restrictions on labor mobility
phase out, migration from the East to the West is expected to increase substantially.
    We simulate the model in order to analyze the eﬀects of opening up to trade while keeping the restrictions on
migration at its current levels (during the period of transitional labor restrictions). We then study the eﬀects of
reducing the migration costs by eliminating the legal barriers while still maintaining the human capital and the
psychological costs of migration. The calibration of the model is described in section 5.1 and the simulations
are performed in section 5.2.
 11 These are Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovania, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Bulgaria and Romania.
 12 Except for the UK, Ireland and Sweden, the rest of the EU countries issued transitional clauses that allowed them to restrict
immigration from the East up to 2011.




                                                               18
5.1     Calibration and Parameter Values

Table 2 summarizes the parametrization of the model. The parameters are either obtained from the data
or calibrated to reproduce the features of the economies of Eastern and Western Europe. Workers’ skills, Z,
are measured in years of schooling. We re-scale this variable so that it ranges from 0 (no schooling) to 1
(corresponding to a Ph.D. degree, obtained with 20 years of schooling). Hence one year of schooling equals
0.05 and a secondary degree and college graduation would be around Z = 0.6 (=12/20) and Z = 0.8 (=16/20)
respectively.13 Measuring skills with years of schooling has several advantages in this context. First, comparable
schooling data for Eastern and Western European countries are available from the Barro and Lee (2001) dataset.
Second, the Mincerian regression approach (very popular in the labor literature) finds that the natural logarithm
of individual wages is a linear function of years of schooling. This is consistent with the wage schedule implied by
our model. Third, particularly since the 1990s the returns to schooling for the highly educated in rich economies
such as the U.S. and Western Europe have been larger than those for the less educated. This also matches well
our characterization of the wage schedule: flatter for low values of Z and steeper for high values of Z. We use
the schooling distributions in the year 2000 of Germany and Poland as representative of the EU-15 and of the
Eastern EU members respectively as they are the largest countries in each region. Table 2 reports the share of
the population in each of five schooling groups, from primary education to college graduation or more. We use
those values to construct the skill distribution for Western Europe (G1 (Z)) and Eastern Europe (G2 (Z)).
   The parameters gXj and gY j characterize the technologies employed in sectors X and Y respectively. They
can be empirically inferred from the wage schedule using equation (7). In particular, the parameter gY j equals
the returns to schooling of less educated workers (to the left of Z j ) while gXj equals the returns to schooling
for highly educated workers (to the right of Z j ). Our calibration is based on several studies in the literature.
First, recent work by Caselli and Coleman (2006) shows that the returns to schooling at high levels of education
(college) relative to those for low levels of education (primary) are particularly large in rich countries. Likewise,
using data for the 1980s and 1990s Iranzo and Peri (2006) shows that the U.S. log-wage schedule has a kink
around 12 years of education and that the returns to schooling are much smaller to the left of the kink than to the
right. Finally, Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004) collect data on average returns to schooling from Mincerian
regressions over several countries. Both Caselli and Coleman (2006) and Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004)
include Germany and Poland and so we can combine those studies to calibrate gY j and gXj for Western Europe
(Germany) and Eastern Europe (Poland). The values obtained are reported in Table 2.14 Consistent with the
 13 There are only slight diﬀerences across countries in the number of years of schooling required for those degrees.
 14 More precisely, we calibrate gY j and gXj so that:
  - The wage premia of workers with ”college completed” vs. those with ”primary completed only” equal those estimated by Caselli
and Coleman (2006) for Germany and Poland.
  - The yearly Mincerian return for Germany and Poland, obtained as an average of the returns to schooling of the low and highly
educated (where the highly educated group is defined as those with a High School diploma or more) match those reported in
Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004).




                                                              19
assumptions of the theoretical model, we find that i) returns to skills are higher in sector X than in sector Y
for both countries, ii) returns to skills in sector X are larger in country 1 than in country 2, iii) returns to skills
in sector Y are larger in country 2 than in country 1. These features produce the shape of the wage schedules
illustrated in Figure 3. Once gY j and gXj are determined, the fixed cost parameter FXj is calibrated to ensure
                                          A
that the cut-oﬀ level in autarky, Z j , equals 12 years of schooling (secondary degree) in both countries. To
complete the parameterization of the technology we need to calibrate the total factor productivity (TFP) levels
for Eastern and Western Europe. Normalizing the Hicks-neutral technological parameters for Eastern Europe
to 1 (i.e., Λ2 = 1), we set Λ1 = 1.5. Such parameters deliver an autarky equilibrium where the real per capita
income of Eastern Europe is 0.39 times that of Western Europe. This value is very close to the ratio of output
per worker in West Germany relative to Hungary (0.36) in the late 1980s as reported by Hall and Jones (1999)
or to the ratio of output per worker in France relative to Poland (0.33). Since the data used in Hall and Jones
(1999) are relative to the late 1980s we can consider those numbers as the benchmark autarky case, with very
small trade and no migration between Eastern and Western Europe.
    The population of Eastern Europe (adding the 10 countries that joined the EU in 2004 and in 2006) was
one third the population of the Western EU countries at the moment of the entry to the EU, and since then
the two blocks have followed similar demographic trends with population growth close to 0. Standardizing the
population of Western Europe to 1 (M1 = 1) this implies M2 = 0.33.
    The rest of the parameters are assumed to be common to both regions and are reported in the lower part of
Table 2. We choose the parameter θ, which measures the substitutability between goods X and Y , to match the
substitutability between the workers that produce those goods (namely, low and highly educated workers). The
consensus estimate for such elasticity in the literature is around 1.5 (see Katz and Murphy 1992, and Ciccone
and Peri 2005). The value of σ captures the degree of substitutability between varieties of good X. This is
an important parameter as the magnitude of the gains from trade of new varieties depends (inversely) on this
parameter. The literature on the gains from new goods and new varieties has produced several estimates of
this parameter. The value of σ = 4 is compatible with Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimates of the elasticity
of substitution between ”diﬀerentiated varieties” in 3-digit sectors. Furthermore, given the broad definition of
good X, which includes all tradeable diﬀerentiated goods and services, we choose a conservative value, in the
high end of the estimated range. The parameter β is chosen to be around 0.5,15 which produces a share of
expenditure in X in autarky close to 0.5 in country 1.
  15 As we are less confident with respect to the value of this parameter, we perform some sensitivity analyses of our results for a

range of values of β. The results are not very sensitive to this parameter.




                                                                20
5.2     Simulations: the Eﬀects of Trade and Migration

5.2.1   Autarky and Free Trade

Our model incorporates trade and technology in a meaningful way and allows us to analyze issues not addressed
before. In particular, it allows us to quantify the residual gains from reducing migration costs once there is free
trade. Thus, although the main focus of the paper is to analyze the eﬀects of freer labor mobility, it is helpful
to begin with the scenario of autarky and analyze the gains from trade only. This provides valuable insights to
understand the role played by trade in spreading the benefits of free labor mobility which we introduce later on.
In order to obtain a clearer intuition for the results, in Tables 3 and 4 we consider a trade regime with costless
trade and then in Table 5 introduce trade costs of a reasonable magnitude.
   Table 3 reports the most relevant variables in the autarky equilibrium (specification I) and under free trade
(specification II) for Western Europe (country 1 in our model) and Eastern Europe (country 2). For ease of
comparison, we standardize the initial price level and per capita GDP in Western Europe in autarky (i.e., pre-
1989) to one. Prior to 1989 per capita real GDP in Eastern Europe was 39% of the per capita income in the
West. The price index was 66% higher than in the West. The price index diﬀerence in autarky is due to the
East’s lower eﬃciency in producing goods in sector X and the smaller range of available varieties in that sector.
This is confirmed by the productive specialization of the two countries, reported towards the bottom of the table:
while 40% of the workers in Western Europe work in the high tech sector, only 28% in Eastern Europe work in
that sector. The productive specialization in autarky is driven by the skill composition and the technology of
the two economies: Western Europe has a larger fraction of highly skilled workers (with more than high school
education) and thus uses the skill-complementary technology more intensively. The rows in the mid-section of
Table 3 report the real wages of workers by educational group (standardized by the per capita GDP in autarky
in Western Europe) in their country of birth or, if they migrate, in their country of residence. We consider 5
educational groups: primary education, some secondary education, those with a secondary degree, some tertiary
education and those with a college degree. Two things are worth noticing in the autarky equilibrium. First,
workers in Eastern Europe are paid, in absolute terms, much less than in Western Europe. Even the college
educated do not reach the real wage of the least educated in Western Europe. Second, in relative terms, there
is a larger wage disparity in the West than in the East. The college-high school wage ratio is 1.75 in the West
and only 1.3 in the East and the college-primary school wage premium is 2.15 in the West and 1.62 in the East.
These wage premia reproduce the schooling premia in Germany and Poland pre-1989.
   With respect to the autarky scenario the free trade equilibrium introduces three significant and intuitive
changes. First, free trade ensures price equalization. This entails a substantial decrease in the overall price
index for Eastern Europe, which now has access to all the good varieties produced in the West. By contrast,
there is not much change in the price level in Western Europe. The second noticeable eﬀect of free trade is


                                                        21
the disappearance of sector X in Eastern Europe. Given the absolute and comparative advantage of Western
Europe in sector X, the opening up to trade leads to the complete specialization of Eastern Europe in sector
            T
Y (i.e., Z 2 = 1). Western Europe still produces both goods, but its employment in sector Y is substantially
reduced. Although trade changes the relative prices of goods X and Y , producing the usual Heckscher-Ohlin
gains for both countries, those are small for Western Europe (the real per capita GDP increases only by 2.8%).
Eastern Europe, however, benefits massively from the lower prices and the access to a larger number of varieties
of good X. Its per capita GDP increases by 63% of its initial value. This asymmetric eﬀect is also due to the
much larger size of Western Europe. The third eﬀect of free trade is the relative benefit for the highly educated
(in Western Europe) and for the less educated in Eastern Europe (Stolper-Samuelson eﬀect). In Western Europe
the college-primary school wage premium increases to 2.28 while in Easter Europe it decreases to 1.42. All in
all, the real wage gains from trade for Eastern Europe dwarf the gains for Western Europe. The reader should
be reminded, though, that this scenario assumes costless trade for all goods and services.


5.2.2   Free Trade and Labor Mobility

The scenario of free trade and very little labor mobility is close to the situation between Eastern and Western
Europe today. Although Eastern Europe lifted the ban on emigration during the 1990s and some Western
European countries received significant flows of immigrants, migrants still represent a small percentage of the
total Eastern European labor force. Using the data collected by Docquier and Marfouk (2005) from national
Censuses around the year 2000, we can calculate how many Eastern Europeans were in Western European
countries in 2000 by educational level and then compute emigration rates (emigrants/residents of the sending
country) for Eastern Europe. These rates are reported in the last row of Table 1. By educational level, one
observes that the emigration rate for the highly educated is three to four times that of other groups. That
is, currently the migration from Eastern Europe involves mainly the highly educated. Our model can easily
explain this phenomenon: in the presence of high barriers to international labor mobility the group of highly
educated workers will be the only group migrating. The last column of Table 3 presents the equilibrium when
labor mobility is allowed and total migration costs (as a share of real wages) are calibrated to generate a
migration rate of 14% among the highly educated (those with at least some tertiary education) and 0 for the
other educational groups.16 As those with some college education are roughly 10% of the Eastern European
population, the overall emigration rate is 1.43% (reported in Table 3), and with respect to the population of
the receiving economy (Western Europe) this constitutes an immigration rate of 0.47%. The value of migration
costs that generates such small migration flows is δ = (δ H + δ B + δ P ) =0.61. This means that the current
hurdles to migration, inclusive of the human capital and psychological costs, are equivalent to a 61% wage cut
 16 While   emigration rates in the other education groups are not 0, they are small enough to make this a reasonable approximation.




                                                                 22
for the average migrant.
   Next, we consider the eﬀects of reductions in migration costs from their current level. The results are
presented in Tables 4 and 5. For ease of comparison, the first column in Table 4 replicates specification III in
Table 3; that is, it reports the per capita GDP, wages and productive specialization at the equilibrium with free
trade and with the migration costs that approximate the current situation. Then we show the equilibria with
intermediate migration costs (specification II) and with low migration costs (specification III). Table 5 does
the same but it includes a first specification with prohibitive migration costs and assumes costly, rather than
costless, trade.
   As explained in section 4.2 there are two types of migration costs that limit international migration even in
the absence of legal barriers to labor mobility. The first cost, δ H , is the human capital loss that migrants suﬀer
when they move to another country. Following Borjas (1996), who empirically estimates earning losses of around
15% for Mexican immigrants to the U.S., we set δ H = 0.15. The second cost, denoted δ P , is a psychological
cost. Leaving loved ones and familiar places for an unknown world is obviously hard. Quantifying this cost in
wage (or consumption) equivalents is a diﬃcult task. We take the stand that these psychological costs are what
constrains migration from poor to rich countries when no legal barriers to migration exist. Therefore these costs
can be empirically inferred from actual migration rates in those cases with unlimited international mobility. In
eﬀect, there have been periods in history with virtually no legal restrictions on labor mobility between some
countries (e.g., the period between 1880 to 1913 for the U.S.) or countries among which there are no formal
barriers but still large wage diﬀerentials (e.g., the U.S. and Puerto Rico since 1945). Yet, we observe in those
instances that migration falls short of what we would expect given the cross-country income diﬀerences. For
example, with diﬀerences in per capita income of 2 to 1, Italian migration rates to the U.S. during the period
1880-1913 amounted to 1.3% each year, and a total of 30% over a forty-year period.17 With a per capita
income equal to one fourth that of the U.S. and full U.S. citizenship rights, Puerto Ricans had a migration rate
during the 1950s and 1960s of only 0.8% each year and about 35% over thirty years. Although these figures are
substantial, they also indicate that despite the large diﬀerences in per capita income (2 to 3 times) and no legal
barriers to migration, the large majority of people do not migrate in the long run. Using a dynamic model,
Klein and Ventura (2006) calibrate the psychological costs needed, on top of human capital costs of 15%, to
generate an average yearly migration rate, with no barriers to labor mobility, equal to 1% per year over the first
25 years, which corresponds to the largest flows experienced by the countries mentioned above. They obtain
a ”utility cost” that can be expressed in consumption-equivalent terms. In their preferred simulation this cost
amounts to a consumption loss of about 17% of the pre-migration consumption,18 and so we use δ P = 0.17.19
 17 Hatton and Williamson (2005, 2006) report similar migration rates from Ireland and Poland.
 18 We  thank Gustavo Ventura for making available to us the average psycological cost in utility-equivalent terms implied by the
Klein and Ventura (2006) model applied to the US-Mexico case.
 19 Given that migration rates of 1% per year are certainly among the highest observed, this value is probably on the low range.




                                                               23
Hence, in the absence of legal barriers to migration, the value of total migration costs δ equals δ P + δ H = 0.32,
which is the value used in specification III of Table 4. Specification II features an intermediate case where we
add to the previous costs some costs due to barriers to labor mobility (in particular, δ B = 0.15 ) so that we
have total migrations costs of δ = 0.47.
    The eﬀects of allowing free labor mobility are most evident when comparing specifications I and III. Several
interesting eﬀects can be observed. First, freer migration is beneficial to each country overall. The price level
decreases in both countries (first row of Table 4) because highly educated Eastern Europeans move to Western
Europe where they are used more eﬃciently and help produce a wider range of varieties of good X. Real income
increases for the average native worker in each country. To see this we should compare the per capita GNP across
specifications I and III. GNP is the average income earned by natives of a country, regardless of where they
reside. This value increases by 0.7% in Western Europe and by 16% in Eastern Europe going from specification
I to III. The comparison of per capita GDP, however, misses most of this positive eﬀect. On the one hand,
the increased wages of emigrants from Eastern Europe is not recorded in the GDP of Eastern Europe. On the
other hand, despite the increase in the wages of the natives, the inclusion of the immigrants lowers the average
GDP of Western Europe due to their lower human capital relative to natives. In sum, although international
migration is Pareto-improving, an analysis based on GDP per capite would be misleading.
    Next we analyze the welfare eﬀects on each educational group separately, as summarized by the real wages
in Table 4. For Western Europe, the move towards freer labor mobility helps the less educated (2.5% increase
in the average wages of primary school educated going from specification I to III) and hurts the most educated
(about -1% change in the average wages of college educated). This is due to the skill composition of immigrants
who are over-represented among the highly educated and therefore cause a negative supply side eﬀect. As for
workers in Eastern Europe, the largest gains are observed for the highly educated (who migrate).20 However, less
educated workers who remain at home are also better oﬀ. For example, college dropouts from Eastern Europe
increase their net real wage (in utility terms) by 22% going from specification I to III and these gains accrue
because they migrate to Western Europe. High school dropouts who remain in Eastern Europe gain 2.5% of
their wage. This gain stems from the lower prices and the larger variety of goods those workers enjoy via trade.
Notice also that in specification II the skill cut-oﬀ for migrants from Eastern Europe is 0.758, which corresponds
to workers with some tertiary education. That is, only workers in the top two education groups migrate, which
results in a total migration rate of less than 8% of the Eastern Europe population. By contrast, specification III
(with no legal migration barriers) captures the case where there is migration at the top (more than secondary
  20 It is important to notice that Tables 3, 4 and 5 report the real wages received by the migrants but not the consumption-

equivalent wages that would give us an idea of the utility they derive from moving. In order to translate the real wages received into
utility or consumption-equivalents, to which we refer in our discussion, one needs to substract the psychological costs (estimated
at 17% of the wage). Notice also that the diﬀerence in net real wages between migrants and stayers of any educational level that
remains after subctracting the 17% psychological costs (see the last column of Table 4) is only due to the skill composition of those
who leave (migrants) and those who stay in Eastern Europe.



                                                                 24
education) and at the bottom (less than primary education) of the schooling distribution. Interestingly, this
case produces a total emigration rate from Eastern Europe close to 30% (27.2%), a value that is in line with the
historical long-run emigration rates from Italy to the US for the period 1880-1913 and from Puerto Rico to the
US during the period 1950-2000. Even in the absence of legal barriers to migration (specification III) Eastern
European immigrants would only represent 9% of the Western European population.


5.2.3      Costly Trade and Labor Mobility

Table 5 features simulations similar to those in Table 4 with the diﬀerence that trade of good X is not completely
free but subject to iceberg trade costs τ = 1.5. Trade costs of 50% of the traded value are not unreasonable if we
consider that they include transport costs (according to Hummels 2007, freight costs for most tradable goods
are close to 10% of their value) and all the bureaucratic hurdles, non-tariﬀ barriers, as well as some intrinsic
non-tradeability of X given that some of these high tech goods and services (such as medical or real estate
services) are hard (although not impossible) to trade.
   We start with the case of no migration at all (specification I) and progressively lower migration barriers so
that migration costs go from δ = (δ H + δ B + δ P ) = 0.66 (specification II) to δ = 0.43 (specification IV). The
main implications of freer migration observed in the previous section carry through in the scenario with costly
trade with only a few diﬀerences. First, the benefits from free trade (relative to autarky) are somewhat reduced,
particularly for Eastern Europe. Since price convergence is incomplete, Eastern Europe maintains higher prices
than Western Europe (about 20% higher) and the gains in real per capita GDP are smaller (+36.5% relative to
autarky). Similarly, the real wages of the highly educated in Eastern Europe do not increase nearly as much as
with free trade. As the gains from trade liberalization in Eastern Europe are smaller in the presence of trade
costs, when labor is allowed to move, the incentives for workers in the East to migrate to the West are larger. In
this sense, migration is a substitute for trade. In particular, in the presence of trade costs higher migration costs
are needed to obtain the same emigration rates as in Table 4. The current (2000) distribution of migrants, with
mainly highly educated immigrants in Western Europe, is achieved for δ = 0.66, and an emigration rate close to
30% of the Eastern European population (with migration of both highly educated and less educated workers)
is reached for δ = 43%.21 Interestingly, while costly trade leads to higher migration and migration increases per
capita GNP in each country (compare specifications I and IV of Table 5) the benefits from migration are reduced
for workers who remain in Eastern Europe.22 For example, high school dropouts who remain in Eastern Europe
gained 2.5% of their real wages going from specifications I to III in Table 4, while in the case of costly trade
they gain 2% of their wage going from specification II to IV in Table 5. Qualitatively, though, all the eﬀects
of increased labor mobility described above also take place in the scenario with costly trade: Eastern European
 21 At   δ = 0.32 all workers would migrate from Eastern Europe, making this an unreasonable and not very interesting scenario.
 22 This   is because due to trade costs the varieties of good X are more costly in the East.



                                                                25
workers with some college education or more gain between 20 and 60% of their real wages by migrating, and
so they are the big winners from the removal of labor mobility restrictions. Even if trade costs reduce some of
the global benefits from migration, and concentrate them more on the migrants and on the workers in Western
Europe, freer migration improves the average GNP of each country.



6        Conclusion

This paper develops a model of international migration that combines technological diﬀerences across countries,
trade of a diﬀerentiated good and heterogeneous workers. Given these ingredients, the model is particularly
suited to analyze the migration of highly skilled workers from poorer to richer countries. This fills a gap in
the literature, since trade and migration tend to be analyzed separately. The model is applied to an important
example of economic integration: the East-West European economic integration. We calibrate the model to
match the economic features of Eastern and Western European countries and analyze the eﬀects of reducing
the barriers to labor mobility between the two regions when trade is free.
     Our simulations show that if the free movement of workers between East and West is allowed, as much as
27% of the Eastern European population would migrate to the West, with most of them being highly educated
workers. This would benefit Europe as a whole by increasing the gross national product of Western Europe
by almost 1% and that of Eastern Europe by 16% thanks to the fact that the highly educated workers are
much more productive in the West and free trade spreads the benefits from their extra productivity. The least
educated workers in the East, as well as in the West, gain from the migration of the highly skilled from the East
to the West. The only group that would somewhat suﬀer from these migration patterns would be the highly
skilled in the West who would bear the competitive eﬀects of an increased supply of high skilled labor.



7        Appendix
                                                                                        [∂=/∂FXj ]
The implicit function theorem implies that ∂Z j /∂FXj = −                                             . Applying Leibniz’s rule to diﬀerentiate
                                                                                         [∂=/∂Z j ]
=[Z j , gY , gXj , β, σ, θ, Mj , FXj , Gj (Z)] as expressed in (13)we obtain


 ∂=/∂Z j =
                                                                                                                          ⎛                  ⎞ σ−θ
                                                                                                                                               σ−1
                                ³          ´θ ³         ´θ−1 ³           ´ σ−1
                                                                           θ−1                                             Z1
                                     1−β           σ             σFXj                                                     ⎜                  ⎟
 exp(gY j Z j )φj (Z j ) +            β           σ−1            Mj Λj           θ(gXj − gY j ) exp[θ(gY j   − gXj )Z j ] ⎝ exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)⎠     +
                                                                                                                         Zj
                                                                                     ⎛                    ⎞ σ−1
                                                                                                            1−θ

     ³         ´θ ³         ´θ−1 ³           ´ σ−1
                                               θ−1                             ³    ´ Z1
         1−β           σ             σFXj                                            ⎜                    ⎟
 +        β           σ−1            Mj Λj           exp[θ(gY j    − gXj )Z j ] σ−θ
                                                                                 σ−1 ⎝   exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)⎠     exp(gXj Z j )φj (Z j )
                                                                                             Zj




                                                                                  26
where φj (Z) is the density function relative to the cumulative distribution Gj (Z). Under the parameter restric-
tions gXj > gY j and σ > θ, the expression above is the sum of three positive terms and hence it is positive. On
the other hand we have

                                                                                                         ⎛                  ⎞ σ−θ
                                                                                                                              σ−1
                          µ         ¶θ µ         ¶θ−1 µ           ¶ θ−σ                                   Z1
                  θ−1         1−β           σ             σFXj      σ−1
                                                                           σ                             ⎜                  ⎟
∂=/∂FXj = −                                                                       exp[θ(gY j −gXj )Z j ] ⎝ exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)⎠
                  σ−1          β           σ−1            Mj Λj           Mj Λj
                                                                                                          Zj



which is negative, and plugging it into the formula above gives ∂Z j /∂FXj > 0.
   Similarly, we have

                                                                                                      ⎛                  ⎞ σ−θ
                                                                                                                           σ−1
                      µ         ¶θ µ         ¶θ−1 µ           ¶ θ−σ                                    Z1
               θ−1        1−β           σ             σFXj      σ−1
                                                                      σFXj                            ⎜                  ⎟
∂=/∂Mj =                                                                       exp[θ(gY j −gXj )Z j ] ⎝ exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z)⎠
               σ−1         β           σ−1            Mj Λj           Mj2 Λj
                                                                                                     Zj



which is positive so that the implied derivative ∂Z j /∂Mj would be negative.
                                                                       Zj
                                                                       Z
   Finally a shift in the density dGj (Z) that decreases the term         exp(gY j Z)dGj (Z) and increases the
                                                                                        0
       Z1
term        exp(gXj Z)dGj (Z) would decrease the overall value of =[Z j , gY , gXj , β, σ, θ, Mj , FXj , Gj (Z)] so that
       Zj
∂=/∂Gj (Z)<0 and the response of Z j to such a shift would be an increase.



References

Acemoglu, D., 1998. “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and Wage
Inequality”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1055-1090.

Acemoglu, D., 2002. “Directed Technical Change”, Review of Economic Studies 69:4, 781-810.

Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti, 200. ”Productivity Diﬀerences”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 563-606.

Bhagwati, J. and K. Hamada, 1974. ”The Brain Drain, International Integration of Markets for Professionals
and Unemployment: A Theoretical Analysis”, Journal of Development Economics 1:1, 19-42.

Bhagwati, J. and Rodriguez, 1975. “Welfare-Theoretical Analysis of the Brain Drain”, Journal of Development
Economics 2, 195—222.

Barro, R. and Lee, J., 2001. “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications”, Oxford
Economic Papers 53:3, 541—63.



                                                                   27
Beine, M., F. Docquier and H. Rapoport, 2001. “Brain Drain and Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence”,
Journal of Development Economics 64:1, 275-289.

Benhabib, J. and B. Jovanovich, 2007. ”Optimal Migration: a World Perspective”, NBER Working Paper #
12871, Cambridge MA.

Boeri, T. and H. Brucker, 2005. ”Why Are Europeans So Tough on Migrants?”, Economic Policy October 2005,
629-703.

Borjas, G., 1996. ”The Earnings of American Immigrants in the United States”, Journal of Development Eco-
nomics 51:1, 69-98.

Broda, C. and D. Weinstein, 2006. “Globalization and the Gains from Variety”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
121:2, 541-585.

Caselli, F. and W. J. Coleman, 2006. ”The World Technology Frontier”, American Economic Review 96:3,
499-522.

Ciccone, A. and G. Peri, 2005. ”Long-Run Substitutability between More and Less Educated Workers: Evidence
from U.S. States 1950-1990”, Review of Economics and Statistic 87:4, 652-663.

Docquier, F. and A. Marfouk, 2005. ”International Migration by Educational Attainment -Release 1.1”,
Manuscript, Faculté des Sciences Sociales, Politiques et Économiques, Université Libre de Bruxelles.

Freeman, R., 2006. ”People Flows in Globalization”, NBER Working Paper #12315, Cambridge MA.

Hall, R. and C. I. Jones, 1999. “Why do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per worker than
Others?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:1, 83-116.

Hatton, T.J. and J. Williamson, 2005. ”A Dual Policy Paradox: Why Have Trade and Immigration Policies
Always Diﬀered in Labor-Scarce Economies?”, NBER Working Paper 11866, Cambridge MA.

Hatton, T.J. and J. Williamson, 2006. ”What Determines Immigration’s Impact: Comparing Two Global Cen-
turies”, NBER Working Paper # 12414, Cambridge MA.

Hummels, D., 2007. ”Transport Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21:3, 131-154.

Iranzo, S. and G. Peri, 2006. ”Schooling Externalities, Technology and Productivity: Theory and Evidence from
U.S. States”, NBER Working Paper #12440, Cambridge MA.




                                                       28
Jones, R.W., I. Coelho and S. Easton, 1986. ”The Theory of International Factor Flows: The Basic Model”,
Journal of International Economics 20, 313-327.

Kapur, D. and J. McHale, 2006. Give Us Your Best and Brightest: The Global Hunt for Talent and its Impact
on the Developing World, Center for Global Development, Washington DC.

Katz, L. and K. Murphy, 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987- Supply and Demand Factors”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 107:1, 35-78.

Klein, P. and G. J. Ventura, 2007. ”TFP Diﬀerences and the Aggregate Eﬀects of Labor Mobility in the Long
Run”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 7:1 (Contributions), Article 10.

Klein, P. and G. J. Ventura, 2006. ”Productivity Diﬀerences and the Dynamic Eﬀects of Labor Movements”,
Manuscript University of Western Ontario, August 2006.

Kremer, M. and S. Watt, 2006. ”The Globalization of Household Production”, Manuscript Harvard University,
December 2006

Krugman, P. and M. Obtsfeld, 2006. International Economics: Theory and Policy, Seventh Edition, Addison-
Wesley.

Kuhn, P. and C. McAusland, 2006. ”The International Migration of Knowledge Workers: When is Brain Drain
Beneficial?”, NBER Working Paper # 12761, Cambridge MA.

Mundell, R.A., 1957. ”International Trade and Factor Mobility”, American Economic Review 47, 321-335.

Psacharopoulos, G. and H. Patrinos, 2004. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further Update”, Education
Economics 12:2, 111 — 134.

Rauch, J. and V. Trinidade, 2002. “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade”, Review of Economics and
Statistics 84, 116—130.

Stark, O., 2004. ”Rethinking the Brain Drain”, World Development 32:1, 15-22.

Wong, K.Y.and C. K.Yip, 1999. ”Education, Economic Growth and Brain Drain”, Journal of Economic Dy-
namics and Control 23, 699-726.

Yeaple, S., 2005. ”A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade and Wages”, Journal of Interna-
tional Economics 65, 1-20.




                                                    29
Figures and Tables
                                                 Figure 1
                Wage Schedules in Autarky (No Trade and No International Labor Movements)
                       Country 1 in the Upper Graph; Country 2 in the Lower Graph

  ln (Wage)                          COUNTRY 1




                                                                                      Slope: gX1




            A
  ln (W(Z 1))

                                  Slope: gY1

    ln Λ1


                                                                                                       Skills
                0              Sector Y                       Z
                                                                  A
                                                                      1
                                                                           Sector X                1


  ln (Wage)                          COUNTRY 2




                                                                                       Slope: gX2




            A
  ln (W(Z 2))

                                  Slope: gY2


                                                                                                       Skills
                0              Sector Y                       Z
                                                                  A
                                                                      2
                                                                           Sector X                1




Notes: The horizontal axis measures the skill (schooling) level of workers, standardized to be between
0 and 1. The vertical axis measures the natural logarithm of the wage in terms of the numeraire good Y.


                                                        30
                                        Figure 2
                      Wage Schedules with Free Trade
                      Country 1 in the Upper Graph; Country 2 in the Lower Graph

                                                                                                                Free Trade
                                              COUNTRY 1
  ln (Wage)
                                                                                                                  Autarky




     ln Λ1

                                                                           A
                  0                              Z1
                                                      T
                                                                       Z       1
                                                                                                            1
                                                   Change Sector                                                     Skills


  ln (Wage)                                  COUNTRY 2




                                                                                                                  Autarky




                                                                                                                 Free Trade




              0                                                Z
                                                                   A                                   T
                                                                       2                           Z    2
                                                                                                            1        Skills
                                                                                   Change Sector

Notes: The horizontal axis measures the skill (schooling) level of workers, standardized to be between
0 and 1. The vertical axis measures the natural logarithm of the wage in terms of the numeraire good Y.
The segment denoted as “Change sector” represents the range of skills of workers who switch sectors
when going from autarky to free trade.



                                                          31
                                                                      Figure 3
                          Incentives to Migrate from Country 2 to Country 1 under Free Trade


n (Wage)




                                                                                       Country 1



                                                                                 Positive Migration Incentives




                                                                                 Country 2


                                         Negative Migration Incentives
               ln Λ1-ln (P1)+ln (1-δ)=
               = ln(Λ2)-ln(P2)

                                                             Z1
                                                                  T   Z*                     Z
                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                  2              Skills
           0



   Notes: The migration cost δ includes the three types of costs (human capital losses, legal barriers to
   migration and psychological costs), i.e., δ = δH + δB + δP .The purple line represents the (logarithm of
   the) real wage net of migration costs in Country 1, the red line represents the (logarithm of the) real
   wage in Country 2. The vertical distance between the two lines measures the gains from migrating from
   Country 2 to Country 1 for workers of skill level Z. This gain is positive if the purple line lies above the
   red line, and it is negative (a loss) if the red line lies above the purple one.




                                                                           32
                                                           Figure 4
                     Wage Schedules with Free Trade and no Barriers to Labor Mobility
                                  Country 1 in the Upper Graph; Country 2 in the Lower Graph

                                                                COUNTRY 1                                  Trade & no Migration
                                                                                                                  Trade & Migration
       ln (Wage)




         ln Λ1


                             Z2
                                TML
                                                                       Z1TM Z2TMH                                        Skills
                  Workers from Country 1 and 2                                  Workers from Country 1 and 2
                  in this range                                                 in this range



                                                            COUNTRY 2
      ln (Wage)




                                                       Trade & Migration                                           Trade & no Migration




                                TML                                             TMH
                           Z2                                              Z2                                            Skills
             No workers in this range,                                                No workers in this range,
             they migrate to Country 1                                                they migrate to Country 1


Notes: The horizontal axis measures the skill (schooling) level of workers, standardized to be between
0 and 1. The vertical axis measures the natural logarithm of the wage in terms of the numeraire good Y
with free trade only (red lines) and with free trade and labor mobility (blue lines).




                                                                  33
TABLE 1: EMIGRATION RATES AND THEIR CHANGES 1990-2000
                                                Emigration Rates in 2000                    Changes in Emigration Rates 1990-2000
                                       Low        Intermediate       High                  Low       Intermediate       High
                                    Education Education Education Total Education Education Education Total
                                                              Rich Countries
Canada                                 3.2%           3.3%           4.6%       4.0%      -0.7%          -1.2%         -0.2%       -0.6%
United States                          1.7%           0.2%           0.5%       0.4%       0.3%           0.1%         -0.1%        0.0%
France                                 1.1%           2.7%           3.4%       2.0%      -0.7%           0.9%          0.7%        0.0%
Germany                                7.5%           2.0%           5.2%       3.4%       1.7%           0.0%         -0.5%       -0.1%
Japan                                  0.2%           0.3%           1.2%       0.5%       0.0%           0.0%         -0.1%        0.0%
                                                          Developing Countries
Mexico                                10.3%          15.5%          15.3%      12.4%       3.7%           6.4%          4.6%        4.9%
Romania                                4.6%           2.0%          11.8%       3.7%       1.1%           1.1%          2.7%        1.3%
China                                  0.1%           0.1%           3.8%       0.2%       0.0%           0.0%          0.8%        0.1%
India                                  0.1%           0.4%           4.3%       0.4%       0.0%           0.1%          1.5%        0.1%
Philippines                            1.4%           3.3%          13.7%       5.0%       0.1%           0.3%          0.8%        0.8%
Eastern Europe                         5.0%           3.3%           14%        5.2%       0.5%           1.2%          0.8%        1.1%
Notes: Emigration rates are calculated as the total number of people residing out of the country of origin relative to the working age
population in the country of origin by level of education and in the aggregate. Low levels of education include people with 0 to 8 years
of schooling, Intermediate levels of education include people with 9 to 12 years of schooling, High levels of education include people
with 13 years of schooling or more. “Eastern Europe” only includes the Eastern European countries admitted to the EU in 2006.




                                                                          34
    TABLE 2: PARAMETER VALUES

 Description of the Parameters:
                                                                  Western EU            Eastern EU
 Population and Education
 Mj: Total population (Country 1’s is standardized to 1)                 1                  0.33
 Share of population with at most primary degree                       0.13                 0.06
 Share of population with some secondary education                     0.47                 0.66
 Share of population with secondary degree                             0.24                 0.18
 Share of population with some tertiary education                      0.08                 0.04
 Share of population with college degree or more                       0.08                 0.06
 Technology
 Λj: TFP level (Country 2’s is standardized to 1)                       1.5                   1
 gXj: Returns to skills (schooling) in sector X                          2                    1
 gYj: Returns to skills (schooling) in sector Y                         0.4                  0.5
 Fxj: Fixed cost of development of a variety in X                       10                   4.7

                                                                    Common to both countries
 Preferences
 θ: elasticity of substitution between goods X and Y                              1.5
 β: preference for good X in the utility function                                 0.5
 σ: elasticity of substitution between varieties of X                              4
Notes: The choice of parameters is described in detail in the main text. Parameters related to population
and education are obtained from the data, parameters related to technology are either from the literature
or calibrated to match the features of Eastern and Western Europe, and the taste parameters, common to
the two economies, are taken from the literature.




                                                                      35
        TABLE 3: AUTARKY, COSTLESS TRADE AND BARRIERS TO MIGRATION
                                                                                                                                  Current Migration Costs*
                                                      Autarky                          Free Trade and No Migration                     (wage cut δ=61%)
                                                        (I)                                        (II)                                      (III)
                                             Western EU      Eastern EU               Western EU         Eastern EU              Western EU        Eastern EU
Overall price                                      1                1.662                1.003                 1.003                1.002               1.002
Real per capita GDP                                1                0.394                1.028                 0.643                1.029               0.643
Real per capita GNP                                                                                                                 1.028               0.650

Real wages of:
 Primary School (natives)                       0.801               0.328                0.798                 0.543                0.800               0.544
 Primary School (migrants)
 HS dropouts (natives)                          0.903               0.381                0.905                 0.631                0.906               0.632
 HS dropouts (migrants)
 HS graduates (natives)                         0.988               0.410                1.045                 0.671                1.045               0.672
 HS graduates (migrants)
 College dropouts (natives)                     1.211               0.451                1.281                 0.705                1.280               0.707
 College dropouts (migrants)
 College graduates (natives)                    1.723               0.533                1.823                 0.770                1.822               0.763
 College graduates (migrants)                                                                                                                           0.971

Cut-off skill level                            Z1A= 0.6            Z2A=0.6             Z1T=0.562               Z2T=1             Z1TM=0.564         Z2TMH=0.954

Share of workers in sector Y                     0.60                0.72                 0.51                    1                  0.52                  1
Share of workers in sector X                     0.40                0.28                 0.49                    0                  0.48                  0

Total Emigration rates (%)                         0                   0                    0                     0                 0.47%               1.43%
of which
 % Low skilled                                    --                  --                   --                     --                  0
 % High skilled                                   --                  --                   --                     --                100%
Notes: The income and wages of both countries in all scenarios have been standardized to the per capita income of country 1 in autarky. Similarly, the prices have
been standardized to country 1’s price under autarky.
(*) These are the migration costs that yield the observed current migration from Eastern Europe under free trade.




                                                                                36
        TABLE 4: COSTLESS TRADE AND DECREASING BARRIERS TO MIGRATION
                                                Current Migration Costs*                   Medium Migration Costs                      Low Migration Costs
                                                   (wage cut δ=61%)                           (wage cut δ=47%)                          (wage cut δ=32%)
                                                          (I)                                        (II)                                     (III)
                                            Western EU            Eastern EU          Western EU            Eastern EU           Western EU           Eastern EU
Overall price                                 1.002                  1.002              0.994                  0.994               0.977                0.977
Real per capita GDP                           1.029                  0.643              1.035                  0.640               1.036                 0.647
Real per capita GNP                           1.028                  0.650              1.030                  0.683               1.035                 0.753

Real wages of:
 Primary School (natives)                       0.800                0.544                0.806                 0.548                0.820                0.586
 Primary School (migrants)                                                                                                                                0.626
 HS dropouts (natives)                          0.906                0.632                0.911                 0.636                0.925                0.648
 HS dropouts (migrants)
 HS graduates (natives)                         1.045                0.672                1.042                 0.677                1.035                0.683
 HS graduates (migrants)                                                                                                                                  0.833
 College dropouts (natives)                     1.280                0.707                1.277                 0.705                1.268
 College dropouts (migrants)                                                                                    0.884                                     1.009
 College graduates (natives)                    1.822                0.763                1.817                                      1.805
 College graduates (migrants)                                        0.971                                      1.133                                     1.436

Cut-off skill level                          Z1TM =0.564          Z2TM =0.954          Z1TM =0.570          Z2TM =0.758          Z1TM =0.586         Z2TML =0.198
                                                                                                                                                     Z2TMH =0.611
Share workers in sector Y                        0.52                   1                  0.52                   1                  0.53                 1
Share workers in sector X                        0.48                   0                  0.48                   0                  0.47                 0

Total Emigration rates (%)                      0.47%                1.43%                2.44%                7.34%                 9.0%                27.1%
of which
 % Low skilled                                    0                                          0                                      11.5%
 % High skilled                                  100                                        100                                     88.5%
Notes: The income and wages of both countries in all scenarios have been standardized to the per capita income of country 1 in autarky. Similarly, the prices have
been standardized to country 1’s price under autarky. The wages of migrants reported in the table are net of migration costs due to human capital losses and legal
barriers to migrations but do not reflect the psychological costs of migrating. In order to translate these wages into consumption-equivalent terms one needs to
substract the psychological costs estimated at 17%.
(*) These are the migration costs that yield the observed current migration from Eastern Europe under free trade.

                                                                                 37
          TABLE 5: COSTLY TRADE AND DECREASING BARRIERS TO MIGRATION, τ=1.5
                                                                                                      Trade and Costly Migration
                                                                    Current Migration Costs*          Medium Migration Costs Medium-Low Migrat. Costs
                                    Trade and No Migration             (wage cut δ=66.6%)                 (wage cut δ=47%)          (wage cut δ=43%)
                                              (I)                             (II)                              (III)                     (IV)
                                   Western EU Eastern EU            Western EU Eastern EU             Western EU Eastern EU Western EU        Eastern EU
Overall price                         1.003       1.200               1.001          1.198              0.990          1.187     0.979           1.174
Real per capita GDP                   1.025       0.538               1.026          0.537              1.031          0.534     1.019           0.539
Real per capita GNP                                                   1.025          0.544              1.028          0.595     1.032           0.638

Real wages of:
 Primary School (natives)              0.799            0.454           0.800              0.455          0.809           0.460            0.818             0.494
 Primary School (migrants)                                                                                                                                   0.530
 HS dropouts (natives)                 0.904            0.527           0.905              0.528          0.913           0.533            0.923             0.539
 HS dropouts (migrants)
 HS graduates (natives)                1.040            0.561           1.039              0.562          1.035           0.567            1.030             0.567
 HS graduates (migrants)                                                                                                  0.673                              0.693
 College dropouts (natives)            1.274            0.590           1.273              0.591          1.268                            1.262
 College dropouts (migrants)                                                                                              0.786                              0.842
 College graduates (natives)           1.813            0.644           1.812              0.638          1.805                            1.796
 College graduates (migrants)                                                              0.811                          1.119                              1.198

Cut-off skill levels                Z1T =0.566         Z2T =1        Z1TM =0.568        Z2TM =0.955   Z1TM =0.577      Z2TM =0.648     Z1TM =0.587       Z2TML =0.253
                                                                                                                                                         Z2TMH =0.610
 Share workers in sector Y              0.52              1              0.52               1             0.53               1              0.54              1
 Share workers in sector X              0.48              0              0.48               0             0.47               0              0.46              0

Immigrants/emigrants (%)                                                0.47%             1.41%          3.66%             11%             9.53%            28.63%
of which
 % Low skilled                                                            0                                 0                               13.9
 % High skilled                                                          100                               100                              86.1
  Notes: The income and wages of both countries in all scenarios have been standardized to the per capita income of country 1 in autarky. Similarly, the prices have
  been standardized to country 1’s price under autarky. The wages of migrants reported in the table are net of migration costs due to human capital losses and legal
  barriers to migrations but do not reflect the psychological costs of migrating. In order to translate these wages into consumption-equivalent terms one needs to
  substract the psychological costs estimated at 17%.
  (*) These are the migration costs that yield the observed current migration from Eastern Europe with trade costs τ=1.5.
                                                                                   38
