                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   INEFFICIENT CREDIT BOOMS

                                            Guido Lorenzoni

                                          Working Paper 13639
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13639


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2007




I am grateful to Nobu Kiyotaki, Alberto Martin and Rafael Repullo for very helpful discussions at
conferences. I also thank for very useful comments the editors Fabrizio Zilibotti and Kjetil Storesletten,
two referees, Daron Acemoglu, Fernando Alvarez, Claudio Borio, Ricardo Caballero, Veronica Guerrieri,
Olivier Jeanne, Victor Rios-Rull, Jean Tirole, Karl Walentin, and seminar participants at Bocconi University,
Università di Venezia, Ente Einaudi (Rome), the Eltville Conference on Liquidity Concepts and Financial
Instabilities, (Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt), Duke University, University of Chicago, University
of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, the Bank of England Conference on Financial Stability, CREI
(Barcelona), the Philadelphia FED and MIT. Pablo Kurlat provided outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Inefficient Credit Booms
Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 13639
November 2007
JEL No. E32,E44,E61,G10,G18

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper studies the welfare properties of competitive equilibria in an economy with financial frictions
hit by aggregate shocks. In particular, it shows that competitive financial contracts can result in excessive
borrowing ex ante and excessive volatility ex post. Even though, from a first-best perspective the equilibrium
always displays under-borrowing, from a second-best point of view excessive borrowing can arise.
The inefficiency is due to the combination of limited commitment in financial contracts and the fact
that asset prices are determined in a spot market. This generates a pecuniary externality that is not
internalized in private contracts. The model provides a framework to evaluate preventive policies which
can be used during a credit boom to reduce the expected costs of a financial crisis.


Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
1        Introduction

In the past two decades, both developed and emerging economies have experienced episodes
of rapid credit expansion, followed, in some cases, by a financial crisis, with a collapse in asset
prices, credit and investment.1 This experience has led policy makers to be increasingly wary of
credit booms and to propose various preventive measures to reduce the probability and/or the
depth of a potential crisis.2 However, relatively little theoretical work has analyzed the reasons
why a credit boom may be ineﬃcient from an ex ante perspective, and whether any intervention
is warranted. If the private sector correctly perceives the risk of a negative aggregate shock,
it will incorporate this risk in its optimal decisions. If agents still decide to borrow heavily
during the boom, it means that the expected gains from increased investment today more than
compensate for the expected costs of financial distress in the future. Therefore, to assess the
need for policy intervention, one needs to understand how, and under what conditions, this
private calculation leads to ineﬃcient decisions at the social level. In this paper, I address this
question focusing on a pecuniary externality which arises from the combination of financial
constraints with a competitive market for real assets. I analyze constrained eﬃciency by
considering a planner who faces the same constraints faced by the private economy, and asking
whether a reduction in borrowing ex ante can lead to a Pareto improvement. My main result
is that excessive borrowing can arise in equilibrium, and that it is associated to an excessive
contraction in investment and asset prices if the crisis takes place.
        The paper develops a three-period model of investment with financial frictions. In the first
period, entrepreneurs with limited internal funds borrow and invest in some productive asset
(real estate, machinery, equipment, etc.). In the second period, their revenues are subject to
an aggregate shock, which can take two values, good and bad. When the bad shock hits, they
face operational losses. Given their limited access to outside funds, they need to sell part of
the assets to finance these losses. Assets are sold on a competitive market, where they are
absorbed by a traditional sector, which makes a less productive use of them. Each entrepreneur
has access to state-contingent debt contracts: he can decide both how much to borrow in the
first period and how much to repay in diﬀerent states of the world in the following periods.
By investing more in the first period the entrepreneur earns higher revenues if the good shock
    1
     For the main stylized facts on boom-bust cycles see Gourinchas, Valdes and Landerretche (2001), Borio and
Lowe (2002), Bordo and Jeanne (2002), Tornell and Westermann (2002), Ranciere, Tornell and Westermann
(2003).
   2
     See Borio (2003) and references therein.


                                                      1
is realized, but faces larger losses if the bad shock hits. Entrepreneurs are fully rational and
correctly perceive the risks and rewards associated to diﬀerent financial decisions. However,
since they are atomistic, they do not take into account the general equilibrium eﬀect of asset
sales on prices. This is the pecuniary externality at the basis of my ineﬃciency result. By
reducing aggregate investment ex ante a planner can reduce the size of the asset sales in the
bad state. This increases asset prices, leading to a reallocation of funds from the traditional
sector, who is buying assets, to the entrepreneurial sector, who is selling them. Due to the
presence of financial frictions, this reallocation leads to an aggregate welfare gain, which is not
internalized by private agents.
      Many accounts of recent financial crises have emphasized the interaction between asset
prices and financial distress in the corporate and financial sector. As an example, take the
case of the banking sector in Thailand prior to the crisis of 1997. In the first half of the 90s
Thai banks increased their investment in real estate, both directly, through loans to property
developers, and indirectly, through loans to finance companies which had extensive investment
in real estate. When the crisis erupted, the fall in real estate prices eroded the value of the
assets held by the banks, as loans, backed by real estate guarantees, started going into default.
This prompted a cut-back in lending, which, in turns, led to a further reduction in the demand
for real estate and a further drop in real estate prices. In these circumstances, the large supply
of recently developed real estate, fueled by bank lending during the boom, contributed to the
severe collapse in prices during the crisis.3 This is the type of mechanism I model in this paper.
To capture the essence of the argument, I do not model explicitly financial intermediation and
I concentrate on a setup where financially constrained agents invest directly in real assets.
      Current policy debates mention a number of reasons why a credit boom might be ineﬃcient:
irrational optimism of the borrowers; moral hazard caused by the expectation of a bailout;
ineﬃcient delays in the treatment of information; some negative externality by which higher
borrowing of some agents may increase “systemic risk.” Of these arguments, only the first two
have been fully developed in the literature.4 This paper attempts to formalize the “systemic
risk” argument, focusing on a pecuniary externality working through asset prices. The idea
  3
     See Herring and Wachter (1999) for a narrative of the boom-bust cycle in Thailand. See Watanabe (2007)
for an empirical estimate of the eﬀect of losses on real estate investment on banks’ lending in Japan.
   4
     The literature on optimal monetary policy has analyzed economies where an investment boom is driven
by an irrational fad, or “bubble,” see Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky and Wadhwani (2000), Bernanke and Gertler
(2001), and Dupor (2002). For the moral hazard argument applied to recent crises, see McKinnon and Pill
(1996), Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999), Tornell and Schneider (2004).



                                                    2
of focusing on the general equilibrium feed-back between financial distress and asset prices
goes back to Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). The role of asset
“fire sales” during recent episodes of financial crisis has been emphasized by Krugman (1998).
Systematic evidence on fire sales is presented in Pulvino (1998) and Aguiar and Gopinath
(2005).
       The fundamental source of ineﬃciency in this paper is in financial frictions, both on the
borrowers’ (entrepreneurs) and on the lenders’ (consumers) side. In particular, my model
assumes that both entrepreneurs and consumers have limited ability to commit to future
repayments. Lack of commitment on the entrepreneurs’ side implies that they have limited
access to external finance. Lack of commitment on the consumers’ side limits the entrepreneurs’
ability to insure ex ante against aggregate liquidity shocks, as in Holmstrom and Tirole (1998).
As I will show in Section 4, the combination of these two imperfections drives the ineﬃciency
result.
       The paper is related to the large literature on the role of financial frictions in the am-
plification and propagation of macroeconomic shocks.5 Existing papers have compared the
equilibrium arising in models with financial constraints with a first-best benchmark in which
no financial constraints are present. The main contribution of this paper is to study welfare
from a second-best perspective and to identify the possibility of over-borrowing. The closer
precedent to the model presented is Krishnamurthy (2003), who develops a model à la Kiy-
otaki and Moore (1997) with state-contingent contracts. He uses the model to argue that, in
presence of state-contingent contracts, the degree of amplification is smaller than in the case
of non-state-contingent debt.6 Gertler (1992) oﬀers an early analysis of multi-period financial
contracts in an environment with agency costs, aggregate shocks, and state-contingent con-
tracts. The analysis of state-contingent debt is also related to the literature on hedging in the
presence of financial constraints. In particular, Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993) make the
case that firms with access to costly external finance and with a concave technology should
hedge cash-flow shocks. In my model firms have a constant returns to scale technology. How-
ever, a similar motive for hedging aggregate cash-flow shocks arises in general equilibrium.
   5
     See Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Lamont (1995), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), Acemoglu and Zilibotti
(1997), Aghion, Banerjee and Piketty (1999), Tornell and Schneider (2003), Rampini (2003), Cooley, Marimon
and Quadrini (2004), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2007) and references in Bernanke et al. (2001).
   6
     “Fire sales” of assets are not present in his model, i.e. entrepreneurial investment is always positive.
Therefore, my conjecture is that over-borrowing cannot arise in that setup, although the equilibrium is not
constrained eﬃcient.



                                                     3
Since asset prices drop when aggregate entrepreneurial wealth is low, that increases the rate of
return on investing in the bad state, and induces entrepreneurs to transfer financial resources
to that state.
    From a methodological standpoint, the idea that the competitive equilibrium in economies
with endogenous borrowing constraints can be constrained ineﬃcient goes back to Kehoe and
Levine (1993). They show that in an economy with limited enforcement the first welfare
theorem holds when there is only one good, but fails to hold with more than one good.7 In the
second case, private contracts fail to internalize their eﬀect on equilibrium prices, and, in turns,
these prices aﬀect the financial constraints. This paper shows that pecuniary externalities of
this type provide a useful framework to study credit booms. Recent contributions that use
constrained eﬃciency analysis to study the role of preventive policies in financial markets
include Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001, 2003), Lorenzoni (2001), Allen and Gale (2004),
Gai, Kondor and Vause (2006), and Farhi, Golosov and Tsyvinski (2007).
    A recent paper by Bordo and Jeanne (2002) approaches credit booms from a point of view
similar to the one taken here, focusing on the trade-oﬀ between high investment ex ante and
financial distress ex post. They consider an economy with sticky prices and show that, if
the firms are highly leveraged when a negative shock hits, this causes a sharper reduction
in investment and output. In this environment they study the eﬀect of preventive monetary
policy, which can help to reduces firms’ leverage ex ante.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, I introduce the model. In Section 3,
I characterize the competitive equilibrium. Section 4 contains the welfare analysis and a
discussion of policy implications. Section 5 concludes. All the proofs are in the appendix.


2     The Model

There are three periods, 0, 1 and 2, and two groups of agents of equal mass, consumers and
entrepreneurs. There are two goods, a perishable consumption good and a capital good.
Consumption goods can be turned into capital goods one for one at any point in time, but the
opposite is not feasible.
    Consumers are risk neutral with preferences represented by the utility function E [c0 + c1 + c2 ],
and receive a constant endowment e of consumption goods in each period. Entrepreneurs are
   7
     In turns, this result is related to the ineﬃciency result in economies with incomplete markets, Geanakoplos
and Polemarchakis (1986).



                                                       4
also risk neutral but only consume in period 2. Their preferences are given by E [ce2 ]. They
begin life with an endowment n of consumption goods and receive no further endowment in the
following periods. Moreover, they have access to the following technology. In period 0, they
choose the level of investment k0 . In period 1, this investment yields as k0 units of consumption
good, with as > 0. The productivity of investment at date 1, as , is random and depends on the
aggregate state s, which takes the values l and h (low and high) with probabilities π l and π h .
In period 1 the capital k0 requires maintenance in order to remain productive. Maintenance
costs are equal to γ units of consumption goods per unit of capital. If γ is not paid, capital is
scrapped, i.e., it fully depreciates. Entrepreneurs choose the fraction of capital they want to
keep productive, denoted by χs ∈ [0, 1]. Hence, χs k0 is the undepreciated part of the capital
stock and total maintenance costs are equal to γχs k0 . At the end of period 1, entrepreneurs
choose the capital stock for next period, k1s , by making the net investment k1s − χs k0 . The
capital stock k1s produces Ak1s units of consumption goods in period 2, with A > 1. Capital
fully depreciates at the end of period 2.
   Each consumer owns a firm in the “traditional sector.” Firms in the traditional sector
                T in period 1 to produce consumption goods in period 2. The technology of
invest capital k1s
                                                                     T ). The function F (.) is
the traditional sector is represented by the production function F (k1s
increasing, strictly concave, twice diﬀerentiable, and satisfies the following properties: F (0) =
                   ¡ T¢
0, F 0 (0) = 1, F 0 k1s is bounded below, with lower bound q.
   The goods and capital markets are competitive. The price of capital in period 1 is denoted
by qs . For simplicity, I assume that the economy begins with no capital, so the price of capital
is one in period 0, as long as some investment takes place. On the other hand, the price of
capital is zero in period 2, since that is the final date.

2.1   Financial contracts with limited commitment

At date 0, entrepreneurs oﬀer financial contracts to consumers. A financial contract specifies
a loan d0 at date 0 from the consumer to the entrepreneur and state-contingent payments d1s
and d2s from the entrepreneur to the consumer in periods 1 and 2, for each state s.
   In period 0, the entrepreneur can invest his initial wealth plus the amount borrowed from
the consumer,
                                            k0 ≤ n + d0 .

In period 1, the entrepreneur’s cash flow is equal to current revenues minus maintenance costs.


                                                 5
Part of these funds are used to pay d1s to the consumer, the rest goes to finance current
investment. The budget constraint is then

                                   qs (k1s − χs k0 ) ≤ as k0 − γχs k0 − d1s .

Finally, in period 2, the entrepreneur can consume the final revenues net of debt repayments,

                                                ce2s ≤ Ak1s − d2s .

       The consumer’s budget constraints are easily derived. If he accepts the contract, his ex-
pected utility is
                                     X       ¡                              ¡ T ¢¢
                                                            T
                          e − d0 +        π s e + d1s − qs k1s + e + d2s + F k1s   ,                              (1)
                                      s
while, if he does not accept, it is
                                          X      ¡                  ¡ T ¢¢
                                                          T
                                    e+        π s e − qs k1s + e + F k1s   .
                                          s

I will assume throughout the paper that e is suﬃciently large that the non-negativity con-
straints for c0 , c1s and c2s are never binding.8 The consumer’s participation constraint is then
given by
                                                     X
                                              d0 ≤        π s (d1s + d2s ) .
                                                     s
       Financial contracts are subject to a form of limited commitment, both on the entrepreneur’s
and on the consumer’s side. Consider first the entrepreneur. In periods 1 and 2 he chooses
whether or not to make the contractual payments d1s and d2s . If he fails to pay, he gets to
make a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to the consumer regarding current and future payments. If the
consumer rejects the oﬀer, the firm is liquidated. When the firm is liquidated a fraction (1 − θ)
of the firm’s current profits is lost, where θ is a scalar in (0, 1). The rest of the profits and
the firm’s capital stock go to the consumer. Therefore, if liquidation occurs in period 1, the
consumer receives the revenue θas k0 and the capital stock k0 . The latter can be either scrapped
or sold on the asset market after paying the maintenance costs.9 Given that the price of capital
   8
       Given the assumptions made below, a suﬃcient condition for this is
                                                              1
                                           e>        P                     n.
                                                1−        π
                                                         s s (θas + 1 − γ)

This ensures that the consumer is neither constrained in period 0, when choosing whether to accept the financial
contract, nor in period 1, when choosing how much to invest in the traditional sector.
    9
      The consumer might also use some of this capital in his traditional firm. Since there is a competitive market
for capital, this option is irrelevant. Notice also that, in the event of a default, the entrepreneur has no incentive
to pay the maintenance cost.


                                                            6
is qs , the consumer will pay the maintenance costs as long as qs − γ > 0. Therefore, the net
                                         ¡               ¢
value of a liquidated firm in period 1 is θas + (qs − γ)+ k0 . From now on, the notation (.)+
will be used to denote the non-negative part of a variable, e. g., (qs − γ)+ ≡ max {qs − γ, 0}.
In period 2, the value of a liquidated firm is simply θAk1s . Since state-contingent contracts
are available, I can, without loss of generality, restrict attention to contracts where default and
renegotiation never happen in equilibrium. The entrepreneur will never default if and only if
the following inequalities are satisfied
                                                     ¡                  ¢
                                   d1s + d2s ≤           θas + (qs − γ)+ k0 ,                       (2)

                                          d2s ≤ θAk1s ,                                             (3)

for s = l, h. A natural interpretation of these constraints is that the liquidation value of the
firm acts as collateral for the financial obligations of the entrepreneur.
      The consumer can always walk away from a financial contract and his current and future
income cannot be seized. Then, the consumer no-default conditions are

                                              d1s + d2s ≥ 0,                                        (4)
                                                      d2s ≥ 0,                                      (5)
                                                                ¡ T¢
for s = l, h. Note that the revenue of the traditional sector, F k1s , cannot be used as collateral
in financial contracts.
      For simplicity, I consider only bilateral financial contracts involving one entrepreneur and
one consumer, which, in the current environment, is without loss of generality. In particular,
cross-holdings of financial securities across entrepreneurs are irrelevant, given that there is only
aggregate uncertainty.10
      Three additional assumptions will be useful in the analysis. First, I assume that the
liquidation value of entrepreneurial firms is suﬃciently small.

      Assumption A The parameter θ is small enough that the following inequalities hold
                                            X
                                                  π s (θas + 1 − γ) < 1,
                                              s
                                            θA < 1.
 10
      See Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) for a thorough discussion of this issue in a related model.




                                                          7
This will imply that investment cannot be fully financed with outside funds either in period 0
or 1. Second, I impose some restrictions on the shocks al and ah , and on the maintenance cost
γ.

     Assumption B The values of al and ah are such that

                                    (1 − θ) ah + θA − 1 > 0,

                                            al + θA − γ < 0.

The maintenance cost γ satisfies γ < q.

The first two conditions will be used to show that entrepreneurs’ investment is positive in the
high state and negative in the low state. The last condition allows me to rule out scrapping
of capital in equilibrium. Finally, the next assumption simplifies the analysis by ruling out
multiple equilibria in the asset market at date 1.
                              ¡ ¡ ¢       ¢
     Assumption C The function F 0 kT − θA kT is increasing in kT .


2.2    Equilibrium definition

The entrepreneur’s individual problem is to choose a financial contract and investment and
consumption levels so as to maximize expected utility subject to the budget constraints, the
consumer’s participation constraint, and the no-default constraints introduced above. The
consumer’s problem is to choose which financial contract to accept, if any, and, then, set
consumption and investment in the traditional firm so as to maximize expected utility subject
to the budget constraints. Both the entrepreneur and the consumer take as given the vector
of asset prices {qs }.
     A symmetric competitive equilibrium is given by a vector of asset prices {qs }, a financial
contract hd0 , {d1s , d2s }i, investment and consumption decisions for the entrepreneur k0 and
                                                                                     © T             ª
{χ1s , k1s , ce2s }, and investment and consumption decisions for the consumer c0 and k1s , c1s , c2s ,
such that entrepreneurs’ and consumers’ behavior are optimal, and goods and capital markets
clear in all periods and states.


3     Equilibrium

In this section, I give a characterization of the equilibrium. First, I will look at the optimal
borrowing and investment decisions of the entrepreneur for given asset prices {qs }. Next, I

                                                  8
will show how the entrepreneurs’ aggregate behavior aﬀects the asset prices which clear the
capital market in period 1. Finally, I will put the two pieces together and show how equilibrium
borrowing and investment are determined. It is useful, however, to begin with a preliminary
result regarding the capital market in period 1.

Lemma 1 In equilibrium asset prices are characterized by the conditions
                                                    ¡ T¢
                                            qs = F 0 k1s ,
                                            T
                                           k1s = (k0 − k1s )+ ,

for s = l, h, and no scrapping occurs in equilibrium, χs = 1 for s = l, h.

       From this lemma it follows that two cases are possible in period 1 capital market. In the
first case, the price of capital is one, the traditional sector chooses zero investment (recall
that F 0 (0) = 1), and the entrepreneurial sector makes positive investment k1s − k0 > 0. This
investment is done by transforming consumption goods into capital goods. In the second case,
the price of capital is smaller than one, no consumption goods are transformed into capital, and
the entrepreneurial sector sells capital to the traditional sector. In this case market clearing
                                                                                          ¡ ¢
          T = k − k , and optimality for firms in the traditional sector requires q = F 0 k T .
requires k1s   0    1s                                                             s         1s

       This result implies that equilibrium asset prices are bounded

                                                 q ≤ qs ≤ 1.                                                (6)

Since q > γ by Assumption B, this also implies that qs − γ > 0 which rules out scrapping of
capital in equilibrium. Both properties will help in the characterization of optimal financial
contracts.

3.1      Optimal financial contracts

Since scrapping is never optimal, I simplify the notation by defining net profits per unit of
capital
                                                xs = as − γ.

Moreover, I describe the financial contract in terms of the net present value of promised
repayments per unit of capital, which are given by11
                                                      d1s + d2s
                                              b1s =             ,
                                                          k0
  11
    In the proof of Lemma 2, I show that the optimal values of k0 and k1s are positive, so these ratios are well
defined.


                                                       9
and
                                                             d2s
                                                   b2s =         .
                                                             k1s
The entrepreneur’s problem can be written in the following form. The entrepreneur chooses
the financial contract hd0 , {b1s , b2s }i and the investment levels k0 and {k1s } to maximize
                                           X
                                                  π s (A − b2s ) k1s ,                             (7)
                                             s

subject to the budget constraints

                             k0 ≤ n + d0 ,                                                         (8)

                        qs k1s ≤ (qs + xs − b1s ) k0 + b2s k1s               for s = l, h,         (9)

the no-default constraints

                             0 ≤ b1s ≤ θas + qs − γ                    for s = l, h,              (10)

                             0 ≤ b2s ≤ θA                  for s = l, h,                          (11)

the consumer participation constraint
                                                     X
                                             d0 ≤           π s b1s k0 ,                          (12)
                                                       s

and non-negativity constraints for k0 and k1s . The following lemma gives a characterization of
optimal financial contracts.

Lemma 2 Given a vector of equilibrium prices {qs }s=l,h , an individually optimal financial
contract satisfies the conditions

                           b1s = 0                                     if z0 < z1s ,         (13a)

                           b1s   ∈ [0, θas + qs − γ]                       if z0 = z1s ,     (13b)

                           b1s = θas + qs − γ                              if z0 > z1s ,         (13c)

                                                    b2s = θA,

for s = l, h, where
                                                       (1 − θ) A
                                             z1s =               ,                                (14)
                                                        qs − θA
and                                        P
                                                 s π s z1s (q
                                                           Ps
                                                               + xs − b1s )
                                    z0 =                                    .                     (15)
                                                    1−        s π s b1s


                                                        10
       The variables z0 and z1s defined in (14)-(15) are the Lagrange multipliers on the budget
constraints at dates 0 and 1, they represent the rates of return on entrepreneurial wealth in
periods 0 and 1.12 Since they play an important role in the analysis to follow, let me provide
some intuition for them. When investing in period 1, the entrepreneur can buy capital at the
price qs and finance this investment by borrowing θA per unit of capital. One dollar of internal
funds can thus be leveraged by a factor of 1/ (qs − θA). At date 2 this investment gives A per
unit of capital, of which θA is paid to consumers. Therefore, the marginal return on internal
funds available in period 1 is z1s = (1 − θ) A/ (qs − θA). Going back to period 0, one extra
                                                                          P
dollar of internal funds at date 0 can be leveraged by a factor of 1/ (1 − s π s b1s ) and the
capital invested gives a random net payoﬀ of qs + xs − b1s in period 1. This net payoﬀ can
then be reinvested at the rate of return z1s . Averaging across states gives expression (15).
       The choice of the repayment ratios {b1s } depends on the comparison of rates of return
on internal funds in periods 0 and 1, state by state. Suppose the entrepreneur increases his
borrowing in period 0 by π s dollars by promising one dollar in period 1 in state s. The increase
in funds available at date 0 increases the entrepreneur’s utility by π s z0 , while the decrease
in funds available at date 1 decreases the entrepreneur’s utility by z1s with probability π s .
Comparing these marginal eﬀects shows that as long as z0 > z1s the entrepreneur will increase
his promised repayments in state s, up to the point where b1s = θas + qs − γ. If, instead,
z0 < z1s the entrepreneur will decrease his promised repayments until b1s = 0. An interior
choice for b1s will only arise if z0 = z1s .
       The choice of the repayments in period 2 is much simpler. The marginal utility of entrepre-
neurial wealth is always equal to one in period 2, since at that point the entrepreneur can only
consume. Given that z1s > 1 in all states, this implies that the entrepreneur always commits
to maximum repayments in period 2, b2s = θA, in order to maximize investment in period 1.
       The argument above shows that the optimal financial contract depends on the prices qs
through their eﬀect on the rates of return z1s and z0 . In turns, the prices qs depend on the
contracts chosen by the entrepreneurs, since they determine how much capital they sell on date
1. I will now look at this relation, before turning to general equilibrium.
  12
       More precisely, z1s is the Lagrange multiplier normalized by the probability πs .




                                                         11
3.2      Asset prices

Consider the asset market in period 1, taking as given the financial contract chosen by the
entrepreneurs. Net investment by the entrepreneurs is

                                                      xs + θA − b1s
                                        k1s − k0 =                  k0                                       (16)
                                                         qs − θA

for s = l, h. This expression comes from rearranging (9) and using the result that the financial
constraint is always binding in period 2 (from Lemma 2). It is not diﬃcult to show that in the
high state the right-hand side of (16) is positive and so is investment. The opposite happens
in the low state.13 Then, Lemma 1 implies that qh = 1 and ql < 1. Therefore, let me focus on
the determination of the asset price in the low state.
       In the low state, the entrepreneurial firm is facing net losses, since xl k0 < 0. Due to the
collateral constraint, the firm has limited ability to borrow against future income. If it tried
to keep the existing capital stock unchanged, its borrowing capacity would be insuﬃcient to
cover current losses, since b2l k0 ≤ θAk0 < −xl k0 (the first inequality follows from no default,
the second from Assumption B). Moreover, the firm has limited ability to buy insurance ex
ante, due to consumers’ limited commitment, b1l ≥ 0. The only remaining option to cover the
firm’s losses is to sell part of the capital stock. To induce the traditional sector to absorb this
capital the price of capital has to fall below 1.
       Figure 1 gives a graphical illustration of the equilibrium in the low state, for given values
of k0 and b1l . Curve S plots the entrepreneurs’ supply of capital as a function of ql . For
completeness, the figure includes the regions where ql ≥ A and ql ≤ γ, although such prices
never arise in equilibrium. When γ < ql < A the entrepreneurs’ behavior is captured by
(16) and the supply of capital is given by − (xl + θA − b1l ) k0 / (ql − θA). Notice that in this
region the supply is decreasing in ql : a price increase allows entrepreneurs to sell a smaller
amount of capital to cover their losses.14 When ql goes above A, entrepreneurial investment
becomes unprofitable and entrepreneurs sell all the capital stock k0 . Finally, when ql goes
below γ scrapping is optimal and entrepreneurial capital is destroyed. In the same figure, I
plot the traditional sector demand for capital, described by the condition ql = F 0 (k0 − k1l ).
  13
    See Lemma 4 in the Appendix.
  14
    The fact that the supply is decreasing has two implications: it magnifies the eﬀect of entrepreneurial losses
on asset prices, and it opens the door to multiple equilibria. The amplification is important because it increases
the quantitative relevance of the pecuniary externality discussed in Section 4. Multiplicity is ruled out in this
paper, by virtue of Assumption C. Gai, Kapadia, Millard and Perez (2006) study the implications of a similar
model, focusing on the case where multiple equilibria are possible.


                                                       12
               ql


                    A

                    1          S            S’


                                                                       F’(k0 - k1l)
                    γ

                                                                  k0    k0 - k1l


                              Figure 1: Asset market equilibrium


The equilibrium is determined at the point where the two curves meet.
   Figure 1 can be used to show the relation between the financial contract and the asset price
ql . The choice of {b1s } aﬀects the equilibrium price in two ways. An increase in either b1l or
b1h increases the capital stock at date 0, given by

                                                  1
                                     k0 =        P                n,
                                            1−        s π s b1s

and thus increases entrepreneurial losses in the low state. Moreover, an increase in b1l directly
increases repayments in the low state. Both channels lead to an increase in − (xl + θA − b1l ) k0
and to a fall in the equilibrium asset price. This mechanism is illustrated by the curve S 0 in
Figure 1, which shows the eﬀect of an increase in borrowing, leading to a rightward shift of
the entrepreneurs’ supply and to a lower equilibrium price.

3.3   Equilibrium hedging

Putting together entrepreneurs’ optimality and the equilibrium determination of asset prices I
can show that an equilibrium exists and I can characterize the equilibrium financial contract.
From now on, I will use the superscript CE to denote equilibrium values.


                                                 13
Proposition 1 There exists a unique symmetric competitive equilibrium. In equilibrium asset
prices satisfy
                                         qlCE < qhCE = 1.

Depending on parameters, the equilibrium financial contract is of one of the following types:

  1. 0 ≤ bCE                    CE
          1h < θah + 1 − γ and b1l = 0;


  2. bCE                    CE
      1h = θah + 1 − γ and b1l = 0;


  3. bCE                        CE          CE − γ.
      1h = θah + 1 − γ and 0 ≤ b1l ≤ θal + ql


   This proposition shows that there is a “pecking order” of repayments in diﬀerent aggregate
states. Entrepreneurs must first exhaust their borrowing capacity in the high state (setting
b1h = θah +1−γ), before they start borrowing against revenue in the low state (setting b1l > 0).
In the low state, the entrepreneurs are poor and the demand for assets is low. The associated
fall in asset prices increases z1l and induces entrepreneurs, ex ante, to reduce their promised
repayments in that state. In equilibria of types 1 and 2, this incentive is suﬃciently strong
that entrepreneurs keep their promised repayments to zero in the low state. In equilibria of
type 3, instead, the benefits from hedging are dominated by the return on investment at date
0. In this case, entrepreneurs decide to oﬀer positive repayments also in the low state, in order
to raise more capital at date 0.
   The general principle behind this result is that endogenous movements in asset prices
determine the entrepreneurs’ incentive to hedge aggregate shocks. In Section 4, I will show
that the social benefits of this hedging are, in general, diﬀerent from the private benefits.

3.4   A graphical illustration

An implication of Proposition 1 is that the equilibrium financial contract can be summarized
                   P
by the variable ρ ≡ s π s b1s capturing the ratio of outside borrowing to total capital invested
at date 0. For low levels of ρ all the borrowing is against revenue in the high state, while if ρ is
greater than the cutoﬀ ρ̂ ≡ π h (θah + 1 − γ) the entrepreneurs also borrow against revenue in
the low state. To illustrate the determination of the equilibrium financial contract, in Figure
2, I plot the relation between ρ and the rates of return on entrepreneurial wealth z0 and z1s .
For each value of ρ, I derive the corresponding values of the state-contingent payments {b1s }
and the equilibrium asset prices, proceeding as in Section 3.2. Given these asset prices, I derive


                                                14
                                                      z1l




                                 z1h


                                               z0


                                        ^
                                        ρ                          ρ
                             (a) Type 1 Equilibrium


                                                            z1l




                                  z1h                         z0




                                        ^
                                        ρ                          ρ


                             (b) Type 3 Equilibrium




Figure 2: The borrowing ratio ρ and the rates of return on entrepreneurial wealth




                                        15
the corresponding values of z0 and z1s , as in 3.1, and look for an optimal financial contract.
Notice that when ρ < ρ̂ the entrepreneur is choosing an interior solution for b1h . In this case,
the relevant marginal trade-oﬀ is between investing more at date 0 and investing in the high
state at date 1. On the other hand, when ρ > ρ̂ the trade-oﬀ is between investing at date 0
and investing in the low state at date 1. Hence, in the first region I plot z1h as the relevant ex
post rate of return, while in the second region I plot z1l . The ex ante return is always equal to
z0 .
         Consider now how an increase in borrowing changes the returns to entrepreneurial wealth
in periods 0 and 1. As ρ increases the price of capital ql falls. This tends to reduce the ex
ante return on entrepreneurial wealth, z0 , given that entrepreneurs face bigger expected capital
losses in period 1.15 At the same time, the ex post return on entrepreneurial wealth tends to
increase for two reasons. First, if ρ crosses the cutoﬀ ρ̂ there is a discrete upward jump in
the rate of return, since z1l > z1h . Furthermore, once above ρ̂, the rate of return z1l keeps
increasing. As ql falls an extra dollar available in the low state earns a higher return between
periods 1 and 2. The equilibrium is determined at the point where the two rates of return are
equalized, except in the cases where the entrepreneur is against a corner for both b1l and b1h .
Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 2 illustrate two cases of interior equilibria. In the first case the
equilibrium is of type 1 and z1h = z0 , in the second the equilibrium is of type 3 and z1l = z0 .


4         Welfare

Let me now turn to eﬃciency. Consider a planner who, at date 0, can choose the financial
contract hd0 , {d1s } , {d2s }i. The planner faces the same constraints as the private economy,
in particular: (i) the financial contract is subject to default and renegotiation, and (ii) the
allocation of used capital in period 1 is determined on an anonymous spot market. The only
diﬀerence between the planner and the individual entrepreneur is that the planner takes into
account the relation between the financial contract and the equilibrium price on the capital
market. That is, instead of taking {qs } as given, the planner’s problem includes the constraints
                                                    ¡ T¢
                                            qs = F 0 k1s ,                                                  (17)
                                            T
                                           k1s = (k0 − k1s )+ .                                             (18)
    15
    Notice that, in general, the relation between ρ and z0 is not necessarily monotone, given that the expression
(15) also includes z1l . However, the diﬀerence z1s − z0 is locally monotone in ρ, around any equilibrium, which
ensures that the equilibrium is unique. See the proof of Proposition 1 for the detailed derivations behind this
statement and for analytical derivations which mirror the graphical presentation in this section.


                                                       16
       As in the previous section, I will describe a financial contract in terms of the initial loan
d0 and the repayments per unit of capital {b1s , b2s }. The Pareto frontier is defined by the
following planner’s problem. Fix a given utility level for the consumers, Ū . The planner chooses
hd0 , {b1s , b2s }i, k0 , and {k1s } to maximize the entrepreneurs’ expected utility (7), subject to the
budget constraints (8)-(9), the no-default constraints (10)-(11), the constraints (17)-(18), and a
constraint on consumers’ expected utility, which takes the place of the consumers’ participation
constraint,
                                      X                   X      ¡ ¡ T¢          ¢
                                                                              T
                          3e − d0 +        π s b1s k0 +       π s F k1s − qs k1s   ≥ Ū .          (19)
                                       s                  s

Since asset prices also determine the profits of the traditional sector, this is taken into account
when writing constraint (19).
       Let me first show that the only substantial diﬀerence between this problem and the problem
of the individual entrepreneur, is, indeed, the endogeneity of asset prices. Suppose asset prices
are set at their competitive equilibrium level, i.e., replace (17)-(18) with qs = qsCE . Set also Ū
at its equilibrium level, denoted by U CE . Then it would be optimal for the planner to choose
                    ¡ ¢
 T to maximize F k T − q CE k T , so as to relax constraint (19), and thus choose k T = k T,CE .
k1s
                     P
                      1s   ³ s ³ 1s ´               ´                               1s    1s
         CE                      T,CE       CE T,CE
Since U      = 3e + s π s F k1s         − qs k1s      it follows that (19) could be replaced by
(12). Since (17) and (18) are no longer present, the planner’s problem would then be identical
to the individual problem, and the competitive financial contract would be optimal.16
       I now go back to the original formulation of the planner’s problem. In order for that
problem to be well defined, Ū cannot be too large, or the constraint set may be empty. Let
me assume that this is the case, and let me also assume that Ū is such that the entrepreneur
gets positive utility. Moreover, as in the previous section, I will ignore the non-negativity
constraints for consumers’ consumption, assuming that e is suﬃciently large.
       The following proposition gives a characterization of a constrained eﬃcient allocation, which
is denoted by an asterisk.

Proposition 2 Suppose the value of Ū is such that the entrepreneur can achieve positive
utility. Then, a socially optimal allocation satisfies the following conditions. Asset prices
satisfy
                                                   ql∗ < qh∗ = 1,
  16
       Kehoe and Levine (1993) call this property “conditional constrained eﬃciency.”




                                                          17
and promised repayments satisfy

                             b∗1s = 0                                 if λ∗ < z1s
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                  ,

                             b∗1s   ∈ [0, θas + qs∗ − γ]                if λ∗ = z1s
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                    ,

                             b∗1s = θas + qs∗ − γ                       if λ∗ > z1s
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                    ,

                                                    b∗2s = θA,

for s = l, h, where λ∗ is the Lagrange multiplier on constraint (19) and

                                                 ∗      (1 − θ) A
                                                z1s =             .                                   (21)
                                                         qs∗ − θA

The value of λ∗ satisfies                           P      ∗     ∗+ xs − b∗1s )
                                    ∗               s π s z1s (q
                                                              Ps
                                    λ ≤   z0∗   =                       ∗       ,                     (22)
                                                        1−       s π s b1s
which holds as a strict inequality if z0∗ 6= z1l
                                              ∗.



    The characterization of the financial contract parallels the result in Lemma 2. As in the
individual problem the planner chooses the promised repayments in each state comparing the
marginal return on entrepreneurial wealth in periods 0 and 1. The social return on entre-
                                ∗ , is identical to the private rate of return, as can be seen
preneurial wealth in period 1, z1s
comparing (14) and (21). However, the social rate of return in period 0 is now captured by
λ∗ . Inequality (22) shows that λ∗ is smaller or equal than the corresponding expression for the
private rate of return.

4.1    Over-borrowing

Let me now use this characterization to show that over-borrowing can arise in equilibrium.
               P
Recall that ρ = s π s b1s is the ratio between the net present value of promised repayments
and capital invested at date 0, introduced in Section 3.4. Thanks to Proposition 2, a socially
optimal financial contract can be fully characterized by the ratio ρ, as it was the case for the
competitive equilibrium contract. Therefore, I can focus on the comparison of ρ∗ and ρCE . To
prove next proposition it is convenient to introduce a slightly stronger version of Assumption
C.17
  17
     Assumption C’ is stronger because η > 1. Notice that limπl →0 η = 1, so the two assumptions tend to be
equivalent for low values of π l .




                                                        18
   Assumption C’ The function F satisfies the following condition
                                    ¡ ¢             ¡ ¢
                                 F 0 kT − θA + ηF 00 k T k T > 0,
                                                               P
where η ≡ (1 − π h (θah + 1 − γ) − π l (xl + θA)) / (1 −          s π s (θas   + 1 − γ)).

This condition is suﬃcient to show that when the planner increases the borrowing ratio ρ, this
increases the sales of used capital by entrepreneurs in the low state. Under Assumptions A, B,
and C’, the following proposition shows that under-borrowing never arises in equilibrium, and
over-borrowing arises if the equilibrium is of type 1.

Proposition 3 (over-borrowing) Let Ū = U CE , then a constrained eﬃcient financial contract
satisfies ρ∗ ≤ ρCE . The inequality is strict if the equilibrium is of type 1.

   This result is due to the presence of a pecuniary externality: the financial decisions of
the entrepreneurs aﬀect the equilibrium price on the capital market in period 1, and this
price aﬀects the allocation of wealth between entrepreneurs and consumers. To clarify why
this leads to a welfare loss consider the following experiment. Suppose the equilibrium is of
type 1 and suppose entrepreneurs and consumers get together in period 0 and coordinate to
reduce entrepreneurial investment in the initial period by dk0 < 0, by reducing b1h . Since
z0 = z1h , the direct eﬀect of this change on the entrepreneurs’ utility is zero. However, in
general equilibrium this change implies a reduced supply of used capital and a higher asset
price in the low state, dql > 0. Since entrepreneurs are sellers of capital in that state, an
increase in the asset price increases entrepreneurial wealth by (k0 − k1l ) dql dollars. At the
same time, by the envelope theorem, (k0 − k1l ) dql corresponds to the reduction in profits
for firms in the traditional sector. Suppose the entrepreneurs compensate the consumers for
this profit loss by giving them π l (k0 − k1l ) dql at date 0. The marginal cost of this transfer
is z0 π l (k0 − k1l ) dql since z0 is the entrepreneurs’ marginal utility of funds. The expected
marginal benefit associated to the increase in asset prices at date 1 is π l z1l (k0 − k1l ) dql . The
net eﬀect of this local perturbation on the entrepreneurs’ utility is

                                     π l (z1l − z0 ) (k0 − k1l ) dql ,                           (23)

which is positive since z1l > z1h = z0 and dql > 0. This gives a Pareto improvement, as
consumers are indiﬀerent and entrepreneurs are better oﬀ.


                                                    19
                                                           z1l




                                       z1h


                                                                 z0
                                                    λ
                           ρ*         ρCE                               ρ

                                 (a) Type 1 Equilibrium




                                                                      z1l



                                                                            z0

                                        z1h                             λ




                                                          ρCE=ρ*        ρ

                                  (b) Type 3 Equilibrium



Figure 3: The borrowing ratio ρ and the private and social returns to entrepreneurial invest-
ment.


                                              20
4.2      A graphical illustration

Figure 3 is the analogous to Figure 2 for the case of the planner. Proposition 2 shows that the
socially optimal contract satisfies the same pecking order identified for equilibrium contracts.
Therefore, also in this case it is possible to represent the optimal financial contract in terms
of the borrowing ratio ρ. For each level of ρ, I plot the corresponding values of z1s and z0 ,
capturing the private benefits from ex ante and ex post investment. As in Figure 2, I plot z1h
when ρ < ρ̂ and z1l when ρ > ρ̂. In the same picture I use a dashed line to plot λ, the social
benefits on entrepreneurial investment at date 0. As shown in Proposition 2 the social benefits
from investment at date 1 coincide with the private benefits and are captured by z1s .
       The diﬀerence between the private and social benefits of ex ante investment, z0 and λ,
are due to the pecuniary externality discussed above. An increase in borrowing has the eﬀect
of reducing ql , and thus reallocating funds from entrepreneurs to consumers at date 1. The
welfare eﬀect of this reallocation is given by (23). Therefore, the diﬀerence between λ and
z0 has the same sign as z0 − z1l . In panel (a) the graph of λ is below that of z0 , given that
z1l is above z0 for the whole range of ρ. In panel (b), instead, the graph of λ crosses that of
z0 at the point where z1l − z0 = 0. In the case depicted in panel (a), this implies that, at
the competitive equilibrium λ < z1h . Therefore, a reduction in borrowing leads to a Pareto
improvement. In the case depicted in panel (b), instead, the competitive equilibrium arises
precisely when z1l = z0 , so there is no room for a Pareto improvement.
       The latter argument suggests that equilibria of type 3 are constrained eﬃcient. This is
indeed the case in specific examples, such as the one depicted in panel (b). However, due to
the non-concavity of the planner’s problem, the result cannot be established in general.

4.3      Sources of ineﬃciency

The two imperfections introduced in the model are limited commitment on the entrepreneurs’
and on the consumers’ side. Both are at the roots of the ineﬃciency result. If I removed the
entrepreneurs’ commitment problem, by setting θ = 1, the economy would reach a first-best
allocation where all the consumption goods in periods 0 and 1 are devoted to investment.18
In this case, not surprisingly, there is no ineﬃciency. Limited commitment on the consumers’
side plays a subtler role. Consider the case of an equilibrium of type 1 where expression (23)
  18
   Note that, in this case, the non-negativity constraint for consumers’ consumption are binding. See the
appendix for the formal analysis of this case.



                                                   21
is positive since z1l > z0 . In this case, the reduction in borrowing is beneficial because the
ex post value of funds to the entrepreneurs is larger than their value ex ante. This can only
happen if the entrepreneur has limited ability to transfer resources between period 0 and period
1 (in state l). In the model, this happens because the constraint b1l ≥ 0 is binding, so the
entrepreneurs are not allowed to buy more insurance against the low state. A coordinated
reduction in borrowing, as described in 4.1, allows the entrepreneurs to partially circumvent
the problem. Borrowing less ex ante leads to an increase in asset prices in the low state
and, thus, it is an indirect way for entrepreneurs to transfer resources to the low state. This
argument suggests that the pecuniary externality identified here will also be relevant in other
environments where the entrepreneurs have diﬃculty channeling resources to the low state, for
example, in models with full commitment on the consumers’ side but without state-contingent
debt.
    It is useful to remark that in this framework the ineﬃciency is not due to fact that the price
ql aﬀects the collateral available to entrepreneurs. As just noticed, the pecuniary externality
identified matters when the constraint b1l ≥ 0 is binding. In that case, the collateral constraint
b1l ≤ θal + ql − γ is slack and the fact that an increase in ql increases the entrepreneur’s
borrowing capacity at date 0 is irrelevant for entrepreneurs. Asset prices matter here because
they determine the asset side of entrepreneurs’ balance sheets, not because of their eﬀects on
their capacity to borrow. In a model with endogenous asset prices in period 2, it would be
possible to study the eﬀect of asset prices on borrowing capacity in period 1, and to study a
“collateral channel” diﬀerent from the asset price channel discussed here.
    As a final observation, notice that constraint (19), with Ū = U CE , ensures that consumers
are as well oﬀ at a constrained eﬃcient allocation as at the competitive allocation. One
may ask, though, whether there should be an additional constraint to ensure that consumers
participate voluntarily to the financial contract hd∗0 , {b∗1s , b∗2s }i, that is, a constraint of the form
     P
d∗0 ≤ π s b∗1s . In the analysis so far, I have left this constraint aside, to simplify the exposition,
but it can be shown that the constraint is not binding at a constrained eﬃcient allocation. The
proof of this claim is in the appendix (Lemma 8).

4.4     Remarks on policy

Regulatory interventions that impose minimum capitalization on financial firms are widespread
in industrialized economies, and often their introduction is justified based on the idea that



                                                    22
excessive leverage in the financial sector may bring about an increase in “systemic risk.” The
model presented here gives a welfare-based rationale to this idea. When the equilibrium is
ineﬃcient, policies that restricts borrowing ex ante can restore constrained eﬃciency. For
example, the planner can impose a capital requirement of the form νk0 ≤ n, which imposes
that a minimum fraction ν of the firm’s assets are financed with insiders’ capital. Given that
both the planner’s optimum and the entrepreneur’s optimum follow the same “pecking order,”
a restriction of this type is suﬃcient to ensure that the eﬃcient financial contract {b∗1s } is
chosen.

Proposition 4 Given a constrained eﬃcient allocation, there is a capital requirement ν and
a transfer τ 0 from entrepreneurs to consumers, such that the corresponding equilibrium is
constrained eﬃcient.

         An open question is how capital requirements should be calibrated for investments with
diﬀerent risky profiles. Existing capital requirements are usually based on the riskiness of the
individual investment, using some measure of “value at risk.” The framework of this paper
can be extended to analyze models with diﬀerent types of investment. In particular, one can
consider a model where the cash-flows xs of diﬀerent investments have diﬀerent exposure to the
aggregate shock. In that case, the investments with a larger pecuniary externality are those
which are more correlated with the aggregate shock, since they are the ones that contribute
more to a drop in asset prices in the event of a bad shock. This points to the idea of optimal
capital requirements that depend on macroeconomic correlations and not just on measures of
individual risk. In particular, it might be desirable that investments with higher correlation
with macroeconomic conditions be subject to tighter requirements.19


5         Conclusions

The policy debate on financial supervision and regulation has been recently shifting towards a
“macroprudential” approach (Borio, 2003). According to this approach the regulator should
be concerned most of all about the aggregate consequences of financial instability and the
main source of instability is identified in the common exposure to macroeconomic risks across
financial institutions. The present paper provides at the same time a warning and a justification
for this approach. The warning is that aggregate volatility and some degree of financial fragility
    19
         See Borio (2003, p.10) for a discussion of recent policy proposals that go in this direction.


                                                            23
are unavoidable in presence of financial constraints, and that a reduction in financial fragility
can only be achieved at the cost of reducing investment ex ante. Defining the objective of
the regulator only in terms of reducing volatility, and disregarding the productive eﬀects of
capital accumulation, may be misleading. On the other hand, the welfare analysis in this
paper provides a justification for a macroprudential approach. In a framework with financial
constraints, private agents may underestimate the damage associated to a contraction in their
wealth and, therefore, policies that limit their losses in a crisis may be welfare improving.
   In practice, capital requirements are imposed on a specific class of firms, typically on com-
mercial banks and financial intermediaries. To have a fully fledged theory of capital require-
ments would require an explicit model of financial intermediation. If entrepreneurial firms,
which are more financially constrained, are also more reliant on bank credit, capital require-
ments on banks can help to stabilize the balance sheet of the firms that need it most. The
analysis of capital requirements in an explicit framework with intermediation remains a topic
for future research.
   The model presented shows that over-borrowing is a possibility. However, it also shows
that in some equilibria (e.g., the equilibrium illustrated in panel (b) of Figure 3) the gains
from ex ante investment are suﬃciently large that both the private economy and the planner
choose the same high level of borrowing. Therefore, the presence and the severity of over-
borrowing in specific episodes becomes an empirical issue. In particular, the model indicates
that some relevant quantitative questions that should be addressed are: how much the presence
of financial distress contributes to the fall in asset prices during financial crises, and how much
that contributes to the propagation of financial distress across the economy.
   Let me conclude with some remarks on the notion of constrained eﬃciency used in this
paper. The social planner introduced here is constrained to take as given both the limited
commitment problem in financial contracts, and the fact that asset prices are determined in
a spot market. The point of this exercise is both theoretical and practical. First, it is useful
to consider a restrictive notion of constrained eﬃciency to identify minimal conditions under
which a planner can improve upon the competitive allocation. Second, it is interesting to
focus on policy interventions that impose restrictions on financial contracts, since they seem
close to regulatory policies already in place. However, this environment naturally suggests
that interventions in diﬀerent markets (e.g., the asset market) can have important interactions
with the equilibrium financial structure. Extensions of the welfare analysis to the case where


                                                24
the planner can intervene directly in the asset market are left to future research. This type of
extensions will be of particular interest when one turns to monetary versions of the model and
studies its implications for optimal monetary policy.20
       Finally, one could allow the planner to directly intervene to relax the limited commitment
constraints. In particular, Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) argue that the supply of public liq-
uidity can alleviate the lack of commitment on the consumers’ side. The government can issue
state contingent bonds in period 0, and tax consumers in period 1 to repay these bonds. Let the
tax on consumers be denoted by τ s . Then, a model with public liquidity is formally equivalent
to the model presented here, if the consumers’ no-default constraint in period 1 is replaced
by d1s + d2s ≥ −τ s . This policy allows entrepreneurs to buy more insurance against the low
state, by holding state-contingent government bonds. By setting a suﬃciently high value for
τ s , the government is able to replicate the equilibrium of an economy with full commitment on
the consumers’ side. As argued above, in 4.3, this would eliminate the pecuniary externality
identified in this paper. Clearly, there are a number of reasons why liquidity creation by the
government may be costly and imperfect (e.g., the distortionary eﬀects of taxation). In all
these cases, the possibility of excessive borrowing remains open.




  20
    Recent papers on optimal monetary policy in economies with financial frictions include Iacoviello (2005)
and Faia and Monacelli (2007).


                                                    25
6     Appendix
6.1    Proof of Lemma 1
                          T
                                                                                                       ¡ T¢
The consumer chooses k1s     ≥ 0 to maximize expected utility, given by (1), that is, to maximize F k1s     −
    T
qs k1s . Recall that F is strictly concave and F 0 (0) = 1. Therefore, if qs ≥ 1¡ optimal  ¢     investment is
  T                         T
k1s  = 0, while if qs < 1, k1s is positive and satisfies the first order condition F 0 k1s
                                                                                        T
                                                                                             = qs .
     Recall that consumption goods can be turned into capital goods one for one but not the converse.
This has two implications. First, by arbitrage, the price of capital must satisfy qs ≤ 1. Second, aggregate
investment must be non-negative,
                                             T
                                            k1s + k1s − χs k0 ≥ 0.
If aggregate investment is positive, then, by arbitrage, the price of capital must be qs = 1. In this
                                                    T
case, optimality for the traditional sector gives k1s  = 0, and, thus, investment by entrepreneurs must
                                                                                         T
be positive, k1s − χs k0 > 0. If, instead, aggregate investment is zero, then we have k1s   = χs k0 − k1s .
                                                                         T                     T
In this case, optimality for the traditional sector implies that either k1s = 0 and qs = 1 or k1s > 0 and
qs < 1. The following conditions hold in all the cases considered
                                                      ¡ T¢
                                          qs = F 0 k1s      ,                                        (24)
                                          T
                                         k1s   = (χs k0 − k1s )+ .                                       (25)
                                         ¡ T¢
Recall that q is the lower bound for F 0 k1s  and, due to Assumption B, q − γ is positive. These two
facts imply that qs ≥ q > γ. If any entrepreneur is scrapping capital in period 1, it is always a profitable
deviation to pay the maintenance cost γ and sell the capital. Therefore, no scrapping takes place in
equilibrium, χs = 1. Substituting χs = 1 in (25) completes the proof. ¥

6.2    Lemma 3
The following is a useful additional result which will be used in the equilibrium characterization.

Lemma 3 The equilibrium price of capital satisfies

                                                qs − θA > 0,                                             (26)

for each s.

                 T
    Proof. If k1s   = 0 then qs = 1 and
                                      ¡ the
                                          ¡ Tresult
                                               ¢    follows
                                                      ¢ T immediately     from Assumption A. If instead
                                                                                                  ¡ T¢
 T
k1s > 0, Assumption C implies that F 0 k1s       − θA k1s   > (F 0 (0) − θA) 0 = 0. Since qs = F 0 k1s
inequality (26) follows.

6.3    Proof of Lemma 2
Consider the problem of maximizing (7) subject to (8)-(12) and non-negativity constraints for k0 and
{k1s }. Given the bounds for equilibrium prices (6) and (26), and given Assumption A, it is possible to
show that the constraint set is non-empty and compact, hence a solution exists.
     Consider the entrepreneur’s problem defined in terms of the original variables {d1s , d2s }. It can
be shown that the problem stated above (in terms of {b1s , b2s }), is equivalent to the original problem.
That is, for any hd0 , {d1s , d2s }i and hk0 , {k1s }i in the feasible set of the original problem, there is a
hd0 , {b1s , b2s }i and hk0 , {k1s }i in the feasible set of the transformed problem, which achieves the same
payoﬀ; the converse is also true. These statements are obvious when k0 > 0 and k1s > 0 for all s.
When k0 = 0 or k1s = 0 for some s, they rely on the following facts: (i) k0 = 0, (2), and (4) imply
d1s + d2s = 0; (ii) k1s = 0, (3), and (5) imply d2s = 0.


                                                     26
    Let me replace (8) and (12) with the constraint
                                                  X
                                        k0 ≤ n +    π s b1s k0 .                                         (8’)
                                                            s

It is easy to show that if (8’) is satisfied, there exists a d0 such that both (8) and (12) are satisfied.
     Let z0 and π s z1s denote the Lagrange multipliers associated, respectively, to (8’) and (9). An
optimum is characterized by the following first order conditions
                                     X              X
                          −z0 + z0        π s b1s +   π s z1s (qs + xs − b1s ) ≤ 0,                      (27)
                                     s              s
                                            π s (A − b2s ) − π s z1s (qs − b2s ) ≤ 0,                   (28)

which must hold with strict equality if, respectively, k0 > 0 or k1s > 0,

                             if π s z0 k0 − π s z1s k0 < 0 then b1s = 0,                               (29a)
                             if π s z0 k0 − π s z1s k0 = 0 then b1s ∈ [0, θas + qs − γ] ,              (29b)
                             if π s z0 k0 − π s z1s k0 > 0 then b1s = θas + qs − γ,                    (29c)


                                  if π s z1s k1s − π s k1s < 0 then b2s = 0,                           (30a)
                                  if π s z1s k1s − π s k1s = 0 then b2s ∈ [0, θA] ,                    (30b)
                                  if π s z1s k1s − π s k1s > 0 then b2s = θA.                          (30c)

Lemma 3 and no default imply that qs > θA ≥ b2s . Condition (6) and A > 1 imply A > qs . Then (28)
gives
                                             A − b2s
                                       z1s ≥          > 1,
                                             qs − b2s
for all s. Using condition (30c) I get b2s = θA for s = l, h. Moreover, since z1s > 0 the constraint (9) is
binding and
                                                 qs + xs − b1s
                                           k1s =               k0 .                                   (31)
                                                    qs − θA
Rearranging condition (27) I get
                                                P
                                                s π s z1s
                                                    (q + xs − b1s )
                                                    Ps
                                         z0 ≥                       ,
                                                1 − s π s b1s
                                                             P
where z1s > 0, qs + xs − b1s > 0 from (10) and θ < 1, and s π s b1s < 1 fromP(10) and Assumption A.
Therefore, z0 > 0, which implies that constraint (8’) is binding and k0 = n + s π s b1s k0 ≥ n > 0. This
implies that (27) holds as an equality, and gives (15). Then, (31) implies that k1s > 0, which, in turn,
shows that (28) holds as an equality, giving (14). Finally, conditions (29a)-(29c) give (13a)-(13c) in the
lemma. ¥

6.4    Proof of Proposition 1
The proof is split in three lemmas. I first prove the characterization part, then existence and uniqueness.

Lemma 4 In any symmetric equilibrium qh = 1 > ql and the financial contract is of one of the types
1 to 3 defined in Proposition 1.




                                                        27
    Proof. First, let me prove that the prices satisfy qh = 1 > ql . Rewrite the budget constraint (9) as

                                (qs − θA) (k1s − k0 ) = (xs + θA − b1s ) k0 .

Lemma 3 implies that qs − θA > 0. Given that k0 > 0, as shown in Lemma 2, to prove the statement
regarding asset prices it is suﬃcient to prove that xh + θA − b1h > 0 and xl + θA − b1l < 0, so that
entrepreneurs’ investment is positive in h and negative in l. To prove the first inequality notice that
the no-default constraint, b1h ≤ θah + qh − γ, and inequality (6) imply

                                xh + θA − b1h ≥ (1 − θ) ah + θA − 1 > 0,

where the second inequality follows from Assumption B. To prove the second inequality notice that
xl + θA − b1l ≤ xl + θA < 0 follows from the consumers’ no-default constraint and Assumption B.
    Having proved that qh = 1 > ql , it follows that

                                               (1 − θ) A   (1 − θ) A
                                     z1h =               <           = z1l .
                                                1 − θA      ql − θA

Therefore, one of the following three cases applies (1) z0 ≤ z1h < z1l , (2) z1h < z0 < z1l , (3) z1h < z1l ≤
z0 . Applying Lemma 2 these three cases give the equilibrium financial contracts of types 1 to 3.

    This characterization implies that the equilibrium financial contract takes the form
                                                     1
                                         b1l     =      max {ρ − ρ̂, 0} ,                               (32)
                                                     πl
                                                      1
                                         b1h     =      min {ρ, ρ̂} ,                                   (33)
                                                     πh
for some parameter ρ ≥ 0, where ρ̂ ≡ π h (θah + 1 − γ). That P is, the equilibrium financial contract is
fully characterized by ρ. Notice that, by construction, ρ = s π s b1s , i.e. the parameter ρ captures the
ratio of outside borrowing to total capital invested at date 0.
     The next Lemma contains useful results on the relation between ρ and the equilibrium price ql .

Lemma 5 There is an upper bound ρ̄ such that the contract {b1s } given by (32)-(33) is consistent with
no default if and only if ρ ∈ [0, ρ̄]. For each ρ ∈ [0, ρ̄] there is a unique equilibrium in the low state
capital market. The associated equilibrium price is given by the function ql = Q (ρ), which is continuous
and decreasing, and is diﬀerentiable except at ρ = ρ̂.

    Proof. For any ρ ≥ 0, let {b1s } be given by (32)-(33). To find the corresponding equilibrium     ¡ T in
                                                                                                          ¢
                                                                       T
the l-state asset market I need to find a price ql and quantities k1l    and k1l such that ql = F 0 k1l    ,
                                                                                              T
(ql − θA) (k1l − k0 ) = (xl + θA − b1l ) k0 (from the entrepreneurs’ budget constraint), and k1l = k0 −k1l .
To find the equilibrium, I define the function
                           ¡ T            ¢ ¡ ¡ T¢         ¢ T ³               ´
                        H k1l  ; b1l , b1h ≡ F 0 k1l − θA k1l  + xl + θA − b̃1l k0                     (34)

where
                                                ©            ¡ T¢    ª
                                    = min b1l , θal + F 0 k1l
                                  b̃1l                            −γ ,                               (35)
                                                  1
                                k0 =            P       n,                                           (36)
                                           1 − s π s bs
                T
                                 ¡ T            ¢
and look for a k1l that solves H k1l ; b1l , b1h = 0. Notice that for every ρ, (33) ensures that b1h ≤
θah +1−γ, so the no-default condition is satisfied in state h. However, with no restrictions on ρ nothing

                                                        28
ensures that no-default is satisfied in state l. For the moment I use condition (35) to ensure that the
no-default condition is satisfied by (b̃1l , b1h ). This construction will allow me, eventually, to find a ρ̄
such that no-default is satisfied if and only if ρ ≤ ρ̄.
                                                                                         T
   ¡ Step
      T
            1. First,
                 ¢ I want to prove that for each pair {b1s } there exists a unique k1l ∈ [0, k0 ] that solves
H k1l ; b1l , b1h = 0. To do that, I will show that the function H: (i) is continuous and increasing in
 T                          T                                   T
k1l , (ii) is negative at k1l  = 0, and (iii) is positive at k1l   = k0 . Point (i) follows from Assumption
                                                                                  T
C
³   and   the  concavity
                 ´       of  F , which implies   that b̃1l is non-increasing in k1l . Point (ii) follows since
 xl + θA − b̃1l k0 < 0 (from b̃1l ≥ 0 and Assumption B). To prove (iii) notice that
                                           ³                         ´
                      H (k0 ; b1l , b1h ) = al + F 0 (k0 ) − γ − b̃1l k0 ≥ (1 − θ) al k0 > 0,

where the first inequality follows from the definition of b̃1l , the¡ T second from ¢       al > 0. The intermediate
                                                T
value theorem implies that there exists a k1l     which solves H k1l    ; b1l , b1h = 0. Since H is monotone in
  T
k1l , the solution is unique.
      Step 2. Next, I define the function Q (ρ) and show that it is continuous
                                                                             ¡ T             and
                                                                                               ¢ decreasing. For any
                                                               T
ρ ≥ 0, let b1l and b1h be given by (32) and (33), let k1l         solve H k1l      ; b1l , b1h = 0 and let Q (ρ) =
    ¡ T¢
F 0 k1l   . Continuity can be easily established. To prove that Q is decreasing, note that xl + θA − b̃1l
is negative, k0 is increasing in both b1l and b1h , and xl + θA − b̃1l is non-increasing in b1l . Therefore,
                                                                             T                               T
H is decreasing
            ¡ T   in both
                        ¢ b1l and b1h . Moreover, H is increasing in k1l . This implies that the k1l which
solves H k1l ; b1l , b1h = 0 is increasing in ρ, since, if ρ increases either b1l or b1h must increase. The
concavity of F then implies that Q (ρ) is decreasing.
      Step 3. Finally, I find the upper bound ρ̄ and argue that the function Q (ρ) is diﬀerentiable, except
at ρ = ρ̂. Let ρ̄ be such that
                                         1
                                            (ρ̄ − ρ̂) = θal + Q (ρ̄) − γ.
                                         πl
This equation admits a solution ρ̄ ∈ [ρ̂, ρ̂ + π l (θal + 1 − γ)] by the intermediate value theorem, given
that 0 < θal + Q (ρ̂) − γ and θal + 1 − γ ≥ θal + Q (ρ̂ + π l (θal + 1 − γ)) − γ (by (6) and Assumption
B). The solution is unique because Q is decreasing. Moreover, again given that Q is decreasing, I have
b1l = π1l (ρ − ρ̂) ≤ θal + Q (ρ) − γ if and only if ρ ≤ ρ̄. Restricting the function Q to [0, ρ̄], I can replace
b̃1l with b1l in (34), and apply the implicit function theorem to show that Q is diﬀerentiable for ρ 6= ρ̂.

    I can now prove existence and uniqueness.

Lemma 6 There exists a unique symmetric competitive equilibrium.

    Proof. Step 1. First, I will define a function ζ : [0, ρ̄] → R. For each ρ, let b1l and b2l be given by
(32) and (33), let qh = 1 and ql = Q (ρ). Substitute in (14) and (15), to obtain {z1s } and z0 , and let
                                           ½
                                             z1h − z0 if ρ ∈ [0, ρ̂]
                                   ζ (ρ) ≡                             .
                                              z1l − z0 if ρ ∈ (ρ̂, ρ̄]

The function ζ is continuous and diﬀerentiable except at ρ̂. Note that ζ corresponds to the diﬀerence
between the z1s and z0 plotted in Figure 2.
     Step 2. The function ζ satisfies two properties. First, it satisfies ζ (ρ̂) < limρ→ρ̂+ ζ (ρ). This follows
from the inequality z1h < z1l , which can be proved for any ρ ∈ [0, ρ̄] proceeding as in the proof of
Lemma 4. Second, if ζ (ρ) = 0 and ζ is diﬀerentiable at ρ, then ζ 0 (ρ) > 0. To prove this claim, consider
first the case ρ < ρ̂. In this case some algebra shows that
                                              µ                                      ¶
                           0           1                xl + θA − b1l 0
                         ζ (ρ) =      P         π l z1l              Q (ρ) + ζ (ρ) .
                                  1 − π s b1s              ql − θA

                                                        29
The last expression is positive given that xl + θA − b1l < 0 (see the proof of Lemma 4), Q0 (ρ) < 0 (from
Lemma 5), and ζ (ρ) = 0. If ρ > ρ̂ then
                                                        µ                                   ¶
                            z1l                 1                 xl + θA − b1l 0
             ζ 0 (ρ) = −         Q0 (ρ) +     P           π l z1l              Q (ρ) + ζ (ρ) ,
                         ql − θA          1 − s π s b1s              ql − θA

which is also positive.
     Step 3. Summarizing the properties derived in step 2: ζ is continuous except at ρ̂, where it has
an upward jump, and, if it crosses the horizontal axis, it is locally increasing at the point of crossing.
These properties imply that there exists one and only one ρCE ∈ [0,¡ρ̄] which        ¢    satisfies one of the
following conditions: (i) ρCE = 0 and ζ (0) ≥ 0; (ii)     ρCE
                                                       ¡ CE ¢  ∈ (0, ρ̂) and  ζ ρCE
                                                                                       = 0;  (iii) ρCE = ρ̂ and
                                   CE                                      CE
ζ (ρ̂) ≤ 0 ≤ limρ→ρ̂+ ζ (ρ); (iv) ρ    ∈ (ρ̂, ρ̄) and ζ ρ     = 0; (v) ρ      = ρ̄ and ζ (ρ̄) ≤ 0. For each of
these cases, it is possible to construct a competitive equilibrium. For example, case (ii) gives bCE   1l = 0,
bCE
 1h = ρ
           CE           CE
              /π h and z1l     CE
                            > z1h  = z0CE , showing that the entrepreneur’s optimality conditions derived
in Lemma 2 are satisfied. All remaining equilibrium conditions are satisfied by construction.
P Step      4. To© prove
                       ª uniqueness notice that the characterization      in Lemma 4 implies that if ρCE =
         CE         CE                                        CE
    π s b1s and b1s is the equilibrium contract, then ρ           must satisfy one of the conditions (i)-(v)
described in step 3.

   The following is a corollary of Lemma 6, which will be useful in the welfare analysis. It follows
immediately from step 3 of the proof.

Corollary 1 Let ζ be the function defined in the proof of Lemma 6 and let ρCE be the equilibrium level
of ρ. Then, ζ (ρ) > 0 for all ρ > ρCE .

6.5    Proof of Proposition 2
Define the function G                                  ½
                                                           F (y) if y ≥ 0
                                          G (y) =                         .
                                                             y   if y < 0
Since F 0 (0) = 1 this function is diﬀerentiable. The planner’s problem can then be written as follows
                                                    X
                                          max           π s (A − b2s ) k1s
                                     k0 ,{k1s ,b1s ,b2s }s=l,h
                                                                  s

subject to
                           X                   X
      n + 3e − Ū − k0 +        π s b1s k0 +       π s (G (k0 − k1s ) − G0 (k0 − k1s ) (k0 − k1s )) ≥ 0,   (λ)
                            s                  s
      G0 (k0 − k1s ) (k0 − k1s ) + (xs − b1s ) k0 + b2s k1s ≥ 0,              (π s µs )
      0 ≤ b1s ≤ θas + G0 (k0 − k1s ) − γ,                                     (π s ν s )
      0 ≤ b2s ≤ θA,
      k1s , k0 ≥ 0.

In parentheses, I report the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the first three sets of constraints.
The multiplier ν s refers to the inequality b1s ≤ θas + G0 (k0 − k1s ) − γ. I will write G0∗     0  ∗    ∗
                                                                                          s for G (k0 − k1s )
      00∗      00  ∗     ∗
and Gs for G (k0 − k1s ). As in the case of the entrepreneur’s problem, the planner’s problem can be
stated in terms of the variables {b1s } and {b2s }, even if k0 or {k1s } are zero (see the proof of Lemma
2). The rest of the proof is split in several steps.




                                                                 30
    Step 1. I derive the Kuhn-Tucker necessary first order conditions for an optimum. First, the
optimality conditions for k0 and k1s ,
   Ã                                  !
    X                                    X                                           X
              ∗     00∗ ∗    ∗
 λ      π s [b1s − Gs (k0 − k1s )] − 1 +   π s µs [xs + G0∗   ∗     00∗ ∗    ∗
                                                         s − b1s + Gs (k0 − k1s )] +   π s ν s G00∗
                                                                                                s ≤ 0,
        s                                           s                                           s
                                                                                                            (37)
and
            π s (A − b∗2s ) + λπ s G00∗ ∗    ∗               ∗     0∗   00∗ ∗    ∗                00∗
                                    s (k0 − k1s ) + π s µs (b2s − Gs − Gs (k0 − k1s )) − π s ν s Gs ≤ 0,    (38)
which must hold with strict equality if, respectively, k0 > 0 or k1s > 0. The conditions for b1s and b2s
give
                  if π s λk0∗ − π s µs k0∗   < 0 then ν s = 0 and b∗1s = 0,                                (39a)
                  if π s λk0∗ − π s µs k0∗   = 0 then ν s = 0 and b∗1s ∈ [0, θas + G0∗
                                                                                    s − γ] ,               (39b)
                  if π s λk0∗ − π s µs k0∗   > 0 then ν s = (λ − µs ) k0 and b1s = θas + G0∗
                                                                       ∗       ∗
                                                                                            s − γ,         (39c)

                                               ∗         ∗
                                    if π s µs k1s − π s k1s    < 0 then b∗2s = 0,                          (40a)
                                               ∗         ∗
                                    if π s µs k1s − π s k1s    = 0 then b∗2s ∈ [0, θA] ,                   (40b)
                                               ∗         ∗
                                    if π s µs k1s − π s k1s    > 0 then b∗2s = θA.                         (40c)
       Step 2. Using the conditions above I show that, at an optimum, µs > 1 and b∗2s = θA for s = l, h,
ql∗   < qh∗ = 1, and k0∗ > 0 and k1s
                                  ∗
                                     > 0 for s = l, h. First, notice that conditions (39a)-(39c) imply that
                                                    ν s = (λ − µs )+ k0∗ .                                  (41)
Lemma 3 and no-default in period 2 imply that G0∗   ∗
                                               s − b2s > 0. Then condition (38) can be rewritten as

                                 A − b∗2s   (λ − µs ) G00∗ ∗     ∗                 00∗ ∗
                                                       s (k0 − k1s ) − (λ − µs )+ Gs k0
                          µs ≥    0∗    ∗ +                   0∗     ∗                   .                  (42)
                                 Gs − b2s                    Gs − b2s
Let me show that the expression (λ − µs ) G00∗     ∗   ∗                 00∗ ∗
                                             s (k0 − k1s ) − (λ − µs )+ Gs k0 is always non-negative. If
                                               00∗   ∗   ∗
λ ≤ µs this expression is equal to (λ − µs ) Gs (k0 − k1s ) ≥ 0, where the inequality follows because
either k0∗ − k1s
               ∗
                  > 0 and G00∗        ∗     ∗              00∗
                           s < 0 or k0 − k1s ≤ 0 and Gs = 0. If λ > µs this expression is equal to
              00∗ ∗
− (λ − µs ) Gs k1s ≥ 0. Therefore (42) implies that
                                                              A − b∗2s
                                                    µs ≥             ∗ > 1,
                                                              G0∗
                                                               s − b2s

where the second inequality follows since A > 1 ≥ G0∗                                         ∗
                                                       s . Condition (40c) then implies that b2s = θA.
Since µs > 0, the budget constraint is binding in period 1 and

                                                  ∗      G0∗
                                                          s + xs − b1s ∗
                                                 k1s =                k0 .                                  (43)
                                                           G0∗
                                                             s − θA
                                                               ∗
Proceeding as in the proof of Lemma 4, I can show that k1h         − k0∗ > 0 and k1l∗
                                                                                      − k0∗ < 0, implying
       ∗     0∗        ∗      0∗           00∗                                     ∗       ∗
that qh = Gh = 1, ql = Gl < 1, and Gh = 0. Moreover, I can show that k0 and k1s              are positive.
                       ∗
First, notice that if k0 = 0 then (43) implies that the entrepreneur’s utility is zero, contradicting the
assumption that it is positive. Second, k0∗ > 0 and (43) imply that k1s ∗
                                                                           > 0.
                                               ∗
    Step 3. Next, I show that µs > λ iﬀ z1s > λ. This, together with conditions (39a)-(39c) gives
the characterization of {b∗1s } in the proposition. Since k1s
                                                           ∗
                                                              > 0 (from step 2), (38) and (42) hold as
                                                                   ∗
equalities. Suppose that λ ≤ µs . Then, given the definition of z1s  , subtracting λ on both sides of (42)
and rearranging gives
                                       G0∗ − θA + G00∗   ∗    ∗
                                                     s (k0 − k1s )
                               (µs − λ) s                              ∗
                                                                   = z1s  − λ.
                                                 G0∗
                                                  s − θA


                                                                31
Assumption C implies that G0∗              00∗  ∗    ∗
                              s − θA + Gs (k0 − k1s ) > 0. Therefore, µs − λ has the same sign as
 ∗
z1s − λ. Suppose, instead, that λ > µs . Then, I obtain
                                             G0∗        00∗ ∗
                                              s − θA − Gs k1s    ∗
                                  (µs − λ)                    = z1s − λ,
                                                 G0∗
                                                  s − θA

and, given that G00∗                                   ∗
                   s ≤ 0, µs − λ inherits the sign of z1s − λ also in this case.
   Step 4. Finally, I prove inequality (22). Since k0∗ > 0 (from step 2) (37) must hold as an equality.
Using (41) to substitute for ν s , gives
  Ã                !
         X            X                              X £                                                ¤
                 ∗
 λ 1−       π s b1s =      π s µs (xs + G0∗   ∗
                                         s − b1s ) −   π s (λ − µs ) G00∗   ∗    ∗                00∗ ∗
                                                                      s (k0 − k1s ) − (λ − µs )+ Gs k0 .
          s               s                               s

Substituting (42) (as an equality), using    qs∗
                                             =     G0∗G00∗
                                                    s ,
                                                                                                    ∗
                                                       h = 0 (from step 3), and the definitions of z1s and
 ∗
z0 gives
                Ã               !
                     X                £                                            ¤          ∗
                                                                              00 ∗ xl + θA − b1l
      (λ − z0∗ ) 1 −    π s b∗1s = π l (λ − µl ) G00∗  ∗   ∗
                                                  l (k0 − k1l ) − (λ − µl )+ Gl k0     ∗         .     (44)
                      s
                                                                                      Gl − θA

In step 3 I have shown that (λ − µl ) G00∗   ∗    ∗                 00 ∗
                                        l (k0 − k1l ) − (λ − µl )+ Gl k0 ≥ 0, and it is easy to show that
    inequality is strict whenever λ 6= µl (notice that k0 − k1l < 0). Since xl + θA − b∗1l < 0 and
the P                                                      ∗      ∗

1 − s π s b∗1s > 0, it follows that λ < z0∗ except if λ = µl , in which case λ = z0∗ . This completes the
proof. ¥

6.6     Proof of Proposition 3
Before proving the proposition, it is useful to introduce the following lemma.

Lemma 7 Suppose the planner chooses ρ∗ > ρCE and the associated price is ql∗ , then ql∗ ≤ Q (ρ∗ )
(where the function Q is defined in Lemma 5).

    Proof. Proceeding as in the proof of Lemma 5 define the following function
                      ¡ T             ¢ ¡ ¡ T¢       ¢ T ³                ´
                    J k1l  ; b1l , b1h ≡ F 0 k1l − θA k1l + xl + θA − b̃1l k0 ,

where
                              ©               ¡ T¢      ª
                  b̃1l   = min b1l , θal + F 0 k1l −γ
                                1         £            ¡ ¡ T¢      ¡ T¢ T¢        ¤
                   k0    =    P            n + 3e + π l F k1l − F 0 k1l k1l − U CE .                     (45)
                           1 − s π s b1s

Suppose the planner chooses the total borrowing ratio ρ∗ , and the associated borrowing ratios {b∗1l , b∗1h },
and let ql∗ and   T∗
             ¡ Tk∗1l ∗be ∗the¢ associated equilibrium price and quantity on the used capital market. By
definition, J k1l ; b1l , b1h = 0. Moreover, the definition of U CE implies that
                                      ³ ³       ´       ³      ´       ´
                                           T,CE           T,CE    T,CE
                              3e + π l F k1l       − F 0 k1l     k1l     = U CE ,
                                       ³                ´   ³                ´
                                         T,CE CE CE           T,CE CE CE
and, by construction, it follows that J k1l  ; b1l , b1h = H k1l  ; b1l , b1h = 0. Diﬀerentiating
                                           T
the function J and noticing that ∂ b̃1l /∂k1l ≤ 0, gives
                                                "                       #
                      ∂J       0
                                 ¡ T¢                    xl + θA − b̃1l       ¡ T¢ T
                        T
                           ≥ F k1l − θA + 1 − π l            P            F 00 k1l k1l .
                     ∂k1l                                1 −    π b
                                                               s s 1s


                                                          32
Some algebra shows that η (as defined in Assumption C’) is an upper bound for the expression in square
brackets on the right-hand side. Therefore, Assumption C’ is suﬃcient to ensure that J is monotone
               T
increasing in k1l . Moreover, it is possible to show that the function J is monotone
                                                                               ¡ T ∗ CE   decreasing
                                                                                                  ¢ in b1l and
           ∗   CE                     ∗      CE       ∗     CE                                 CE
b1h . If ³ρ > ρ , it follows
                         ´     that  b1l ≥ b 1l  and b1h ≥ b1h . Therefore,  J  k 1l ; b 1l , b1h  ≥ 0. Given
          T,CE CE CE                                                 T∗     T,CE
that J k1l     ; b1l , b1h = 0, the last inequality implies that k1l     ≥ k1l   . Since the profits of the
                       ¡ T¢    0
                                 ¡ T
                                     ¢ T                      T
traditional sector, F k1l − F k1l k1l , are increasing in k1l , it follows that
                                    ³ ³       ´      ³     ´      ´
                                          T,∗          T,∗    T,∗
                            3e + π l F k1l      − F 0 k1l    k1l    − U CE ≥ 0.                        (46)
                                                                     ³                 ´
                                                                        T,∗ ∗
Comparing (36) and (45), using inequality (46), shows that H k1l           ; b1l , b∗1h ≥ 0. Let k̂1l   T
                                                                                                          denote the
          T
                            ¡ T   ∗     ∗
                                          ¢
value of k1l that solves H k1l ; b1l , b1h = 0, where H is the function defined in Lemma 5. Since H is
               T                   T       T∗
                                                                             ¡ T ∗¢
monotone in k1l  it follows that k̂1l  ≤ k1l  , which implies that ql∗ = F 0 k1l       ≤ F 0 (k̂1l
                                                                                                T
                                                                                                   ) = Q (ρ∗ ).

     Now, I can turn to Proposition 3. I will proceed by contradiction, assume that ρ∗ > ρCE , and show
that this leads to a violation of the optimality conditions of the planner’s problem. Notice that when
Ū = U CE , the entrepreneurs must achieve positive utility at the social optimum (since they do so at
the competitive equilibrium, and the competitive allocation is feasible). So Proposition 2 applies.
     Step 1. I first define the values ẑ0 and ẑ1s , which will be used below. Let q̂h and q̂l denote the
prices
    © CEwhich
         ª    would arise in competitive equilibrium if the entrepreneurs were to choose {b∗1s } instead
of b1s . That is, q̂h = 1 and q̂l = Q (ρ∗ ), where Q (.) is the function defined in Lemma 5. Let ẑ0 and
ẑ1s denote the values of z0 and z1s obtained substituting {b∗1s } and {q̂1s } in (14) and (15). Notice that
substituting {b∗1s } and {q1s
                           ∗
                              } in (14) and (15) gives z0∗ and z1s
                                                                ∗
                                                                   .
     Step 2. I now derive some inequalities regarding ẑ0 and ẑ1s . It is possible to show that ρ∗ >
ρCE implies ql∗ ≤ q̂l . This follows from Lemma 7, and here is where Assumption C’ is used. This
                                           ∗
result immediately implies that ẑ1l ≤ z1l   . Moreover, qh∗ = q̂h = 1 implies that ẑ1h = z1h   ∗
                                                                                                   . Finally,
                                ∗
I want to show that ẑ0 ≥ z0 . To prove this inequality, it is suﬃcient to show that (15) defines an
increasing function in ql , which follows from diﬀerentiating (15) with respect to ql and using the fact
that xl + θA − b1l < 0.
     Step 3. Define the state s0 as follows: s0 = h if 0 < ρ∗ ≤ ρ̂ and s0 = l if ρ∗ > ρ̂ (ρ∗ = 0 is not
possible since ρ∗ > ρCE ≥ 0 by hypothesis). The construction in step 1 implies that
                                               ẑ1s0 − ẑ0 = ζ (ρ∗ ) ,
where ζ (.) is the function defined in Lemma 6. Since ρ∗ > ρCE , Corollary 1 implies that ζ (ρ∗ ) > 0.
Finally, Proposition 2 shows that λ∗ ≤ z0∗ . Putting together these two inequalities and those derived in
step 2, gives
                                   ∗      ∗    ∗      ∗
                                  z1s0 − λ ≥ z1s0 − z0 ≥ ẑ1s0 − ẑ0 > 0.

                                                                                                         ∗
Notice that the definition of the state s0 implies that b∗1s0 > 0. The inequalities b∗1s0 > 0 and z1s
                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                     0 −λ > 0

violate the planner’s optimality conditions derived in 2. This completes the argument.

    Finally, I turn to the last statement of the proposition. Suppose that the equilibrium is of type 1,
and suppose, by contradiction, that ρ∗ ≥ ρCE . Then, steps analogous to the ones above lead to the
chain of inequalities
                                    ∗      ∗   ∗      ∗
                                   z1s0 − λ > z1s0 − z0 ≥ ẑ1s0 − ẑ0 ≥ 0,


where the first inequality is now strict, because of Proposition 2. Again, I obtain a contradiction. ¥


Lemma 8 Consider the eﬃcient allocation in Proposition 3. The corresponding financial contract
satisfies                                  X
                                     d∗0 ≤   π s b∗1s k0∗ .


                                                        33
      Proof. Constraint (19) can be rewritten as
                             X                             X ¡ ¡      ¢          ¢
                      −d∗0 +    π s b∗1s k0∗ ≥ U CE − 3e −         T∗
                                                            π s F k1s         T∗
                                                                        − qs k1s   .               (47)
                                 s                             s

Moreover, Proposition 3 shows that ρ∗ ≤ ρCE . An argument symmetric to the one used in the previous
                                                T,CE
proof shows that ρ∗ ≤ ρCE implies that k1l
                                        T∗
                                            ≤ k1l    , and thus
                                  ³ ³      ´      ³      ´      ´
                                       T,∗           T,∗    T,∗
                          3e + π l F k1l     − F 0 k1l     k1l    − U CE ≤ 0.                  (48)

Putting together (47) and (48) gives the desired result.

6.7      Full commitment on the entrepreneurs’ side
Here, I discuss the equilibrium in the case where entrepreneurs have unlimited ability to commit future
repayments, i.e., when θ = 1. Let me derive first the first best allocation, next I will show that this
allocation can be achieved in equilibrium without violating the consumers’ participation constraints.
Consider the planner’s problem                    X
                                             max      π s ce2s ,
                                                         s

subject to

                                     k0 ≤ n + d0 ,
                                     qs k1s ≤ (qs + xs ) k0 − d1s for s = l, h,
                                     ce2s ≤ Ak1s − d2s for s = l, h,

and
                                       X        ¡                           ¡ T ¢¢
                                                            T
                            e − d0 +         π s e + d1s − k1s + e + d2s + F k1s   ≥ Ū ,
                                         s
                                                         T
                                                                          ¡ T¢
                            e − d0 ≥ 0,       e + d1s − k1s ≥ 0,   d2s + F k1s ≥ 0.

with Ū = 3e. Note that in this case it is necessary to take into account the non-negativity constraints
for the consumers’ consumption levels. It is possible to show that the optimum is achieved when

                           d0    = e, d1s = −e, d2s = 2e,
                          ce2s   = A (1 + xs ) (n + e) + Ae − 2e,
                                                                               T
                           k0    = n + e, k1s = (1 + xs ) (n + e) + e,        k1s = 0.

    The same allocation is achieved in a competitive equilibrium with prices qh = ql = 1. Given that
these prices are constant at 1 in a neighborhood of the planner’s optimum, it is easy to show that
the first-order conditions of the individual problem are satisfied at the planner’s optimum. Moreover,
absent the no-default conditions of the entrepreneur, the individual problem is concave so the planner’s
optimum is also an individual optimum.

6.8      Proof of Proposition 4
The entrepreneur’s problem is now to maximize
                                       X
                                          π s (A − b2s ) k1s ,
                                                 s



                                                         34
subject to

                              k0 ≤ νn                                                              (49)
                                        X
                              k0 ≤ n + (  π s b1s )k0 − τ 0 ,
                                           s
                           qs k1s ≤ (qs + xs − b1s ) k0 + b2s k1s   for s = l, h,


                               0 ≤ b1s ≤ θas + qs − γ for s = l, h,
                               0 ≤ b2s ≤ θA for s = l, h.

The first order conditions are the same as in those derived in Lemma 2, with the exception of that for
k0 which gives                          P
                                            π s z1s (xs + qs − b1s ) − ξ
                                   z0 = s             P                  ,
                                                 1 − s π s b1s
where ξ is the Lagrange multiplier on (49). Take a constrained eﬃcient allocation, characterized in 2,
set ν = n/k0∗ and
                               X
                    τ 0 = 3e −    π s (G (k0∗ − k1s
                                                 ∗
                                                    ) − G0 (k0∗ − k1s
                                                                   ∗
                                                                      ) (k0∗ − k1s
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                   )) − Ū .
                                s

To show that {b∗1s } solves the entrepreneur’s optimization substitute in the entrepreneur’s first order
conditions, setting z0 = λ∗ and ξ equal to the right-hand side of (44). ¥




References

 [1] Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 1997, “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance?
     Risk, Diversification, and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(4), pp. 709-51.

 [2] Aghion, Philippe, Abhijit Banerjee and Thomas Piketty, 1999, “Dualism and Macroeco-
     nomic Volatility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4), pp. 1359-97.

 [3] Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, 2005, “Fire-Sale FDI and Liquidity Crises”, Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 87(3), pp. 439-452.

 [4] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2004, “Financial Intermediaries and Markets.” Econo-
     metrica, 72, pp. 1023-1061.

 [5] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluc-
     tuations,” American Economic Review, 79(1), pp. 14-31.

 [6] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 2001, “Should Central Banks Respond To Movements
     in Asset Prices?” American Economic Review, 91(2) pp.253-57.

                                                    35
 [7] Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, 2001, “The Financial Accelerator in a
    Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook
    of Macroeconomics. Vol. 15. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 1341-93.

 [8] Bordo, Michael D. and Olivier Jeanne, 2002, “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices: Does
    ’Benign Neglect’ Make Sense?” International Finance, 5(2), pp. 139-64.

 [9] Borio, Claudio, 2003, “Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Bank Supervision and
    Regulation?” Bank for International Settlements Working Paper No. 128.

[10] Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe, 2002, “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability:
    Exploring the Nexus.” Bank for International Settlements Working Paper No. 114.

[11] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International and Domestic
    Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crisis.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 48(3), pp. 513-48.

[12] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
    Development and Underinsurance.” Journal of Finance, 58(2), pp. 867-94.

[13] Caprio, Gerard, Daniela Klingebiel, Luc Laeven and Guillermo Noguera, 2005, “Bank-
    ing Crisis Database,” in Patrick Honohan and Luc Laeven, Systemic Financial Crises,
    Cambridge University Press, 2005

[14] Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy Fuerst, 1997, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
    Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review,
    87(5), pp. 893-910.

[15] Cecchetti, Steven, Hans Genberg, John Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwani, 2000, “Asset Prices
    and Central Bank Policy,” International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies Report
    No. 2.

[16] Cooley, Thomas, Ramon Marimon and Vincenzo Quadrini, “Aggregate Consequences of
    Limited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 111(4).

[17] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini, 1999, “Paper Tigers? A Model
    of the Asian Crisis.” European Economic Review, 43(7), pp. 1211-36.



                                            36
[18] Dupor, Bill, 2002, “The Natural Rate of Q,” American Economic Review, 92(2), pp.
    96-101.

[19] Faia, Esther, and Tommaso Monacelli, 2007, “Optimal Interest Rate Rules, Asset Prices
    and Credit Frictions,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(10), pp. 3228-3254.

[20] Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski, 2007, “A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of
    Financial Intermediation,” MIT mimeo.

[21] Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein and J. C. Stein, 1993, “Risk Management: Coordinating
    Corporate Investment and Financing Policies,” Journal of Finance 48, pp. 1629-1658.

[22] Gai, Prasanna, Peter Kondor and Nicholas Vause, 2005, “Procyclicality, Collateral Values
    and Financial Stability.” Bank of England Working Paper 304.

[23] Gai, Prasanna, Sujit Kapadia, Stephen Millard and Ander Perez, 2006, “Financial Inno-
    vation, Macroeconomic Stability and Systemic Crises,” mimeo, Bank of England.

[24] Geanakoplos, John and Heraklis M. Polemarchakis, 1986, “Existence, Regularity, and
    Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is In-
    complete,” in W. Heller, R. Starr and D. Starret (eds.) Uncertainty, Information, and
    Communication: Essays in Honor of K. J. Arrow, Vol. III, Cambridge University Press.

[25] Gertler, Mark, 1992, “Financial Capacity and Output Fluctuations in an Economy with
    Multi-Period Financial Relationships,” Review of Economic Studies, 59, pp. 455-472.

[26] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdes, and Oscar Landerretche, 2001, “Lending
    Booms: Latin America and the World,” Economia 1(2).

[27] Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, 2007, “Liquidity and Spending Dynamics,”
    mimeo MIT.

[28] Herring, Richard J. and Susan Wachter, 1999, “Real Estate Booms and Banking Busts:
    An International Perspective,” Group of 30 Occasional Paper 58.

[29] Holmstrom, Bengt and Tirole, Jean, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.”
    Journal of Political Economy, 106(1), pp. 1-40.




                                             37
[30] Iacoviello, Matteo, 2005, “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints and Monetary Policy in
    the Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, 95(3), pp. 739-764.

[31] Kehoe, Timothy and David K. Levine, 1993, “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” Review
    of Economic Studies, 60, pp. 865-888.

[32] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy,
    105(2), pp. 211-48.

[33] Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2003, “Collateral Constraints and the Amplification Mechanism.”
    Journal of Economic Theory, 111(2), pp. 277-292,.

[34] Krugman, Paul, 1998, “Fire-sale FDI,” manuscript, NBER Conference on Capital Flows
    to Emerging Markets.

[35] Lamont, Owen. “Corporate-Debt Overhang and Macroeconomic Expectations,” American
    Economic Review, December 1995, 85 (5), pp. 1106-17.

[36] Lorenzoni, Guido, 2001, “Excess Interest Rate Volatility in an Intermediated Economy,”
    PhD thesis (Chapter 1), MIT.

[37] McKinnon, R., and H. Pill, 1996, “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital
    Flows: The Overborrowing Syndrome,” in T. Ito and A. Krueger (eds.), Financial Dereg-
    ulation and Integration in East Asia, Chicago: Chicago University Press.

[38] Pulvino, Todd, 1998, “Do Asset Fire Sales Exist?: An Empirical Investigation of Com-
    mercial Aircraft Transactions,” Journal of Finance 53, pp. 939-978.

[39] Ranciere, Romaine, Aaron Tornell and Frank Westermann, 2003, “Crises and Growth: A
    Re-Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper 10073.

[40] Rampini, Adriano, 2004, “Entrepreneurial Activity, Risk, and the Business Cycle,” Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics 51, pp. 555-573.

[41] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity.”
    Journal of Finance, 47(4), pp. 1343-66.

[42] Schneider, Martin and Aaron Tornell, 2004, “Balance Sheet Eﬀects, Bailout Guarantees
    and Financial Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3) pp. 883-913.

                                              38
[43] Tornell, Aaron and Frank Westermann, 2002, “Boom-Bust Cycles in Middle Income Coun-
    tries: Facts and Explanation.” International Monetary Fund Staﬀ Papers, 49, pp. 111-55.

[44] Watanabe, Wako, 2007, “Prudential Regulation and the Credit Crunch: Evidence from
    Japan,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.




                                            39
