                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 COMPETING ON STANDARDS? ENTREPRENEURSHIP, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
                   AND THE PLATFORM PARADOX

                                        Timothy S. Simcoe
                                        Stuart J.H. Graham
                                        Maryann Feldman

                                       Working Paper 13632
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13632


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2007




The authors would like to thank Shane Greenstein, Scott Stern, Thomas Hellman and participants in
the 2007 NBER Entrepreneurship conference and Haas School of Business Institutional Analysis seminar.
Joel West also provided very thoughtful comments on an earlier version of the paper. Simcoe and
Feldman thank Sun Microsystems and particularly Catherine McCarthy for financial support and several
useful discussions. Simcoe acknowledges the financial support of Bell Canada University Labs. Graham
is funded by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The usual disclaimer applies. Correspondence:
timothy.simcoe@rotman.utoronto.ca. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Timothy S. Simcoe, Stuart J.H. Graham, and Maryann Feldman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competing on Standards? Entrepreneurship, Intellectual Property and the Platform Paradox
Timothy S. Simcoe, Stuart J.H. Graham, and Maryann Feldman
NBER Working Paper No. 13632
November 2007
JEL No. L0,L17,L26,O34

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper studies the intellectual property strategy of firms that participate in the formal standards
process. Specifically, we examine litigation rates in a sample of patents disclosed to thirteen voluntary
Standard Setting Organizations (SSOs). We find that SSO patents have a relatively high litigation
rate, and that SSO patents assigned to small firms are litigated more often than those of large publicly-traded
firms. We also estimate a series of difference-in-differences models and find that small-firm litigation
rates increase following a patent's disclosure to an SSO while those of large firms remain unchanged
or decline. We interpret this result as evidence of a "platform paradox" -- while small entrepreneurial
firms rely on open standards to lower the fixed cost of innovation, these firms are also more likely
to pursue an aggressive IP strategy that may undermine the openness of a new standard.


Timothy S. Simcoe                                      Maryann Feldman
University of Toronto                                  Institute for Higher Education
J.L. Rotman School of Management                       University of Georgia
105 St. George Street                                  Athens, GA 30603
Toronto, ON M4S 1S2                                    mfeldman@uga.edu
timothy.simcoe@rotman.utoronto.ca

Stuart J.H. Graham
College of Management
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street, N.W.
Atlanta, GA 30332
stuart.graham@mgt.gatech.edu
1. Introduction

New technologies are often designed to be part of a platform – a system of

independently supplied yet inter‐operable components governed by shared technical

standards. Many successful platforms, such as the Internet, the personal computer, and

the cellular telephone, are based on open standards, meaning that any firm can access key

components and interface technologies at little or no cost. These open standards are

typically developed by voluntary Standard Setting Organizations (SSOs), which offer

their members a quid pro quo:         in return for the opportunity to promote their

proprietary technology, and perhaps have it endorsed as an industry standard, firms

agree to disclose relevant intellectual property (IP) and license it broadly (Chiao, Lerner

and Tirole 2005).



While both large platform leaders (Gawer and Henderson 2007) and small entrepreneurs

play an important role in the formal standards process, SSO intellectual property rules

can present smaller firms with a conundrum. While small specialized technology firms

are often anxious to see a standard emerge — especially if it will complement (or rely

on) their proprietary technology —they typically cannot pursue the competitive strategy

favored by large firms because they lack the downstream marketing, manufacturing and

distribution capabilities needed to “cooperate on standards and compete on

implementation” (IBM 2007). In fact, many small firms view the formal standards

process as an attempt by other firms to secure cheap access to their proprietary

technology. Large systems vendors generally take a different view. Many suspect that

small players manipulate the standards process, and respond by accumulating a large

stock of patents for defensive cross‐licensing (Hall and Ziedonis 2001). We label this

broad conflict faced by small firms over standards‐related IP the platform paradox; open

standards create favorable conditions for innovation by technology entrepreneurs while

simultaneously providing them incentives for opportunistic behavior that can

undermine a platform’s openness.



                                                                                         2
This paper examines the intellectual property strategy of SSO participants and finds

evidence of a platform paradox; specifically, large firms pursue a more liberal licensing

policy than small ones following the creation of standard. Our evidence is based on

patent litigation, which indicates that a patent‐holder tried to assert its IP and that

licensing negotiations were unsuccessful. To link individual patents to the formal

standards process, we created a unique data set of 949 U.S. patents listed in the

intellectual property disclosure archives of thirteen influential SSOs.



We find that SSO patents have a very high litigation rate (roughly six times that of a

random sample from the same vintage and technology class), and that patents assigned

to small firms are more likely to be litigated. However, we interpret these results as

selection effects: firms disclose their most important patents, and a large firm’s marginal

disclosure is less important simply because they have a larger IP portfolio.



Our evidence for the platform paradox is based on changes in the litigation rate

following disclosure. Specifically, we estimate difference‐in‐differences models that use

patent‐level fixed‐effects to control for any time‐invariant unobserved heterogeneity,

such as differences in disclosure strategy. We find that litigation rates increase following

the creation of a standard for patents assigned to small firms, but remain unchanged (or

even decline) for patents assigned to large public firms. We find no comparable change

in the relative citation rate of the small‐ and large‐firm patents following disclosure,

which suggests that our main results are driven by changes in licensing or litigation

strategy, rather than unobserved shifts in demand (or infringement) that favor small‐

firm patents after the new standard is created.



The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the standard setting

process – particularly the importance of IP disclosure and “reasonable and non‐

discriminatory” (RAND) licensing rules – and develops a simple model of patent

litigation. Section 3 describes our empirical methods. Section 4 discusses the

                                                                                          3
construction of our data set and presents a number of summary statistics. Section 5

presents our main results – including the difference‐in‐differences models that show a

significant divergence in the litigation rate for large and small firm patents after

disclosure – along with several robustness checks. Section 6 concludes.


2. Formal Standards and Intellectual Property Strategy

Standards are an important part of the competitive landscape in information technology

markets. This section describes several ways that formal standards are used, explains

why firms are willing to contribute IP to these standards, and develops a simple model

of patent litigation to motivate our empirical work.


2.1 The Role of Compatibility Standards
At a basic level, standards exist to promote inter‐operability. For example, consumers

expect any DVD player to work with a wide variety of television sets and to play DVDs

released by any studio. Matutes and Regibeau (1988) were among the first to analyze the

positive externalities associated with this type of “mix and match” compatibility, which

is central to the basic idea of a platform.



Standards can also help firms or consumers make a coordinated transition between

successive technology generations. In theory, markets with strong network effects might

converge on inferior solutions or take “too long” to make a Pareto‐improving switch

(Arthur, 1989; Farrell and Saloner 1985). In practice, SSOs work to solve these problems

by seeking the best available technology, and issuing a formal endorsement that serves

as a focal point for consumers, perhaps leading to bandwagons in the adoption process.

For example, Greenstein and Rysman (2007) describe how the ITU helped break a

standards deadlock that slowed the adoption of 56K modems. Similarly, affixing the

“Wi‐Fi” label to the IEEE’s 802.11g standard helped reassure end‐users that new

products would be compatible with the installed base of 802.11b equipment.




                                                                                      4
Standards are also used to lower the cost of innovation. By specifying a set of

boundaries or “modules,” standards reduce opportunities for differentiation in some

dimensions of product design and promote experimentation in others (Baldwin and

Clark 2000). For example, widespread adoption of the Internet’s core transport protocols

(TCP/IP) led to a proliferation of new technologies at the underlying physical or delivery

layer.1 Similarly, when IBM opened up the personal computer architecture, there was a

great deal of entry and experimentation in the design of both PCs and peripheral devices

(Bresnahan and Greenstein 1999). This experimentation corresponds to the first half of

the platform paradox: by facilitating component‐level innovation, standards promote

entrepreneurship and an increased division of innovative labor.



However, standards can also be used to create or reinforce a position of market power.

One such anti‐competitive strategy is to delay or withhold important technical

information from competitors. Mackie‐Mason and Netz (2007) suggest that this strategy

was used by members of the consortium that developed the USB 2.0 standard. Firms can

also create market power by inserting patents into an industry standard. The most vivid

example of this strategy comes from the Rambus case (Farrell et al 2004; Graham 2004).



Rambus participated in an SSO called JEDEC that was developing an open standard for

memory chips. The evidence suggests that Rambus used information gained through its

participation to ensure that its patents would cover the standard, but withdrew from

JEDEC when the work was nearly complete (possibly to avoid any disclosure

obligations). When Rambus sought to license its IP to firms using the JEDEC standard,

there was a wave of public and private anti‐trust litigation. Much of the litigation

focused on Rambus’ obligation to disclose its patent applications to JEDEC and

subsequently license them on “reasonable and non‐discriminatory” terms. Eventually, a




1These physical‐layer protocols include ATM, DSL, Frame‐relay, PPP, and several wireless
standards.

                                                                                           5
unanimous ruling by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission found that Rambus violated

JEDEC’s membership rules, and placed royalty caps on the relevant patents.


2.2 Standards and Proprietary Technology
While Rambus’ “submarine” strategy and the resulting litigation attracted a great deal

of attention, it is important to note that JEDEC and most other SSOs do not prohibit IP in

standards or the licensing of essential patents. Rather, these groups encourage ex ante

disclosure of relevant IP, so members can evaluate the potential trade‐off between

technical quality and implementation cost. Most SSOs also seek a promise to license on

“reasonable and non‐discriminatory” (RAND) terms, which promotes widespread

adoption of the final specification.2



In practice, the meaning of RAND and its European equivalent FRAND (“Fair”

reasonable and non‐discriminatory) is unclear. Lemley (2002) suggests that RAND

represents a commitment to refrain from exclusive licensing and the use of injunctions

during patent litigation. However, the question of “reasonable” pricing is murkier, and

in some cases the courts are becoming involved.3 One solution to this problem might be

to encourage IP owners to commit to specific royalty rates before choosing standard.

However, most SSOs prohibit any prospective discussion of licensing terms – generally

citing fears of antitrust litigation.4 Thus, while bilateral negotiations may take place on

the side, the formal standards process does not typically produce common knowledge

about expected IP prices. In fact, a standard RAND commitment seems to leave SSO

participants with considerable flexibility to pursue an aggressive licensing strategy.




2
  For a detailed discussion of how these IP rules fit into the broader process of standards creation
see, for example, Cargill (1997), Lemley (2002), or Farrell and Simcoe (2007).
3Nokia Inc. vs. Qualcomm Inc. Civ. A. No. 2330‐N (Delaware).

4 This is changing. Some SSOs, such as the IEEE, now allow for ex ante disclosure of royalty caps

as part of the IP disclosure process. Some of the SSOsʹ antitrust concerns were also addressed by
the Standards Development Organization Advancement Act of 2004 (H.R. 1086), and recent
statement from various antitrust agencies: see e.g. Majoras (2005) or the discussion in the FTCʹs
unanimous Rambus opinion (FTC 2006, page 36).

                                                                                                   6
Nevertheless, disclosure and the inability to grant exclusive licenses are a real cost for

any firm that owns IP essential to the standard. What causes these firms to join an SSO?

We suggest there are two types of private incentive: some firms join an SSO to promote

their own technology, while others join to promote the creation of a standard based on

anyone’s technology. That is, firms can either “compete on standards” or “compete on

implementation.” For small firms, the incentive to compete on the former formula is, we

contend, stronger: lacking the complementary assets necessary to compete downstream

on implementation, small firms will seek profits upstream, around the standard itself.



Firms that compete on standards (within SSOs) can profit in a number of ways if their

proprietary technology becomes a de facto standard. The most obvious is licensing,

which can be extremely lucrative, even under a RAND policy. For example,

Qualcomm’s portfolio of CDMA cellular telephony patents generates several billion

dollars of licensing revenue annually. There is also a “defensive” version of this strategy,

where firms try to prevent an IP‐rich company from controlling the standard, or

contribute their own IP to ensure access to a less costly cross‐licensing arrangement.



Firms may also compete on standards even if they do not expect to make money on

licensing. In some cases, companies will give away the IP – usually via a royalty‐free

license or non‐assertion covenant – in order to have a proprietary technology endorsed

by the SSO. These firms typically hope to benefit from product development lead times,

backwards compatibility, or the existence of proprietary complements. For example,

Henderson (2003) describes how Ember hoped to create an advantage for its proprietary

wireless networking systems by contributing to the IEEE 802.15.4 standards process and

the ZigBee alliance.



While “competing on standards” clearly creates an incentive to participate in formal

standards development, some firms (often those with interests in “implementation”) join

SSOs even if they do not have a specific technology to promote. Such firms naturally

                                                                                          7
place more emphasis on the emergence of a high‐quality standard. Often, they are large

customers, systems vendors or “platform leaders” with a strong position in

complementary markets. For example, Thomson (1954) describes the role of the major

auto manufacturers in the standardization of a wide variety of parts and sub‐assemblies.

Similarly, Intel participates in a broad array of standards activities that could lead to

new applications for its micro‐processors, and IBM’s increasingly co‐operative patent

licensing strategy reflects a broad move into computing services.



Though we refer to this strategy as competing on implementation, it is analogous to the

principle of “internalizing complementary efficiencies” (or ICE) described by Farrell and

Weiser (2003). They discuss a monopoly platform provider’s incentive to promote the

efficient organization of vertically‐related complements markets (calling it a variation of

older Chicago‐style “one monopoly rent” arguments). In our setting, standards based on

cheap and widely‐accessible technology will be attractive to large systems vendors

because such openness mitigates the “patent thickets” problem (i.e., complementary

upstream monopolies) and promotes investment by reducing the threat of hold‐up

(Shapiro 2001; Farrell, Hayes et al 2007).5



We expect that the distinction between competing on standards and competing on

implementation generates variation in firms’ IP strategies. Longitudinal variation will be

driven by the creation of new standards and technology life‐cycles. Cross‐sectional

variation will be driven by differences in size – especially where it is related to

manufacturing, marketing or distribution capabilities, or a presence in complementary

markets that make it more attractive for large firms to compete on implementation. A

natural place to look for evidence of these broad differences in intellectual property

strategy would be data on patent licensing. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to collect

5
 Farrell and Simcoe (2007) also suggest that “vendor neutral” participants can also improve the
efficiency of the formal standards process. Gawer and Henderson (2007) offer an interesting
discussion of how Intel may commit not to compete too hard in complementary product markets
– a problem that is analogous to pursuing a liberal licensing policy.

                                                                                              8
licensing data, as most firms hold these agreements in strict confidentiality (often

because of legal restrictions). As a result, we use data on patent litigation.


2.3 Patent litigation: a simple model
There are two necessary conditions for a patent lawsuit to be filed. First, the patent‐

holder must try to assert its IP, and second, the bargaining process must fail. There is

often some confusion on the first point, since some patent suits are filed by the accused

infringer and focus on the issue of patent validity. However, until the Medimmune case

in 2007, the law was clear that a non‐patentee could not initiate an invalidity suit unless

it faced ʺan explicit threat or other action by the patentee [suggesting an imminent]

infringement suit.ʺ6 Therefore, no suit in our data could arise unless the patentee was

actively enforcing the patent. The second point raises a question that has received a

great deal of scholarly attention: why couldn’t the two parties bargain to a more efficient

outcome?7 This sub‐section addresses that question using a simple model based on the

discussion in Lanjouw and Lerner (1998).



Consider a two‐period bargaining game played between a patent‐holder i and potential

infringer j. If the players reach an agreement in the first period, the game ends,

otherwise the dispute goes to court. If the patent‐holder wins in court, the infringer will

be forced to pay damages of $D, with no payment in the event of a loss. The total

expected cost of litigation is $C and that the plaintiff and defendant place the probability

of winning a trial at bi and bj respectively. We assume that first‐period bargaining is

costless, and that an agreement will be reached as long as the first‐period surplus

exceeds the players’ joint payoff from going to court. Given these (very stylized)

assumptions, the two parties will enter litigation if and only if



6
  Sierra Applied Scis., Inc. v. Advanced Energy Indus., Inc., 363 F.3d 1361, 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (quoting
BP Chems. Ltd. v. Union Carbide Corp., 4 F.3d 975, 978 (Fed. Cir. 1993)). Overturned by MedImmune,
Inc. v. Genentech, Inc.,127 S. Ct. 764 (2007).
7
  The American Intellectual Property Law Association (2007) provides some estimates of the
direct costs of patent litigation. They suggest that suits between $1‐25 million in patent value cost
litigants on average a total of $2.5 million through discovery, and $5 million through trial.

                                                                                                          9
                                    D(bi + bj – 1) > C                                  (1)

The logic is straightforward. Litigation is only observed when the total expected value

of going to trial, Dbi – D(1‐bj), exceeds the total cost, because otherwise there must be

some side‐payment less than C that will make both players better off. This model is a

simplified version of the well‐know divergent expectations hypothesis; litigation occurs

only if bi+bj > 1, which implies that one or more players over‐estimates its chance of

winning.



A variety of incomplete information models relax the assumption of inconsistent

posterior beliefs, and generate litigation based on inconsistent priors (e.g. Nalebuff 1987;

Spier 1992). These models typically place more structure on the bargaining process, and

allow the players’ to reveal private information about D or C as part of the litigation (e.g.

during discovery). However, compared to other types of litigation, the parties in a

patent suits are sophisticated, and have detailed knowledge of the relevant technology.

Thus, we focus on an alternative story – based on the idea that litigation is not

necessarily a zero‐sum game.



Suppose the plaintiff’s expected value of going to court in our model is actually αD

(where α could be greater or less than one). In patent litigation, the potential loss of a

monopoly will frequently lead to α greater than one. Going to trial might also help a

patent‐holder establish a reputation for “tough” bargaining, or to win a validity ruling

that would increase the value of their IP. On the other hand, litigation can generate

negative externalities – particularly for large systems vendors – by destroying goodwill,

inducing wasteful efforts to invent around a patent, and perhaps reducing the long‐run

levels of entry and innovation in complementary markets. There may also be

asymmetries in the expected cost of litigation. For example, practitioners often suggest

that asset‐intensive firms are hesitant to litigate because they fear that counter‐suits

could lead to costly injunctions.



                                                                                          10
Whatever the cause, if litigation creates positive externalities (α>1) for a plaintiff, the

negotiation surplus shrinks and the likelihood of settlement becomes smaller.8 In

particular, our simple model predicts litigation whenever


                                     D(αbi + bj – 1) > C                                         (2)

How, then, do standards influence the propensity to litigate? In general, there are two

possible channels: demand and litigation incentives. Suppose that Xikt is a vector of

observable characteristics for patent k (owned by firm i) at time t, including an indicator

variable sikt which equals 1 if the patent is essential to implement an industry standard.

We model demand as the total number of potential infringers N(X,s). Litigation

incentives are the probability that Equation (2) is satisfied. To simplify matters, we make

the (standard) assumption that D is proportional to C, and let bj be an independently

distributed random variable, so the average litigation propensity can be written as

P(X,s).9 Thus, when N is large and P small, the total amount of litigation for patent k can

be approximated by a Poisson distribution with mean:


                                   E[Suitsikt|X,s] = P(X,s)N(X,s)                                (3)

Equation (3) provides the basis for our empirical tests, which measure the impact of

disclosure on litigation, and perhaps more importantly, examine whether this effect is

larger for specialized entrepreneurs who “compete on standards” than for large systems

vendors that “compete on implementation.” The central empirical challenge will be to

control for unobservables that correlate with both disclosure and litigation, and

distinguishing between the demand effects (changes in N) and incentive effects (changes

in P) created by standardization. Our basic strategy is to estimate difference‐in‐




8 Farell and Shapiro (2007) point out countervailing externalities that may encourage a defendant
to settle. In particular, fighting to invalidate the plaintiff’s IP is akin to providing a public good
and we naturally expect some free‐riding.
9
  For example, if bj has a Gumbel distribution P(X,s) will be logistic with mean exp{C/D+1-bi} / (1+
exp{C/D+1-bi}). Of course, this formulation abstracts from a number of potentially interesting
complexities, such as the endogeneous ordering of potential targets for litigation.

                                                                                                       11
difference models that contain patent‐level fixed effects and exploit the time‐series

variation associated with standards creation.


3. Methods

An ideal approach to measuring the impact of formal standards on litigation would be

to identify a significant coordination problem, along with a feasible set of substitute

technologies, and randomly assign one technology to be the standard. Given a large

number of these random trials, we might compare the subsequent litigation rates for

large and small IP‐holders. Unfortunately, we have neither a controlled experiment nor

an instrumental variable that will exogenously cause SSOs to favor a particular

technology as the standard. So, we turn to non‐experimental methods that exploit

variation over time caused by the standards process itself.



We begin by specifying the probability of litigation P(X,s) = exp{β1Xikt + θsikt} and demand

for the intellectual property N(X,s) =exp{β2Xikt + ηsikt}.10 Equation (3) then suggests the

following linear model:


                                Log(Suitsikt) = Xikt (β1+β2) + sikt (θ+η) + εikt                 (4)

This equation highlights the two main issues we confront below. First, in a cross‐

sectional regression, sikt is very likely to be correlated with unobserved variables that

enter a firm’s litigation decision through εikt. And second, the data do not separately

identify standards’ impact on litigation incentives θ from their impact on demand η.



We address the first issue by restricting attention to SSO patents and examining changes

in litigation rates. In particular, we add patent fixed effects to equation (4) to capture any

time‐invariant unobserved heterogeneity.11 In these models, our estimate of the


10
   The exponential is a convenient functional form for P(X,s) and provides a reasonable approximation to
the logistic for small litigation probabilities.
11
   In practice, we estimate Poisson quasi‐maximum likelihood models with conditional fixed‐
effects, so only litigated patents actually enter the estimation sample.

                                                                                                       12
standards effect (θ+η) will be identified by comparing changes in the litigation rate of

disclosed patents to changes in the litigation rate of undisclosed patents that will

eventually be revealed to an SSO. If the timing of the formal standards process were

exogenous, we could interpret these estimates as the causal impact of standardization on

the litigation rate of disclosed patents (i.e., the impact of the treatment on the treated).

However, the creation of new standards is likely correlated with time‐varying shocks in

the importance of particular technologies. Thus, our interest will center on a different

question: do large and small firms respond to these standards‐related technological

shocks differently?



To answer this question, we create an indicator variable Ei that equals one for small

firms (entrepreneurs) and interact it with the time‐varying standardization dummy sikt.

This leads to the following specification, where γk are patent fixed‐effects, λt a set of

time‐period effects, α captures the small‐firm incentive effect, δ reflects the small‐firm

demand effect, and εikt is a patent‐specific time‐varying error component that is

uncorrelated with the explanatory variables:


                Suitsikt = γk + λt + Xikt (β1+β2) + sikt (θ + η + Ei(α + δ)) + εikt    (5)

By including patent fixed‐effects, we control for time‐invariant factors that might lead to

differences in the litigation rate across firms (e.g. systematic differences in patent quality

driven by disclosure strategies). By focusing on the interaction effect (α + δ) we turn our

attention from identifying a causal standards effect to a test of our informal platform

paradox hypothesis.



While we might like to include a set of patent‐age effects in equation (5), these are not

separately identified in a linear model with a full set of time‐dummies and patent fixed‐

effects, since age equals calendar‐year minus grant‐year (which will be absorbed in the

patent fixed‐effects). However, it is possible to examine correlations between a patent’s

age and the difference between large‐ and small‐firm litigation rates. We are particularly

                                                                                             13
interested in showing that there is no secular trend in this difference prior to disclosure,

which would raise questions about the exogeneity of disclosure‐timing. We test for a

difference in pre‐disclosure litigation trends by interacting a time‐trend with a pre‐

disclosure dummy and the small‐firm indicator Ei.



Finally, equation (5) shows that our identification strategy can only identify the joint

impact of changes in litigation incentives (α) and demand (δ) for standards‐related IP.

Without more data, it is not possible to dis‐entangle these effects. So, the last step in our

analysis uses patent‐citation data as a proxy for demand to test the hypothesis that δ > 0.

Specifically, we estimate (5) using citations as the dependent variable and test whether

the interaction between disclosure and the small‐firm indicator variable is positive. If we

reject the null‐hypothesis that δ > 0, any heterogeneity in the demand effects of

standardization will create a downward bias for our estimates of the difference between

large and small‐firm litigation incentives. In other words, (α + δ) would be a lower

bound on the size of the platform paradox.


4. Data

Our data were collected from publicly available SSO IP disclosure archives, the NBER

US patent database (Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2001), the Derwent LIT/ALERT patent

litigation database, the U.S. Federal Judicial Center, CompuStat and Venture Economics.

This section discusses our main data sources and presents a series of firm and patent‐

level summary statistics.


3.1 Standard Setting Organizations and IP Disclosures
We began by identifying fourteen SSOs (listed in Table 1) with publicly‐accessible IP

disclosure archives. The scale and scope of these institutions varies substantially, with

two large umbrella organizations, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)

and the International Organization for Standards (ISO), at one end of the spectrum and

several small consortia such as the DSL Forum, ATM Forum and Multi‐Service

Switching Forum (MSSF) at the other.

                                                                                          14
Collectively, these fourteen SSOs have developed a large number of commercially

significant standards. Prominent examples include Ethernet (IEEE), the 802.11 or Wi‐Fi

protocols for wireless networking (IEEE), core Internet protocols such as TCP/IP (IETF),

cellular telephony protocols such as CDMA and TDMA (ATIS and ETSI) and various

modem protocols (ITU and DSL Forum). While several of the larger SSOs (e.g., ISO and

ANSI) develop safety and quality standards, nearly all of the patent disclosures are

related to compatibility standards used for information and communications

technologies.12


For each SSO, we collected all disclosures made through July 2006. A disclosure is

typically a letter or e‐mail message indicating that a firm owns relevant IP that it is

willing to license on RAND terms. While each disclosure contains a firm name and date,

not every disclosure lists a specific piece of intellectual property. In particular, there are

a number of “blanket” disclosures that do not mention any specific patent or application

numbers. (Figure A.1 in the Appendix reproduces two letters from our sample to

provide a sense of the heterogeneity in disclosure practices.)



We pause here to offer several caveats about the disclosure data. First, we do not

observe whether a given standardization effort was successful or a particular piece of IP

was actually essential to the final specification. Thus, our sample of disclosed patents is

likely to contain a number of false positives (i.e. disclosures where the standard failed or

the SSO chose an alternative technology). We expect these patents to bias estimates of

the standards effect downwards. This issue could present a problem for our analysis if

large firms’ non‐essential IP was more likely be litigated before disclosure. However, if




12Table A.1 in the Appendix contains a short description of the fourteen SSOs in our study. Table
A.2 in the Appendix shows that ninety‐nine percent of U.S. patents in our data have a primary (3‐
digit) technology classification of Computing, Communications, Electrical or Electronic
technology.

                                                                                              15
this effect were large, we would expect it to become evident in our tests for a difference

in the pre‐disclosure litigation trends.



Second, disclosure is clearly not exogenous. We expect disclosed patents to be among

the most important in a firm’s IP portfolio, and disclosures to be concentrated in the

most important and commercially relevant standards efforts. Thus, when we compare

SSO patents to various “control” samples below, the controls are meant to provide a

measure of the average patent, rather than a true counter‐factual. And finally, since our

results are based on patents that were specifically identified in a disclosure letter, they

are not likely to reveal anything about the prevalence of “hold‐up” strategies – where a

patent‐holder pushes for a particular standard while keeping its IP secret, as in the

Rambus case.



Figure 1 shows the increase in IP disclosure over time and Table 1 presents a number of

summary statistics for our sample of disclosures. The first two columns in Table 1

indicate that we reviewed 2,558 disclosure letters, of which 969 were blanket disclosures.

There is substantial variation across SSOs in the number of IP documents listed per

disclosure. For instance, the average ETSI disclosure listed 42 separate patents or

application numbers (many from international jurisdictions), while the average TIA

disclosure listed 0.2 pieces of IP. Our review identified 2,049 U.S. patents and 224

application numbers that matched to a U.S. patent.



The evidence in Table 1 suggests that disclosure norms at ETSI are quite different from

the rest of the sample. In particular, many firms appear to have “dumped” their patent

portfolios into the standards process. For this reason, we exclude ETSI from the

remainder of our analysis. However, we have run all of the regressions with ETSI

included in the sample and find qualitatively similar results.13



13
     These results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                                                        16
3.2 SSO Patents
We matched all of the U.S. patents in our sample of disclosure letters to the Derwent

LIT/Alert database as well as an augmented version of the NBER U.S. patent database.14

The Derwent litigation data are based on court records provided to the USPTO, and

their strengths and weaknesses are discussed in Lanjouw and Schankerman (2003).

Table 2 compares a series of sample means for the SSO patents to several sets of matched

controls.



The left‐most panel in Table 2 compares all SSO patents (excluding ETSI) to a randomly

selected control sample that matches on grant year, three‐digit technology classification,

and assignee country.15 The first eight rows examine litigation patterns. SSO patents

have a substantially higher litigation rate than an average patent (9.4 versus 1.7 percent)

and this difference increases with a patent’s age (e.g. the difference is 14.2 versus 2.0

percent for patents granted before 1994). This age effect may reflect truncation, since

older patents are exposed to the risk of litigation for a longer period of time, or a

selection effect, since past litigation may increase the probability of disclosure to an SSO.

Conditional on litigation, there is little difference in the number of lawsuits or named

defendants per patent. However, the SSO patents are roughly 2.5 years older than the

controls when first litigated. Finally, we find that 28 percent of the SSO patents are

involved in litigation before they are disclosed to an SSO. Since lawsuits tend to attract a

great deal of attention, this last fact may suggest that some disclosures are less about

revealing the existence of essential IP than signalling the strength of a firm’s patent

portfolio.



The next six rows in Table 2 examine a number of patent quality measures that have

appeared in the empirical literature. These measures are forward‐citations (i.e. cites

received), backwards citations, citations to non‐patent prior art, the number of claims,


14
   Since many of the data elements are available in the NBER database are available only through 1999,
and none after 2002, we found it necessary to update the data.
15
   Our assignee countries are really continents – i.e. either the US or the rest of the world.

                                                                                                         17
and the “generality” index of Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson (1993), which indicates

that a patent is cited by a more diverse array of future inventors. Not surprisingly, we

find that SSO patents score substantially higher than an average patent along almost all

of these quality dimensions.



The last five rows in Table 2 compare the SSO and matched control patents in terms of

assignee characteristics. While it is not surprising that the SSO and control samples are

indistinguishable (this was the point of the matching exercise), it is worth noting that 11

percent of the SSO patents are assigned to individual inventors, universities,

governments or other non‐corporate entities.



The central panel in Table 2 (columns 4 through 6) pairs each SSO patent with a matched

control patent having the same grant year, technology category16 and assignee. This

panel contains a smaller number of patents, since we could not obtain matched controls

for unassigned patents and some of the smaller firms. Overall, the results confirm our

intuition that the disclosure process selects for important patents. Once again, the SSO

patents are more likely to be litigated – especially as they get older – and score higher on

all of the quality measures (except for non‐patent prior art cites).



Finally, the right‐most panel in Table 2 (columns 7 through 9) compares the SSO patents

to a set of matched controls with the same grant‐year, technology category, assignee‐

country and cumulative citation count.17 Our goal in this matching exercise was to

determine whether forward cites – perhaps the most widely used measure of patent

quality – would capture a substantial amount of the variation in litigation rates. They do


16
   In order to generate more matches, we expanded the technology classifications to the NBER
sub‐category level.
17 Since it was difficult to draw an exact match when cumulative citations are large, we simply

drew the control patent that matched on all other characteristics and had the next highest citation
count (after the focal SSO patent). We had to drop 9 patents from the SSO sample in the matching
process because they were the most highly cited patent in a particular grant‐year technology‐
class cell, so that no comparable control patent could be identified.

                                                                                                18
not. While the litigation rates in this control sample are slightly higher, they do not

approach those of the SSO patents – in spite of the fact that the controls score slightly

higher on all of the citation‐based quality measures by construction. Once again, these

results highlight the idea that disclosure is correlated with unobserved patent

characteristics that influence the litigation process. For this reason, we discard any

pretence of constructing a matched control sample and focus on the SSO patents in our

main analyses.


3.3 Entrepreneurs and Systems Vendors
Identifying individual firms represents a major challenge in any research that relies on

patent data. We use the assignee codes contained in the NBER patent data as our

starting point.18 Unfortunately, many patents are assigned to subsidiaries or related

entities, and ownership can change over time. As a result, we undertook an extensive

effort to identify the parent firm for every assignee in our data, using a variety of

corporate directories as well as the Internet. Through these efforts, we identified 190

unique parent‐firms that disclosed one or more SSO patents.



For 126 parent‐firms that were traded on a public stock‐exchange at some point in time,

we also obtained CUSIP numbers, and (whenever possible) CompuStat data on

Employees, Assets, and R&D expenditures.19 While we would like to track changes in

patent ownership over time, this did not prove feasible. Thus, a potential weakness of

our analysis is that each patent retains its affiliation with the original assignee. We did

experiment with measures that might capture significant changes in ownership (e.g.

dummy variables for entering or leaving the CompuStat database) and found that it

produced no changes in our results.




18 These data have been updated and can be found on Bronwyn Hall’s web site. We also used the
Compustat name matching programs created by Bronwyn Hall and Megan MacGarvie as the
starting point for our own name matching algorithms.
19
   Wherever possible, these data are for the application year of a given patent, though we settled
for the closest available year in several cases.

                                                                                                19
Since our empirical tests focus on the difference between large and small firms – where

size serves as a crude proxy for vertical specialization – we constructed a binary size

measure that plays a central role in the analysis. Specifically, we define as “small”

vertically specialized entrepreneurs a set of 72 firms that were either privately‐held or

were public but had fewer than 500 employees (averaged over all available years). The

remaining 118 public firms we defined as “large” systems vendors. While the cutoff at

500 employees is arbitrary, our results do not change if we choose a random threshold

anywhere between 50 and 3,000 employees. The main point is to separate the small

publicly traded firms with a relatively small number of employees from the large

enterprises with several thousand.



Table 3 compares sample means (at both the firm and patent level) for the large and

small firms in our data set. The first two rows in this table show that small firms disclose

patents to fewer SSOs and have a smaller cumulative patent portfolio. By comparing

sample‐sizes in the top and bottom‐half of the table, we can also see that small

companies disclose fewer US patents per firm. The third and fourth rows in the top

panel of Table 3 report our use of a Herfindahl measure of patent technology classes to

show that small‐firm patent portfolios are more concentrated.20 The final rows in the top

panel show that large systems vendors are older, have more employees (compared to

publicly‐traded small firms), and are less likely to have received venture capital funding

(i.e. appear in the Venture Economics data).



The bottom panel of Table 3 presents patent‐level summary statistics. The first row

shows that patents disclosed by small firms have a significantly higher litigation rate –

particularly those granted before 1998. We find little difference in the numbers of

lawsuits or named defendants per litigated patent. And while the large‐firm patents are

five percent more likely to be litigated before disclosure, this difference is not


20
  This measure is based on 10 years of patent data and was constructed using the 3 digit U.S.
patent classification scheme.

                                                                                                20
statistically significant. While small‐ and large‐firm patents receive a similar number of

forward cites, the small firm patents have later grant years, and so are cited slightly

more often per year. Finally, the small firms are more likely to use the continuation

procedure – potentially a method for “hiding” a patent inside the USPTO – when

acquiring a disclosed patent (Graham and Mowery, 2004). Overall, the comparisons in

Table 3 suggest that the entrepreneurs in our data set are in fact smaller and more

vertically specialized than the large systems vendors.21

5. Results

This section begins with a set of descriptive probit regressions before turning to our

main difference‐in‐differences analysis. After presenting the difference‐in‐differences

results, we perform a series of robustness checks, including the patent/citation analysis

described above.


5.1 Descriptive Probits
We begin by estimating a series of probit regressions in order to characterize the cross‐

sectional litigation patterns in our sample. These results are primarily descriptive, since

firm‐ and patent‐level (unobserved) heterogeneity presumably play an important role in

the litigation process. In Table 4 we report marginal effects from these probit models,

along with robust standards clustered by disclosure, and a baseline litigation rate

calculated at the means of the independent variables. (For a complete set of variable

definitions and summary statistics, see Table A.4 in the appendix.)



The first column in Table 4 emphasizes variation in the size of the “selection effect” (i.e.,

the difference between SSO and matched control patents) across SSOs. For this model,

the estimation sample includes all patents in the first panel of Table 2, and we create five

SSO categories; one each of the four largest organizations (ANSI, IEEE, IETF, ITU) and a

21
  Table A.3 in the appendix lists the top‐ten entrepreneurs and systems vendors based on a count
of disclosed patents. Several of the entrepreneurs clearly fit into the vertically specialized
category. For example, Interdigital earns all of its revenue from licensing, and Verisity Design is a
“fabless” semiconductor company. The second half of table A.3 lists the most common plaintiffs
and defendants in our litigation data.

                                                                                                  21
composite group (“Other”) that includes the remainder. The specification includes an

unreported set of “main effects” to capture between‐SSO variation in the control patent

litigation rates (e.g. from differences in technology), a full set of interactions to measure

the SSO‐specific selection effects, and a full set of assignee‐type effects.



The results in the first column of Table 4 show that small‐firm patents are substantially

more likely to be litigated (an increase from 3.4 to 9.2 percent). Not surprisingly, all of

the SSO effects are substantial, though not all statistically significant. ANSI has the

largest selection effect – almost 30 percentage points – and the body with the smallest

SSO effect (ITU) still increases the baseline litigation rate by 200 percent (a Wald test

does not reject the hypotheses that all of the SSO effects are equal). While we do not

report those assignee‐type effects that are not statistically significant, it is worth noting

that SSO patents assigned to individual inventors and universities are litigated

somewhat more often than those assigned to firms.



In the second column of Table 4, we drop the matched control patents from our

estimation sample (noting that the baseline litigation rate nearly doubles) and add a

series of patent level control variables. Once again, the marginal effect for a small‐firm

dummy is large and statistically significant. We find no correlation between the

litigation rate and a patent’s age at disclosure or disclosure year, though it is possible

that secular trends in the overall litigation rate are picked up by the grant‐year effects.

We do find a significant positive correlation between litigation and forward citations.

Litigation is also correlated with the continuation procedure (one interpretation of this

result is that lawsuits select for patents with an early priority date). Finally, the SSO

coefficients at the bottom of column 2 show that while ASNI patents have the highest

litigation rate, none of the between‐SSO differences are statistically significant.



In the third and fourth column of Table 4, we divide the sample into small‐ and large‐

firm patents and re‐estimate the model of column 2. This exercise reveals several

                                                                                          22
interesting observations. First, the correlation between litigation and use of the

continuation procedure is primarily driven by large‐firm patents. This result is not

surprising in light of Table 3, which shows that the continuation rate for small‐firm

patents is almost 80 percent. For small‐firm patents, there is a strong negative correlation

between non‐patent prior art citations and litigation. Finally, it is interesting to compare

the SSO effects across columns 3 and 4 (noting that ANSI is the omitted category and the

baseline litigation rates are similar). While large firm patents are more likely to be

litigated at the ITU, there is a substantial (though imprecise) increase in litigation among

small‐firm disclosures in the “Other” group.



The last column in Table 5 adds firm‐size and financial variables for a sub‐sample of 626

patents that could be matched to CompuStat.22 These patents are concentrated among

the large firms by construction, since CompuStat contains only publicly‐listed firms.

Once again, the results suggest a negative correlation between firm size and litigation. In

particular, the coefficient on the log of assets per employee is negative and significant,

while patenting intensity (patents per R&D dollar) produces the opposite sign.

Moreover, when these measures are excluded, the coefficient on the log of employees

becomes more negative and statistically significant. Interestingly, there is a weak

positive correlation between litigation and disclosure year in this specification,

suggesting that the largest firms are becoming somewhat more litigious over their IP in

standards over time.


5.2 Difference‐in‐differences models of patent litigation
Overall, the descriptive probit regressions suggest that small‐firm SSO patents are more

likely to be litigated. Of course, this could easily reflect differences in disclosure strategy.

In particular, since large firms own and disclose more patents, the marginal disclosed

patent may be less important, and therefore less likely to be litigated. This effect may be

further exacerbated by a tendency in small firms, with relatively fewer resources, to


22
     Wherever possible, these data are taken from the patent’s grant-year.

                                                                                             23
focus their patenting activity only on those technologies that are necessary to the firm’s

business model. In this sub‐section we address these selection problems using patent

fixed‐effects.



Figures 2.a and 2.b provide a graphical intuition for our identification strategy and the

main results. These figures compare the litigation rate (i.e. lawsuits per patent) for

patents assigned to small and large firms over a 20 year window, centered on the year of

disclosure (Figure 2.a shows the litigation rate for all patents; only litigated patents enter

the denominator in Figure 2.b). In both graphs, there is a sharp increase in the litigation

rate for small‐firm patents in the disclosure‐year, followed by a substantial increase over

the next five or six years. In contrast, the large‐firm litigation propensity seems to

increase slightly before disclosure, remains unchanged in the period immediately

surrounding the disclosure year, and then tails off again. The result is a large increase in

the relative litigation rate of small‐firm patents in the period immediately following

disclosure. This graphical display represents our main evidence of the platform paradox.


In Table 5, we present a series of regression results that capture the basic pattern seen in

Figure 2 while controlling for calendar effects and other sources of potentially

confounding variation. Our basic specification is a Poisson quasi‐maximum likelihood

model with conditional fixed effects (Wooldridge 1999). Like the more common

negative‐binomial fixed‐effects model, the coefficients have an elasticity interpretation.

However, this estimator is preferable because it is consistent under a weaker set of

assumptions, robust to arbitrary forms of hetero‐skedasticity and does not suffer from

the fixed‐effects serial correlation issues highlighted by Betrand, Duflo and

Mullainathan (2004). Because the conditional fixed‐effects specification discards all

unlitigated patents, the sample sizes in Table 5 are quite small.23 However, we obtain

similar results using OLS fixed‐effects models that retain all unlitigated patents.




23
     Figure A.2 plots the number of large‐ and small‐firm observations by age‐relative‐to‐disclosure.

                                                                                                  24
The first two columns in Table 5 tell the main story. For the 26 patents assigned to small‐

firms that were litigated, there is a substantial increase in litigation following disclosure.

For the 46 litigated patents assigned to large firms, there is a large but statistically

insignificant decline in the litigation rate following disclosure. Each of these models

includes a fourth‐order polynomial in time (i.e. calendar year minus 1995) to control for

secular trends in the litigation rate. While we would have preferred a complete set of

calendar‐year dummies, the presence of several years with no litigation makes this

approach infeasible.24



The third column in Table 5 pools the small‐ and large‐firm patents to estimate the

model specified in Equation (5), in which disclosure is interacted with a small‐firm

dummy variable. The coefficient on this interaction term is large but statistically

significant only at the 90% confidence interval. This result suggests that the calendar‐

year effects differ in the large and small‐firm sub‐samples (since the coefficient on this

interaction term in a fully‐interacted model would equal the sum of the disclosure

coefficients in the first two columns). Since the calendar‐year polynomial also captures

correlations between patent age and the litigation rate – which could easily differ for

large and small firms – we consider several models that provide some additional

flexibility in these age effects.



In the fourth column of Table 5, we test for a difference in the pre‐disclosure litigation

trend. Specifically, we interact a time‐trend (Age) with the small‐firm dummy and an

indicator for the pre‐disclosure period. The coefficient on this variable is small and not

statistically significant, indicating no difference in pre‐disclosure litigation trends

between the large and small firms. This result is reassuring evidence that any difference

in the post‐disclosure litigation rates is not driven by the standards process, rather than

by pre‐existing differences in the underlying trends.


24
  We experimented with various ways of aggregating calendar-year dummies and found that they produce
the same results.

                                                                                                  25
The next column in Table 5 includes a differential time‐trend in both the pre‐ and post‐

disclosure periods. While we continue to find no difference in the pre‐disclosure trends,

the post‐disclosure trend difference is both negative and statistically significant.

Moreover, there is a sharp increase in the disclosure effect. An explanation for this effect

can be seen in Figure 2. While there is a sharp increase in small‐firm litigation rates

during a five to six years period following disclosure, the relative increase in litigation

disappears by years seven and eight. This leveling may reflect technology life‐cycles,

reversion to the mean, firm‐level age processes or negative state‐dependence (e.g.,

litigation reveals information about patent‐quality that leads to more negotiated

settlements). Whatever the cause, the result is a “bump” in the relative litigation rate of

small‐firm patents immediately after disclosure. In our regressions, this bump in the

litigation rate is captured by a large positive coefficient on the interaction between the

“Small‐firm” and “Disclosure” dummy variables and a negative coefficient on the post‐

disclosure interaction between firm size and patent age.



The last column in Table 5 shows that it is also possible to generate the small‐firm

“bump” described above by including a set of interactions between the small‐firm

indicator variable and a quadratic in patent age. Once again, there is a large statistically

significant coefficient on the interaction term corresponding to the sum (α + δ) in

Equation (5).



In Table 6 we consider a variety of robustness checks. One potential concern with our

difference‐in‐differences analysis is that it is sensitive to outliers – particularly since the

dependent variable is a litigation count that equals zero for most patents in most years.

We address this question by estimating a series of fixed‐effects logit models, in which

the dependent variable is a dummy taking the value unity only if a new lawsuit was

filed (i.e., the maximum value in a given year is one). The results are presented in the

first four columns of Table 6. Interestingly, we find that the disclosure effect for large‐

                                                                                            26
firm patents is negative and statistically significant in this specification. However, the

overall findings upon which our main findings are based do not change meaningfully.



The fifth column in Table 6 uses a count of defendants (rather than lawsuits) as the

dependent variable. While this empirical approach may pick up differences in the

propensity to file multi‐party lawsuits, it does not produce a meaningful change in our

main results. Finally, the last column in Table 6 presents estimates from a negative

binomial regression.25 Not surprisingly, the point estimates are quite similar to the

Poisson coefficients.



To summarize, we consider a variety of different models and find a persistent increase

in the relative litigation rate of small‐firm patents following disclosure. We obtain the

same results in a variety of less conservative models (firm fixed‐effects and pooled cross‐

sectional regressions) that are not reported here. These consistent findings suggest that

entrepreneurs and systems vendors respond differently to the creation of a new

standard in which their IP is essential. In the next sub‐section we ask whether these

differences in intellectual property strategy are driven by variation in demand or by

divergent litigation incentives.


5.3 Citation models
The simple model developed in Section 2 suggests that our difference‐in‐difference

estimates will capture the joint impact of an increase in demand along with any change

in the incentive to litigate patents following the creation of a new standard. Thus, if

standardization has a larger impact on the demand for small‐firm IP, it would be

inappropriate to interpret the difference‐in‐differences results as evidence of a platform

paradox (i.e., a divergence in litigation incentives). In this sub‐section, we use patent‐

citations as a proxy for demand, and argue that our previous estimates actually provide

a lower bound on the true incentive effects.

25
  Because we could not cluster the standard errors on disclosures for this model, the standard errors may be
inappropriately small.

                                                                                                         27
There is a large literature that uses forward citations to measure a patent’s economic or

technological significance (e.g. Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2005; Harhoff et al 1999).

Thus, while cites are an admittedly crude proxy for demand, they should provide a

reasonable picture of changes in the perceived importance of a patent near its SSO‐

disclosure date. We estimate a series of citation models similar to those presented in

Rysman and Simcoe (2006).



The regressions focus on a 13 year window that includes the five years prior to

disclosure, along with the seven post‐disclosure years, and include a complete set of

age‐relative‐to‐disclosure dummies (excluding the dummy in the year prior to

disclosure). We also include a set of non‐linear Age (since grant) variables to capture

well‐documented non‐linearities in the citation age‐profile. In this specification, changes

in the counterfactual citation rate are estimated using undisclosed SSO patents with the

same age. Once again, we use a Poisson specification with individual‐patent

(conditional) fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered on disclosures.



We are primarily interested in measuring the difference between large‐ and small‐firm

citation rates following disclosure. We do this in two ways: first by including a simple

interaction between a Small Firm and Disclosure dummy variable, which we report in

Table 7; and second, by including a complete set of age‐relative‐to‐disclosure

interactions for the small‐firm patents, which we present in Figures 3.a and 3.b.



The first column in Table 7 shows the coefficient for the small‐firm disclosure interaction

in the sample of litigated patents (i.e., the sample used to generate our main results).

While the point estimate suggests that small‐firm patent citations drop by 3 percent

relative to those of large‐firms following disclosure, the upper bound of the 95 percent

confidence interval corresponds to a 60 percent increase. In the second column we add a

post‐litigation dummy and its interaction with the small‐firm indicator. The results are

                                                                                        28
not meaningfully different. The third and fourth columns in Table 7 repeat this exercise

for the full sample of disclosed patents. For this broader sample, the point estimates

indicate a 30 percent decline in the relative citation rate of small firm patents after

disclosure, with the upper bound corresponding to an 18 percent increase.26



Figure 3 presents a similar set of results in graphical form. In particular, we estimated

the model used in Table 7, including a complete set of interactions between the Small

Firm dummy and the Age (relative to disclosure) coefficients – again omitting the

dummy for the year before disclosure. This approach allows for a very flexible citation

response to disclosure in both the small‐ and large‐firm sub‐samples. We then plotted

the coefficients on these interaction terms (along with a 95 percent confidence interval).

The top panel shows the results for the full set of disclosed patents. We observe a

distinct small negative break just before disclosure. In the second panel, which includes

only litigated patents, there is neither an apparent trend, nor a break in the relative

citation rates.



These results provide some assurance that our main findings are not driven by

heterogeneity in the demand shock produced by standardization. While we find that

patent citations increase following disclosure, there is essentially no difference in the

response of small‐ versus large‐firm citation rates. If we believe the negative point

estimates obtained in the full sample of disclosed patents, then our difference‐in‐

differences results provide a lower bound on the actual divergence in litigation

incentives produced by the standards process (i.e., the platform paradox). We do offer

two caveats to interpreting these results too broadly. First, citations are a crude proxy

for the level of infringement. And second, while the point estimates in our citation



26
  The unreported baseline age coefficients in these regressions are very similar to the results
presented in Rysman and Simcoe (2006); there is a 15 to 20 percent increase in the citation rate in
the year before disclosure, followed by a upward trend that adds another 20 percent over the
next three to five years.

                                                                                                 29
models are close to zero, these estimates are not precise enough to reject the null

hypothesis of a moderate positive shock to the relative demand for small‐firm IP.


5.4 Litigation patterns
As a last stop in our exploration of SSO patent litigation, we use data from the Federal

Judicial Center (FJC) to compare trial outcomes for SSO patents to those in a matched

control sample. We formed the control sample by selecting a random patent case filed in

the same court within 10 days of each SSO patent‐suit filing (with replacement).

However, because the FJC data are collected at case termination (while the Derwent data

are reported at filing), there is a substantial truncation problem in the matching process.

So, for this exercise, we re‐introduced the ETSI patents, and were able to match 102 out

of 151 total lawsuits.



Table 8 shows a series of univariate tests for differences in litigation outcomes between

the SSO and control samples. In general, the results show the processes to be quite

similar. The average case duration – from filing to termination – is 61 days (14 percent)

shorter for the SSO patents, but that difference is not statistically significant. The share

of cases that terminate during discovery (the initial phase of the suit in which parties are

permitted to collect information, including documentary and depositional) is 31 percent

for SSO patents and 36 percent in the control (non‐SSO) sample, but again this difference

is not statistically significant.27 We do find that SSO patent suits are more likely

(significant at the 5% level) to end with a settlement order (i.e., an order requested and

agreed upon by both parties). This difference may indicate that SSO patent litigants

desire added institutional support for their settlement agreements.



We observe too that lawsuits in the SSO and control sample have an identical likelihood

of reaching trial (4.9 percent). However, we find a large disparity in plaintiff win rates.

In particular, plaintiffs win 54 percent of the SSO‐patent cases compared to 24 percent in

27
  Note that the outcome shares are not intended to sum to unity (for instance, the “reached trial”
share is a subset of the “final verdict” share of cases).

                                                                                                30
the control sample (significant at the 10% level). The SSO cases appear less likely to end

in a defendant victory or a shared victory.28 However, it is difficult to interpret these

findings since the patent holder might be either a plaintiff or defendant in these cases

(depending on whether it is an infringement or validity suit). Overall, we interpret the

summary statistics in Table 8 as evidence that SSO patent lawsuits are not particularly

different from other types of patent litigation.


6. Conclusions

This paper examines the intellectual property strategy of firms that participate in the

formal standards process. Using data on patents disclosed to a group of influential SSOs,

we show that small firms are more likely to litigate their standards‐related IP after a new

standard is created, while large‐firm litigation rates remain unchanged or perhaps

decline. These findings suggest to us that standardization causes a divergence in the

litigation incentives faced, on the one hand, by small entrepreneurs and, on the other, by

large systems vendors. One explanation for this divergence is that small vertically‐

specialized firms do not have the presence in complementary markets or the

downstream manufacturing, marketing and distribution capabilities that allow their

large firm rivals to cooperate on the standards while competing on the implementation.



While these results shed some new light on important questions related to IP strategy

and the emergence of open platforms, we acknowledge that it is very difficult to draw

clear welfare implications from our findings. In particular, we have little to say about the

impact that SSO intellectual property policies may have on long‐run innovation

incentives. Our results suggest that patents are truly important to entrepreneurs, and

thus play an important role in promoting the division of innovative labor. At the same

time, they suggest that large firms are willing to sacrifice some of the value in their IP for

the benefits of a more “open” technology input market. While this trade‐off between the


28A shared victory may occur, for instance, when a defendant is found to be infringing some of
the patent claims, but the plaintiff’s patent is found to have other claims that are invalid.

                                                                                                 31
dynamic benefits and static costs of IP protection is well known, our results suggest that

large and small firms will have different views about the optimal policy – particularly in

markets where the innovation process is vertically dis‐integrated.



It is somewhat ironic that we find very high litigation rates for standards‐related

technologies, since the goal of most SSOs is to promote “openness” in the form of

widespread access to standardized components at relatively low prices. Of course, such

litigation is presumably the price of success, since increased use of a patented

technology will inevitably lead to more infringement, more incentives to enforce the IP,

and a resulting higher probability of litigation. Nevertheless, we believe our findings

suggest the need to re‐examine the RAND standard currently used by most SSOs. The

lack of a clear definition of “reasonable” pricing – combined with the proliferation of

open platforms and increased vertical dis‐integration in many technology markets –

seems likely to send an increasing number of cases into the legal system. Some SSOs,

including IEEE and ANSI, are exploring the idea of allowing firms to state an ex ante

royalty cap as part of their IP disclosure. This approach strikes us as a reasonable policy.

However, it is important to recognize that any move towards stronger IP rules will

cause some SSO participants to opt out of the formal standards process, which may lead

to more standards wars and an increased use of the submarine‐patent or hold‐up

strategies.



Finally, our results raise a number of questions about the organization and dynamics of

open‐platform development that call for further research. In particular, what strategies

can platforms leaders adopt to encourage entry by entrepreneurs (who may be better

poised to provide critical complements) while preserving the benefits of platform

openness? Will competition between SSOs working on similar problems lead to a more

efficient set of IP policies, or will it produce technical fragmentation and coordination

failures? How do SSOs compare to patent pools (Lerner, Strojwas and Tirole 2003) as a

mechanism for contracting around the problem of complementary upstream

                                                                                         32
monopolists (i.e., the patent thicket)? We are hopeful that the increasing availability of

data on patents and the formal standards process will lead to further empirical work on

these issues.




                                                                                       33
References

Arthur, W. B., (1989), ʺCompeting Technologies, Increasing Returns, And Lock‐in by Historical
Events.ʺ The Economic Journal, 99: 116‐131.

Bekkers, R., G. Duysters, and B. Verspagen (2002). “Intellectual Property Rights, Strategic
Technology Agreements and Market Structure: The case of GSM.” Research Policy, 31: 1141‐1161.

Bertrand , M., E. Duflo and S. Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should We Trust Differences‐in‐
Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249‐275.

Bresnahan, T. and S. Greenstein (1999). ʺTechnological competition and the structure of the
computer industry.ʺ Journal of Industrial Economics 47(1): 1‐40.

Cargill, C. F. (1997). Open Systems Standardization : A Business Approach. Upper Saddle River,
NJ, Prentice Hall PTR.

Chiao, B., J. Lerner and J. Tirole (2005). “The Rules of Standard Setting Organizations: An
Empirical Analysis.” NBER Working Paper No. 11156.

Baldwin, C. and K. Clark (2000). Design Rules: The Power of Modularity, MIT Press.

Farrell, J., J. Choi, A. Edlin, S. Greentein, B. Hall and G. Saloner (2004). “Brief Amicus Curiae of
Economics Professors and Scholars in the Matter of Rambus, Inc.,” U.S. Federal Trade
Commission Docket No. 9302.

Farrell, J., J. Hayes, C. Shapiro and T. Sullivan (2007). “Standard Setting, Patents and Hold‐Up.”
(forthcoming) Antitrust Law Journal.

Farrell, J. and G. Saloner (1985). ʺStandardization, Compatibility, and Innovation.ʺ Rand Journal
of Economics, 16(1): 70‐83.

Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro (2007). “How Strong Are Weak Patents?” mimeo.

Farrell, J. and T. Simcoe (2007). “Choosing the Rules for Formal Standardization.” mimeo.

Farrell, J. and P. Weiser. (2003). “Modularity, Vertical Integration and Open Access Policies:
Towards a Convergence of Antitrust and Regulation in The Internet Age,” Harvard Journal of
Law and Technology, 17(1):86‐134 .

FTC (2003). In the Matter of Rambus Incorporated. U.S. Federal Trade Commission Docket 9302.

Galasso, A. (2007). “Broad Cross‐License Agreements and Persuasive Patent Litigation: Theory
and Evidence from the Semiconductor Industry” STICERD discussion paper EI‐45.




                                                                                                       34
Gawer, A. and R. Henderson (2007), “Platform Owner Entry and Innovation in Complementary
Markets: Evidence from Intel.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 16(1): 1‐34.

Graham, S. (2004). “Continuation, Complementarity, and Capturing Value: Three Studies
Exploring Firms’ Complementary Uses of Appropriability Mechanisms in Technological
Innovation.” Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, Spring 2004.

Graham, S. & Mowery, D. (2004). “Submarines in Software? Continuations in U.S. Software
Patenting in the 1980s and 1990s,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 13(5): 417‐442.

Greenstein, S. & Rysman, M. (2007). “Coordination Costs and Standard Setting: Lessons from 56K
Modems.” In S. Greenstein & V. Stango (Eds.), Standards and Public Policy. Cambridge
University Press. 123‐159.

Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg (2001). ʺThe NBER Patent Citation Data File : Lessons,
Insights, and Methodological Tools.ʺ NBER Working Paper 8498.

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A., and M. Trajtenberg (2005). “Market Value and Patent Citations”. RAND
Journal of Economics, 36(1), 16–38.

Hall, B. H., and R. Ziedonis (2001). ʺThe Patent Paradox Revisited : An Empirical Study of
Patenting in the US Semiconductor Industry, 1979‐1995ʺ The RAND Journal of Economics 32(1):
101‐128.

Hall, B. H., and R. Ziedonis (2007). “An Empirical Analysis of Patent Litigation in the
Semiconductor Industry.” mimeo.

Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F. M., and K. Vopel (1999). “Citation Frequency and the Value of
Patented Inventions”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(3), 511–515.

Henderson, R. (2003) “Ember Corp: Developing the Next Ubiquitous Network Standard”
Harvard Business School Case 9‐703‐448.

IBM (2007). “An open e‐business foundation.” Technical report. Available online at:
www.ibm.com/developerworks/cn/websphere/download/pdf/openappframework.pdf.

Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg and R. Henderson (1993). ʺGeographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,ʺ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3): 577‐98.

Lanjouw, J. and J. Lerner (1998). “The Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights: A Survey of
the Empirical Literature.” The Annales dʹEconomie et de Statistique 49/50: 223‐246.

Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman (2001). “Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A Window on
Competition. The RAND Journal of Economics 32(1): 129‐151.

Lanjouw J. and M. Schankerman (2003). ʺEnforcement of Patent Rights in the United States.ʺ
Patents in the Knowledge‐based Economy: Proceedings of the Science, Technology and
Economic Policy Board. W. Cohen and S Merrill.

                                                                                                35
Lemley, M. (2002). ʺIntellectual Property Rights and Standard Setting Organizations.ʺ California
Law Review 90: 1889‐1981.

Lerner, J., M. Strojwas and J. Tirole (2003). “Cooperative Marketing Agreements Between
Competitors: Evidence from Patent Pools .” Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 03‐25 .

Lerner, J. (2007). “Trolls on State Street?” mimeo.

Mackie‐Mason J. and J. Netz (2007). “Manipulating interface standards as an anticompetitive
strategy.” In S. Greenstein & V. Stango (Eds.), Standards and Public Policy. Cambridge
University Press. 231‐259.

Matutes, C. and P. Regibeau (1988). ʺMix and Match: Product Compatibility Without Network
Externalities,ʺ Rand Journal of Economics, 19 (2): 219‐234.

Majoras, D. (2005). ʺRecognizing the Procompetitive Potential of Royalty Discussions in Standard
Setting.ʺ Standardization and the Law : Developing the Golden Mean for Global Trade.

Nalebuff, B. (1987). “Credible Pretrial Negotiation” RAND Journal of Economics, 18: 198‐210.

Rysman, M. and T. Simcoe (2006), “Patents and the Performance of Voluntary Standard Setting
Organizations” NET Institute Working Paper No. 05‐21.

Shapiro, C. (2001). Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools and Standard‐
Setting. Innovation Policy and the Economy. A. Jaffe, J. Lerner and S. Stern. Cambridge, MIT
Press. 1.

Spier, K. (1992). “The Dynamics of pre‐trial negotiation.” Review of Economic Studies, 59(1): 93‐
108.

Thomson, G. (1954) “Intercompany technical Standardization in the Early American Automobile
Industry” Journal of Economic History 14(1): 1‐20.

Wooldridge, J. M. (1999). Distribution‐free Estimation of Some Nonlinear Panel Data Models.
Journal of Econometrics, 90(1), 77–97.




                                                                                                36
Table 1: Disclosure summary statistics by SSO
A blanket disclosure contains no patent or application numbers that would identify a specific piece of intellectual property. Total IPR is a count of
all patents (US and foreign) and application numbers listed in a disclosure. A large firm is publicly traded or has more than 500 employees.



                                Total            Blanket             Total               US        US       Min        Mean        Mean       Large
SSO                             Discs             Discs               IPR              Patents    App’s   Disc Year   Disc Year   Disc Age*   Firms*
ANSI                             278                177                278                127      15       1971        1996        3.08       0.87
ATIS                              58                 38                 51                20        2       1986        1996        2.68       0.82
ATM Forum                         25                 1                  90                45        1       1995        1998        4.22       0.92
ETSI                             324                 0               13,684              1,164     160      1990        2002        3.77       0.93
IEEE                             390                239                966                278      12       1983        2000        3.35       0.89
IETF                             353                188                351                101       6       1995        2003        3.26       0.95
ITU                              643                 0                1,175               200      18       1983        1999        4.12       0.89
TIA                              126                117                 23                19        0       1989        1998        3.16       0.99
DSL Forum                          8                 0                  32                 3        1       2000        2004        0.75       0.86
ISO                               24                 8                  44                16        1       1980        1995        3.59       0.73
ISO/IEC JTC1                     217                194                 61                13        7       1992        1998        4.05       0.96
MSSF                              13                 7                  15                 3        0       1999        2002        0.33       1.00
OMA                               44                 0                 185                53        1       1999        2004        3.63       0.72
VESA                              55                 0                  62                 7        0       1995        2001        1.14       0.88
Pooled Sample                   2,558               969              17,017              2,049     224      1971        2000        3.66       0.91
* The unit of observation for these statistics is a disclosed patents rather than a disclosure.




                                                                                                                                                      37
Table 2 : Sample means for SSO and matched control patents
This table presents sample means and t‐tests for SSO patents and three different one‐to‐one matched control samples. Each control patent has the
same grant year and technology class as its SSO twin. Firm matches have the same assignee and Cite matches the same number of forward cites.*


                                 SSO         Random                           SSO           Firm                            SSO       Cite
                                Patents       Match        P‐value           Patents        Match       P‐value            Patents   Match   P‐value
Litigation Rate (percent)          9.38         1.69          0.00              7.16         1.26          0.00             9.15      1.91    0.00
Lit Rate (grant pre‐94)           14.24         1.99          0.00             11.66         1.79          0.00             13.85     2.70    0.00
Lit Rate (grant 94‐98)             7.11         1.55          0.00              5.11         1.02          0.00             6.99      1.55    0.00
Lit Rate (grant post‐98)           4.46         0.96          0.01              4.53         0.41          0.00             4.46      0.96    0.01
Lawsuits (count)**                 1.97         2.06          0.87              1.76         1.67          0.79             1.95      1.94    0.98
Defendants (count)**               2.69         2.56          0.90              2.63         2.00          0.21             2.66      3.00    0.75
Litigation Age (years)**           6.20         3.75          0.02              6.10         5.44          0.65             6.12      5.11    0.41
Pre‐disclosure (percent)**        28.09                                        29.41                                        27.91
Forward Cites 63‐06               33.88         16.84         0.00             30.86         17.05         0.00             31.64    32.32    0.70
Backward Cites                    10.75         10.36         0.56              9.89         10.08         0.77             10.79    11.48    0.32
Non‐patent Cites                   9.07         4.69          0.00              8.54         8.33          0.89             8.97      7.39    0.22
Claims                            22.24         17.89         0.00             22.02         17.67         0.00             22.12    20.31    0.05
Continuation                       0.43         0.31          0.00              0.40         0.28          0.00             0.43      0.30    0.00
Generality                         0.51         0.44          0.00              0.50         0.45          0.02             0.50      0.50    0.60
US Firm                           62.17         61.54         0.78                                                          62.45    60.85    0.48
US Other                           2.42         2.53          0.88                                                          2.13      3.30    0.12
Non‐US Firm                       26.87         27.82         0.64                                                          27.02    28.09    0.61
Non‐US Other                       2.53         1.58          0.15                                                          2.55      1.49    0.10
Unassigned                         6.01         6.53          0.64                                                          5.85      6.28    0.70
Patents                            949          949                             712          712                             940      940
*See text for additional description of the matching process. **Statistics in these cells are conditional on litigation.




                                                                                                                                                 38
Table 3 : Sample Means for Small and Large Firms
This table presents sample means and unpaired two‐sample t‐tests that examine differences
between the large firms (systems vendors) and small firms (entrepreneurs) disclosing one or
more patents to an SSO in our sample.


          Firm‐Level                 Large                Small
            Means                    Firms                Firms             P‐value
 SSO Count                            1.69                 1.06               0.00
 Patent Grants (67‐06)               4899.40              39.40               0.00
 HHI 1995                             0.12                 0.34               0.00
 HHI 2000                             0.13                 0.38               0.00
 Public Firm                         100.00               11.11               0.00
 IPO Year                            1980.34             1990.89              0.01
 log Employees                        9.80                 5.36               0.00
 VC Match                             27.12               36.11               0.20
 Total Firms                          118                  72


          Patent‐Level               Large                Small
             Means                   Firms                Firms             P‐value
 Litigation Rate (percent)            6.67                17.31               0.00
 Lit Rate (grant pre‐94)              10.09               37.93               0.01
 Lit Rate (grant 94‐99)               4.98                 12.6               0.02
 Lit Rate (grant post‐98)             4.57                 4.23               0.90
 Lawsuits*                            1.98                 2.11               0.82
 Defendants*                          2.67                 2.59               0.90
 Litigation Age*                      6.11                 4.78               0.20
 Pre‐disclosure Litigation*           32.61               25.93               0.55
 Disclosure age (since grant)         3.44                 3.16               0.45
 Forward Cites 63‐06                  31.14               33.68               0.46
 Backward Cites                       10.46               12.80               0.10
 Non‐patent Cites                     8.33                13.54               0.11
 Claims                               22.07               24.31               0.21
 Continuation dummy                   0.36                 0.78               0.00
 Generality                           0.51                 0.49               0.62
 Forward Cites / Year                 3.07                 3.80               0.04
 Cites / Claim / Year                 0.21                 0.24               0.38
 Backward Cites / Claim               0.78                 0.93               0.28
 Non‐patent Cites / Claim             0.53                 1.42               0.14
 Total Patents                        690                  156




                                                                                        39
Table 4: Cross‐sectional probit models of patent litigation
This table presents marginal effects from patent‐level probit regressions. Column 1 compares SSO
to control patents. Columns 2 through 5 exclude all patents not assigned to a US or foreign firm.

                                     Unit of Observation = Patent
                                       DV = Litigation Dummy
                                         All SSO      All SSO        Small       Large      Public
        Sample                           & Match         Firms       Firms       Firms       Firms
        Baseline Probability             0.0338       0.0593       0.0402      0.0495      0.0423
        Small Firm                          0.058         0.076
                                          (0.02)***     (0.03)**
        US Firm                             0.014        ‐0.008      0.046       ‐0.017      ‐0.019
                                           (0.01)*       (0.03)     (0.03)*      (0.03)       (0.03)
        Disclosure Age                                    0.002      0.009       ‐0.001      ‐0.004
                                                         (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.00)       (0.00)
        Disclosure Year                                   0.002     ‐0.001       0.002        0.009
                                                         (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.00)      (0.00)*
        Continuation Dummy                                0.074      0.025       0.075        0.054
                                                       (0.03)***     (0.03)     (0.03)**    (0.02)**
        Log (Claims)                                     0.011       0.002        0.012      ‐0.004
                                                         (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.01)
        Log (Forward Cites)                               0.041      0.047        0.034       0.030
                                                       (0.01)***   (0.02)***   (0.01)***   (0.01)***
        Log (Backward Cites)                              0.005      0.014       ‐0.000       0.001
                                                         (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.01)
        Log (Non‐patent Cites)                           ‐0.003     ‐0.037       0.005        0.005
                                                         (0.01)    (0.01)***     (0.01)       (0.01)
        Log (Employees)                                                                      ‐0.007
                                                                                              (0.00)
        Log (Assets / Employee)                                                              ‐0.046
                                                                                            (0.02)**
        Log(Patents / Employee)                                                               0.025
                                                                                            (0.01)**
        ANSI                                0.293
                                          (0.12)**
        IEEE                                0.096      ‐0.041       ‐0.038      ‐0.024       ‐0.065
                                          (0.04)**     (0.02)*      (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.02)***
        IETF                                0.120      ‐0.037       ‐0.046      ‐0.020       ‐0.028
                                            (0.10)      (0.03)     (0.02)**     (0.03)        (0.02)
        ITU                                 0.062      ‐0.016       ‐0.050       0.001       ‐0.033
                                           (0.03)*      (0.03)     (0.02)**     (0.03)       (0.02)*
        Other                               0.122      ‐0.019       0.098       ‐0.027       ‐0.036
                                          (0.05)**      (0.02)      (0.09)      (0.02)      (0.02)**
        Grant Year Effects                    Y           Y            Y           Y            Y
        Assignee‐type Effects^                Y
        SSO Main Effects^                     Y
        N (Patents)                          1848        846          156         690         626
        Pseudo R‐square                    0.1367      0.1399       0.4013      0.0968      0.1827
        Chi‐square                          84.48       69.90        53.68       39.42       58.95
         * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance. (Robust SEs clustered on disclosure)
        ^See text for a discussion of the specification in column 1.


                                                                                                             40
          Table 5: Difference‐indifferences models of patent litigation
          This table presents coefficients and robust standard errors (clustered by disclosure) from Poisson
          quasi‐maximum likelihood regressions with patent (conditional) fixed effects. These models
          exclude all un‐litigated patents. All specifications contain a fourth‐order polynomial in calendar
          years to control for common unobserved time‐trends.


                                      Unit of Observation = Patent‐Year
                                          DV = Count of new lawsuits
                                Small        Large         All          All                   All          All
 Sample                         Firms        Firms        Firms       Firms                  Firms        Firms
 Specification                 Poisson        Poisson         Poisson        Poisson        Poisson      Poisson
 Disclosure                     1.570***        ‐0.831         ‐0.278         ‐0.276         ‐0.693       ‐0.906
                                 (0.58)         (0.59)         (0.52)         (0.52)         (0.58)       (0.66)
 Small Firm * Disclosure                                       1.216*         1.310          2.478**      2.189**
                                                               (0.73)         (0.94)         (0.99)       (0.98)
 Small * Age * Pre‐Disc                                                       0.0395         ‐0.114
                                                                              (0.19)         (0.23)
 Small * Age * Post‐Disc                                                                    ‐0.205**
                                                                                             (0.093)
 Small Firm * Age                                                                                         0.0760
                                                                                                          (0.37)
 Age squared                                                                                             ‐0.00652
                                                                                                         (0.0053)
 Small * Age squared                                                                                      ‐0.0276
                                                                                                          (0.028)
 log (Cites, t‐1)                                                                                         ‐0.299
                                                                                                          (0.22)
 Year Effects (Chi2, 4 d.f.)      7.52           8.23*        12.54**        12.47**        17.75***      13.16**
 Patent Effects                     Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
 Patents                           26             46             72             72             72              72
 Observations                     317             588           905            905            905          905
 Log‐likelihood / N              ‐0.334         ‐0.311         ‐0.202         ‐0.328         ‐0.328       ‐0.322
*10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance. (Robust SE’s clustered on disclosures).




                                                                                                          41
          Table 6: Difference‐in‐differences robustness checks
          This table presents models similar to Table 5 with variations in the specification and dependent
          variable. These models exclude all un‐litigated patents. All specifications contain a fourth‐order
          polynomial in calendar years to control for common unobserved time‐trends. Note that it is not
          possible to cluster the standard errors by disclosure for the fixed‐effects logistic or negative‐
          binomial model.


                                     Unit of Observation = Patent‐Year
                               DV = New Lawsuit (Dummy) or Defendants (Count)
                               Small        Large        All           All                   All            All
 Sample                        Firms        Firms       Firms        Firms                  Firms          Firms
 Dependant variable            Dummy          Dummy           Dummy         Dummy           Count          Count
 Specification                 Logistic       Logistic        Logistic      Logistic       Poisson        Neg Bin
 Disclosure                     2.029***       ‐0.966**        ‐0.278        ‐0.803*        ‐0.682         ‐0.540
                                 (0.67)         (0.48)         (0.44)         (0.47)         (0.63)            (0.40)
 Small Firm * Disclosure                                       1.389*        3.214***       2.902***       2.184***
                                                               (0.80)         (0.97)         (1.09)            (0.61)
 Small * Age * Pre‐Disc                                        0.051         ‐0.149         ‐0.127         ‐0.159
                                                               (0.18)         (0.20)         (0.24)            (0.17)
 Small * Age * Post‐Disc                                                    ‐0.309***       ‐0.259**      ‐0.227***
                                                                             (0.091)         (0.11)        (0.071)
 Year Effects (Chi2, 4 d.f.)    11.60**          7.14         11.14**        12.62**        11.30**        11.86**
 Patent Effects                     Y              Y             Y              Y              Y                 Y
 Patents                           26             46            72             72             72                72
 Observations                     317            588            905            905            905               905
 Log‐likelihood / N              ‐0.227         ‐0.231         ‐0.239        ‐0.231         ‐0.412         ‐0.306
*10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                                           42
    Table 7: Disclosure and patent citations
    This table presents coefficients and robust standard errors (clustered by disclosure) from Poisson
    quasi‐maximum likelihood regressions with patent (conditional) fixed effects. These models
    exclude all un‐cited patents. All specifications contain a full set of age‐since‐disclosure effects.




                                        Unit of Observation = Patent Year
                                            DV = Forward Citation Count
                                Litigated SSO        Litigated SSO          All SSO           All SSO
     Sample                         Patents              Patents            Patents           Patents
     Small Firm * Disclosure        ‐0.0278             ‐0.0420             ‐0.278            ‐0.363*
                                     (0.32)              (0.29)             (0.23)             (0.22)
     Litigation Dummy                                    ‐0.310                              ‐0.00350
                                                         (0.20)                                (0.17)
     Litigation * Small Firm                             0.0489                               0.425*
                                                         (0.24)                                (0.25)
     Patent Fixed Effects               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
     Age‐since‐disc Effects           Y                  Y                  Y                   Y
     Patents                         70                  70                803                 803
     N (Patent Years)               892                 892                8994                8994
    * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance. Robust standard errors.



     Table 8: Litigation Outcomes
    This table provides descriptive statistics for outcomes of SSO patent lawsuits and a matched
    sample of non‐SSO patent lawsuits drawn from the same court within 10 days of the SSO lawsuit
    filing date.


                                                       SSO           Non‐SSO
                                                     Lawsuits        Lawsuits          Difference       P‐value
Duration: Filing to termination (days)                   449.99            511.52           ‐61.53         0.34

Outcome Shares (N=102)
Terminated during discovery                               0.314                0.363       ‐0.049             0.46
Settlement order                                          0.431                0.294        0.137             0.05
Reached trial                                             0.049                0.049        0.000             1.00
Final verdict (after trial or motion)                     0.127                0.167       ‐0.040             0.43

Final verdict (N=13 SSO, 17 Non‐SSO)
Plaintiff victory                                         0.538                0.235        0.303             0.09
Defendant vicory                                          0.231                0.412       ‐0.181             0.31
Shared victory                                            0.231                0.353       ‐0.122             0.49



                                                                                                         43
                                           Disclosures (Count)
            0               50              100       150      200                       250




                1
     1980




                1
     1981




                4
     1982




                     18
     1983




                4
     1984




                1
     1985
     1986



                7 11
     1987


                     12
     1988
                            39

     1989
     1990
                    17 14


     1991
                                 51




     1992
                                      64




     1993
                                             92




     1994
     1995
                                                                       171




     1996
                                                  111


                                            84




     1997
     1998
                                                                               190




     1999
                                                        127




     2000
                                                           140




     2001
                                                                 161




     2002
                                                                             183




     2003
                                                                                          243




     2004
                                                                                   198
                                                                                                Figure 1 : Annual IPR Disclosure at Thirteen Standard Setting Organizations




44
Figure 2a: Pre/Post‐disclosure litigation rates by firm size (all patents)


                                                      All Disclosed Patents


                       .2      .15
              Lawsuits per Patent
            .05       .1
                       0




                                     -10   -8   -6   -4     -2      0       2      4   6   8   10
                                                          Years Since Disclosure

                                                              Small            Large




Figure 2b: Pre/Post‐disclosure litigation rates by firm size (litigated patents)


                                                          Litigated Patents
                       .8       .6
              Lawsuits per Patent
            .2        .4
                       0




                                     -10   -8   -6   -4     -2      0       2      4   6   8   10
                                                          Years Since Disclosure

                                                              Small            Large




                                                                                                    45
Figure 3a: Citation rate differences (small firm interactions, all patents)


                                                                        All Patents



                             1         .5
                  Estimated Coefficient
                -1     -.5    0
                             -1.5




                                            -5   -4   -3   -2   -1       0     1   2      3      4     5   6   7
                                                                 Years Since Disclosure

                                                                     Coefficient          95% CI




Figure 3b: Citation rate differences (small firm interactions, litigated patents)


                                                                 Litigated Patents
                       2
           Estimated Coefficient
                0      -1   1




                                            -5   -4   -3   -2   -1       0     1   2      3       4    5   6   7
                                                                 Years Since Disclosure

                                                                     Coefficient              95% CI




                                                                                                                   46
                                           Appendices
Table A.1 : Short SSO Descriptions

Acronym        Description

ANSI           American National Standards Institute: The umbrella organization that certifies US
               Standards Developing Organizations.
ATIS           Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions: ANSI accredited US SDO that
               develops telecommunication standards
ATM Forum      Asynchronous Transfer Mode Forum: Consortium promoting a high‐speed Internet
               switching technology
ETSI           European Telecommunications Standards Institute: Develops cellular telephony
               standards, including GSM and CDMA protocols used widely in Europe.
IEEE           Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers: Engineering trade groups that also
               sponsors ANSI accredited standards activities for a variety of information technologies,
               including the 802.x series of computer networking standards.
IETF           Internet Engineering Task Force: Large independent SSO that develops core Internet
               protocols for applications, routing and transport.
ITU            International Telecommunication Union: The primary international organization for
               voluntary governance and standardization of the public switched telephone network.
TIA            Telecommunications Industry Association: ANSI accredited US SDO that develops
               telecommunications industry standards, particularly for wireless/cellular applications
DSL Forum      Digital Subscriber Line Forum: A consortium for high speed modem standards.

ISO            International Organization for Standards: Large umbrella organization for international
               standards development.
ISO/IEC JTC1   Joint committee of ISO and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) where all
               ISO sponsored work on information technology standards occurs.
MSSF           Multiservice Switching Forum. Consortium for ʺnext generationʺ networking standards.

OMA            Open Mobile Alliance. Consortia to promote mobile telephone application
               interoperability.
VESA           Video Electronics Standards Organization: Promotes industry‐wide interface standards
               designed for the PC, workstation, and other computing environments.




                                                                                                 47
           Table A.2 : Technology Classification of Disclosed Patents
           This table shows the distribution of patents in our sample over a set of broad technology areas,
           whose definitions are based on the US Patent and Trademark Office’s technology classification
           scheme. These patents primarily cover information and communications technologies.

                                                                         SSO         With
                                    Technology Category                 Patents      ETSI
                              Chemical                                        3            9
                              Communications                                426        1,500
                              Computers (HW/SW & Other)                     377          563
                              Drugs & Medical                                 4            5
                              Electrical & Electronic                        98          121
                              Mechanical & Other                             34           68
                              Total Patents                                 942        2,266



           Table A.3: Common Firms
           This table provides the names of the top ten Large and Small firms in our data set (ranked by the
           number of disclosed patents). It also lists the most frequent plaintiffs and defendants out of 206
           total lawsuits.


  Top 10 Large Firms         Pat Discs    Employees*              Top 10 Small Firms           Pat Discs      Employees*
Ericsson                        276          71,981          Interdigital Technology              170              185
Nokia                           181          44,780          Snaptrack                            33
Qualcomm                        172           5,949          Intʹl Mobile Machines                30               87
Motorola                        105          87,656          Tecsec, Inc.                         12
AT&T                             77         108,953          Hybrid Networks                      11               65
IBM                              66         312,643          Verisity Design                      10               190
Toshiba                          46         147,217          Stac Electronics                      9
Alcatel                          45         143,744          Netergy Networks                      8               113
Apple Computer                   41          10,477          SCS Mobilecom                         5
Philips                          41         299,382          Digital Theater Systems               5

      Top Plaintiffs         Lawsuits                               Top Defendants             Lawsuits
Elonex IP Holdings               13                          Interdigital Technology               5
U.S. Philips                     7                           Acer Inc                              2
RSA Data Security                5                           Broadcom Corp                         2
Lucent Technologies              5                           Ciena Corp                            2
Qualcomm Inc.                    5                           Compal Electronics                    2
Interdigital Technology          3                           Dallas Semiconductor                  2
Compression Labs                 3                           Dell Computer                         2
                                                             Ericsson, Gateway, Microsoft,
Agere Systems                    3                           Motorola, Novell                      2



                                                                                                              48
          Table A.4 Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

                       N    Mean S.D.         Min Max                                   Definition
Small Firm            949    0.21     0.40     0       1      Dummy: Private firm or public company with less
                                                              than 500 employees (in year of patent grant).
US Firm               949    0.70     0.46     0       1      Dummy: Parent firm located in the United States.

Disclosure Age        949    3.50     3.87     ‐5      33     Years between patent grant and first disclosure.

Disclosure Year       949   1999.23   5.03    1974    2006    Calendar year of first disclosure.

Continuation          949    0.27     0.45     0       1      Dummy: Patent application filed as a continuation or
Dummy                                                         Continuation‐in‐part.
Claims                949    22.24    17.90    0      199     Count of individual claims contained in the patent.

Forward Cites         949    33.88    45.11    0      500     Cumulative citations received from other US patents.

Backward Cites        949    10.75    14.97    0      198     Count of citations made to other US patents.

Non‐patent cites      949    9.07     31.83    0      565     Count of citations made to non‐patent materials (e.g.
                                                              scientific papers).
Employees (000ʹs)     635    101      111      0      430     Compustat employees of parent firm in patent grant‐year.

Assets ($Mʹs)         635   30,234 33,534      4     164,863 Compustat    assets of parent firm in grant‐year ($millions).

Patents               892    2,587    3,689    1     23,038   Five‐year stock of granted patents.

Generality            807    0.51     0.33     0       1      One minus a Herfindahl measure based on the 3‐digit US
                                                              patent classification of citing patents.




                                                                                                                 49
Figure A.1a: Sample disclosure letter 1




                                          50
Figure A.1b: Sample disclosure letter 2 (blanket disclosure)




                                                               51
Figure A.2a: Observations by age and firm size (all patents)


                                        N by Years Since Disclosure (All Patents)




                   800  600
           Observations
              400  200
                   0




                              -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           8 9 10
                                                     Large            Small




Figure A.2b: Observations by age and firm size (litigated patents)


                                     N by Years Since Disclosure (Litigated Patents)
                   50
                   40
           Observations
           20     30
                   10
                   0




                              -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           8 9 10
                                                     Large            Small




                                                                                                52
