                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             FIRMS' STAKEHOLDERS AND THE COSTS OF TRANSPARENCY

                                          Andres Almazan
                                           Javier Suarez
                                          Sheridan Titman

                                       Working Paper 13647
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13647


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We are grateful to comments from Aydogan Alti, Kent Daniel, Adolfo de Motta, Mark Flannery, Xavier
Freixas, Ron Giammarino, Maria Gutierrez, Thomas Hellmann, David Hirshleifer, Giovanna Nicodano,
Robert Prentice, Chris Parsons, Todd Pulvino, Scott Stern, Siew Hong Teoh, and seminar participants
at University of Amsterdam, Arizona State University, ESCP-EAP, INSEAD, Instituto de Empresa,
LSE, McGill University, NYU, Northwestern University, Ohio State University, Oxford, Pompeu
Fabra, UCLA, University of Texas, Tulane University, the CEPR Workshop on European Corporate
Governance and the New Economy, the WFA meetings, and the NBER Entrepreneurship: Strategy
and Structure Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms' Stakeholders and the Costs of Transparency
Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 13647
November 2007
JEL No. D21,D23

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a model of a firm whose production process requires it to start and nurture a relationship
with its stakeholders. Because there are spillover benefits associated with being associated with a "winner,"
the perceptions of stakeholders and potential stakeholders can affect firm value. Our analysis indicates
that while transparency (i.e., generating information about a firm's quality) may improve the allocation
of resources, a firm may have a higher ex ante value if information about its quality is not prematurely
generated. The costs associated with transparency arise because of asymmetric information regarding
the extent to which stakeholders benefit from having a relationship with a high quality firm. These
costs are higher when firms can initiate non-contractible innovative investments that enhance the value
of their stakeholder relationships. Stakeholder effects of transparency are especially important for
younger firms with less established track records (e.g., start-ups).


Andres Almazan                                        Sheridan Titman
Finance Department                                    Finance Department
McCombs School of Business                            McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin                         University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179                                 Austin, TX 78712-1179
andres.almazan@mccombs.utexas.edu                     and NBER
                                                      titman@mail.utexas.edu
Javier Suarez
CEMFI
Casado del Alisal 5
28014 Madrid, SPAIN
suarez@cemfi.es
1         Introduction
The entrepreneurship literature recognizes that a prior relationship with a leading firm pro-
vides individuals with valuable entrepreneurial opportunities. For example, the papers re-
viewed in Audia and Rider (2005) provide evidence that is consistent with the idea that firms
operating at the technological frontier are more likely to provide their employees with greater
access to valuable entrepreneurial opportunities. In particular, proxies for the technological
success of firms, such as early entry in a new market (Brittain and Freeman 1986), superior
technology (Franco and Filson 2000) or highly-cited patents (Gompers et al 2005), have a
statistically significant positive eﬀect on the likelihood that the firm’s employees create new
firms.1
        This paper starts with the dual premise that a firm’s stakeholders are essential for the
firm’s success and that they appreciate the benefits of being associated with a successful
firm, i.e., a winner. Given this premise, a firm’s success is closely tied to how it is perceived,
both internally, by its employees, and externally, by its customers and suppliers. This is
especially true for younger firms with less established track records, and perhaps a greater
need to attract stakeholders.2
        In order to manage how their firms are perceived, entrepreneurs make a number of choices
that influence the extent to which information about the firm is generated and disseminated
both internally and externally. These choices determine what we call the degree of trans-
parency of the firm. For example, a firm’s decision to go public is likely to increase its
transparency due to the disclosure requirements associated with an IPO, the due diligence
of the underwriters, and the scrutiny brought by market participants (e.g., analysts).
        Although there are a number of reasons why transparency is likely to contribute positively
to firm value, in this paper we stress the oﬀsetting cost that it may have for a young firm,
    1
      A paramount example of this process is provided by Fairchild Semiconductors, the firm producing the
first integrated circuit in 1959. As reported by Saxenian (1994), at least 23 out of 67 entrants to the
semiconductor industry between 1957 and 1976 had at least one founder who worked for Fairchild.
    2
      For a excellent discussion of the importance of attracting stakeholders to entrepreneurial firms see Bhide
and Stevenson (1999).



                                                       1
whose success depends on its capacity to attract and retain key stakeholders. In particular,
these firms face the risk that their potential as industry winners is prematurely revealed,
which may in turn jeopardize their appeal to potential employees, customers and suppliers.
Of course, positive news will help the firm, but as we show, the costs associated with the early
revelation of negative information can exceed the benefits associated with the early revelation
of positive information, tilting entrepreneurs towards choices that reduce transparency.
       To illustrate these value-reducing eﬀects of transparency we develop a model in which
the firm and its stakeholders can be of diﬀerent classes. The firm may or may not be an
innovator that sets future standards in its industry and the stakeholders can either realize
substantial benefits or modest benefits from being exposed to the firm’s innovations. The
model assumes that initially everyone is uncertain about the firm’s quality, but depending
upon its transparency, the firm’s quality is revealed either sooner or later to all. In contrast,
stakeholders have private information about their own types, and this information is not
revealed during the course of their relationship with the firm.3 This last point implies that
all stakeholders must be oﬀered the same terms of trade with the firm, which in turn means
that if the firm deals with both types of stakeholders, one or the other type will obtain a rent.
In particular, when the firm is likely to be an innovator the stakeholders who benefit from
their exposure to innovation earn rents and, when the firm is not likely to be an innovator
stakeholders who do not benefit from being exposed to innovation receive rents. As we show,
these expected rents are lower when less is known about the firm.
       Transparency is especially costly when the firm can make non-contractible investments in
innovative activities that increase the spillover gains to its stakeholders. For example, a soft-
ware firm might enhance the design of its programs in ways that benefit sophisticated users
or oﬀer training to workers and customers about the internal architecture of its programs.
By doing this, the firm becomes a more attractive partner and can thus attract stakeholders
on more favorable terms. However, as we show, the stakeholders capture a greater portion
   3
    We refer to stakeholders’ “types” and potential firm “qualities” to emphasize that while stakeholders
have private information about themselves the information about the firm, while imperfect, is symmetrically
held by all.


                                                    2
of the innovation gains if the firm is more transparent, which reduces the firm’s incentive to
make these investments.
       Our model contributes to the literature on the costs and benefits of transparency as
well as to the growing literature on entrepreneurship and innovation. Regarding the former,
most papers formalize the role of transparency in reducing asymmetric information in the
market for the firm’s securities, and study the optimal degree of transparency arising from
trading oﬀ the corresponding reduction in the cost of capital with direct information costs.4
For instance, Easterbrook (1984) considers the implications on the dividend decision, and
Pagano and Roell (1998) examines the going-public decision. The literature on corporate
governance has considered the transparency implications of shareholder activism (Burkart,
Gromb and Panunzi 1997) and the connections between transparency and the eﬀectiveness
of boards (Hermalin and Weisbach 1998). Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999) point out
that, if transparent firms are likely to be more eﬃciently priced, they are also likely to make
better investment choices and thus be more valuable on average.
       Our paper fits into the relatively small subset of papers in the former literature that
analyze potential indirect costs of transparency. Teoh (1997) analyzes the problem of vol-
untary contributions to public goods and, like us, attributes the cost of transparency to its
interaction to with an asymmetric information problem (about users’ willingness to pay).
Bhattacharya and Chiesa (1995) and Perotti and von Thadden (2000), among others, point
to the costs of revealing potentially useful information to competitors. In their analysis of
corporate governance, Hermalin and Weisbach (2007) attribute the cost of transparency to
the additional uncertainty on executives’ careers concerns and to the additional incentives
to manipulate information.
       Regarding the literature on entrepreneurship and innovation, our focus on stakeholder
retention and on the idea that some stakeholders appropriate substantial spillover gains
from the firm’s innovative investments is consistent with a growing literature on the role
   4
    See Verecchia (2001) for a survey of the literature on the design of firms’ accounting and auditing
systems and Diamond and Verrechia (1991) for an analysis of the eﬀect of costly disclosure on the firm’s cost
of capital.


                                                     3
of the transition from employee to entrepreneur in the creation of new businesses (Pakes
and Nitzan 1983, Gromb and Scharfstein 2001, Lewis and Yao 2003, Cassiman and Ueda
2006, Hellmann 2007a) and, more generally, the problem of the appropriability of innovative
ideas (Anton and Yao 1994, 2002, Anand and Galetovic 2000, Gans and Stern 2003, Biais
and Perotti 2004, Hellmann and Perotti 2006). We contribute to this literature by showing
how transparency (i.e., the premature generation of information) aﬀects the division of the
returns from innovation between the firm and its stakeholders, and hence the firm’s incentives
to undertake innovative investments.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we describe the full model
and in Section 3 we consider a simplified setup in which the firm’s problem is reduced to
attracting stakeholders who are already endowed with private information about their types.5
As we discuss, the analysis of attraction of privately informed stakeholders is formally very
similar to the analysis of the problem of retaining stakeholders that we consider in Section 4,
where stakeholders start their relationship with the firm without any private information but
acquire such information as the relationship progresses over time. In Section 5, we analyze
the richest case in which the firm controls both its transparency and an investment that
increases the value of the human capital that stakeholders acquire through their relationship
with the firm. In Section 6 we discuss a number of illustrative stakeholder relationships
to which the model could apply and consider some issues related to the robustness of our
approach. Section 7 concludes the paper.


2         The model
We consider a firm that operates in a risk-neutral economy where the discount rate is normal-
ized to zero. As shown in Figure 1, there are four relevant dates in the firm’s life, t = 0, 1, 2, 3.
At t = 0, the firm is born and chooses its level of transparency. This choice can be related
to its funding (e.g., with angels’ funds or with funds stemming from venture capitalists) and
    5
    The problem of attracting stakeholders to startups has been addressed before in the literature on entre-
preneurship. See Hellmann (2007b) for a recent contribution.


                                                     4
to other organizational aspects that aﬀect the degree of involvement of external expertise in
the analysis of the firm’s business. The idea is that a higher degree of external involvement
leads to a more intense scrutiny of the firm’s activities and, as a result, to the generation of
more information about the firm’s prospects.
      At t = 1, the firm initiates a long-term relationship with a continuum of stakeholders.
By stakeholders we refer to a number of constituencies (employees, customers, suppliers,
advisors or other agents) whose interests are intrinsically linked to the firm’s prospects.6
Such a relationship involves a start-up period in which the stakeholders acquire familiarity
with the firm and, then, from t = 2, a development period in which large-scale production
takes place. At the beginning of the development period, stakeholders can stop doing business
with the firm. At t = 3 the firm generates revenue proportional to the fraction of the initially
attracted stakeholders that remain with it.7

                                            Start-up period            Development period

         t=0                      t=1                            t=2                         t=3
       Choice of        Attracting compensation w1       Uncertainty resolved?     Revenue Y
       transparency d   Firm investments z               Retaining compensation w2

                                    Figure 1: Sequence of Events.

      A central aspect of our model is the interaction between stakeholders’ unobservable het-
erogeneity and the timing of the resolution of uncertainty about the firm’s quality. This
interaction will interfere with the firm’s problem of attracting and retaining its stakeholders,
the transparency decision, and the incentives for the firm to undertake relationship-specific
investments.


Stakeholder heterogeneity. Stakeholders are ex-ante identical and have an opportunity
cost U of dealing with the firm during the start-up period. During this period, however, a
  6
    In Subsection 6.1, we particularize the discussion to some specific constituencies.
  7
    We rule out the possibility that the firm replaces its original stakeholders with new, unexperienced
stakeholders at t = 2. This simplification captures the intuition that new stakeholders cannot perfectly
substitute the original stakeholders attracted at t = 1.



                                                   5
proportion μ of them privately discover that they are quick learners, while the remaining
proportion 1 − μ privately discover that they are slow learners. Being a quick or a slow
learner aﬀects the extent to which a stakeholder can profit from the experience acquired by
dealing with the firm. This private discovery aﬀects two aspects of the firm’s stakeholder
retention problem. First, by virtue of the experience acquired over the start-up period (and
the surplus that they can obtain by dealing with another firm over the development period),
a quick learner’s opportunity cost of continuing with the firm at date t = 2 is Uh , while the
slow learner’s is, instead, Ul , with ∆U ≡ Uh − Ul > 0. Second, dealing with the firm during
the development period may create for each of the stakeholder types diﬀerent experience
gains, which we will assume to be increasing in the firm’s quality.8 For simplicity, however,
we assume that stakeholder types do not aﬀect the gross revenue that the firm can generate
at t = 3.9


Firm quality. The firm can end up being of high quality (a winner) or of low quality (a
loser). A winner firm is an innovator able to set the future technological and organizational
standards of its industry and, hence, provides its stakeholders with especially valuable ex-
perience. To make things simple, we assume that the quick learners obtain an incremental
experience gain z from their association with a winner up to date t = 3 while the incremental
gain equals zero in any other association (i.e., when a loser firm and/or a slow learner are
present).10
       We assume that all agents have symmetric information about the firm’s quality at all
dates, which allows us to examine the choice of transparency in the absence of information
   8
      Notice that, to the extent that stakeholders are willing to credit the firm for the value of the experience
that they can accumulate after date t = 2, the diﬀerence between Uh and Ul does not necessarily imply that
quick learners require a larger monetary reward for continuing dealing with the firm at t = 2.
    9
      Alternatively, one could assume diﬀerent productivities across types in a model where the firm is a team
and only the total team output is observable. We choose the current formulation for simplicity.
   10
      The logic of our results also applies if slow learners could obtain some incremental experience gains,
smaller than z, from dealing with a winner over the development period. As for the experience gains
associated with working for a loser over such a period, one can interpret that they are already discounted
from the opportunity costs Uh and Ul .




                                                       6
eﬀects associated that may be associated with the firm’s actions.11 Specifically, we assume
that all parties take γ as the initial likelihood that the firm is a winner. The uncertainty
about the firm’s quality is publicly resolved either after the start-up period (t = 2) or after
the development period (t = 3). The timing of this discovery is aﬀected by the firm’s degree
of transparency.


The transparency decision. The firm chooses its degree of transparency d ∈ [0, 1] at
t = 0. We assume that d equals the probability that the firm’s quality is revealed at t = 2,
and show that this probability can aﬀect the value that the firm extracts from its relationship
with the stakeholders. On top of these eﬀects, we capture the standard costs and benefits
of favoring an earlier resolution of uncertainty about the firm’s quality by postulating that
the transparency decision adds some net benefits X(d) to the firm’s gross revenue. We
assume that X(d) is a single-peaked function, with X(0) = 0, that reaches a maximum for
some interior degree of transparency d∗ , which would be chosen by the firm in the absence
of the concerns identified in this paper. Technically, this can be guaranteed by assuming
X 0 (1) ≤ 0 ≤ X 0 (0) and X 00 < 0.


Relationship-specific investments. In the most general case discussed below, we al-
low the firm to influence the size of the experience gain z that quick learners obtain when
the firm turns out to be a winner. We interpret z as the result of innovative investments
(e.g., R&D activities, unconventional human capital development activities, customer train-
ing programs) undertaken by the firm after starting its relationship with the stakeholders.
Importantly, we assume that these investments are non-contractible and costly for the firm.
The cost of providing z is described by the function C(z), with C 0 > 0 and C 00 > 0.
  11
     Abstracting from signaling eﬀects simplifies the analysis while neatly capturing the intuition that our
notion of transparency refers to the generation of information about the firm rather than to the disclosure
of information by the firm.




                                                     7
Attracting and retaining the stakeholders. We assume that the stakeholders attracted
at t = 1 and the firm itself are free to unilaterally break up their relationships at t = 2.12 For
simplicity, we assume that the terms of trade are set by the firm through take-it-or-leave-it
oﬀers. Specifically, the firm oﬀers its stakeholders compensation equal to w1 to attract them
at t = 1 and equal to w2 to retain them at t = 2.13 Stakeholders are assumed to be penniless
and enjoy limited liability so that w1 and w2 must be non-negative.14 We assume that the
compensation w1 at t = 1, must be the same for all stakeholders since they are ex-ante
identical. We assume that this is also the case at t = 2, when stakeholder types are privately
known, and show that this is optimal for the firm under a (mild) parametric assumption
described below.15
       Given that w2 is the same for both types, the compensation required to retain both types
will be the “reservation pay” (or opportunity cost net of expected incremental experience
gains) of the stakeholder that finds it relatively more costly to maintain its relationship
with the firm during the development period. Since reservation compensation diﬀers across
stakeholder types and firm qualities, it follows that, depending on the perception about the
firm’s quality, either the quick learners or the slow learners will appropriate some rents on
top of their reservation compensation. The firm’s transparency and investment decisions will
then be partly driven by the firm’s desire to reduce the expected value of those rents.
       At t = 3, the firm generates a gross revenue αY , where α is the fraction of the initial
stakeholders that the firm retains at t = 2 and Y is a productivity parameter that, for sim-
plicity, we assume independent of stakeholder types and firm quality. Moreover, we assume
that Y > max{ ∆U +μU
                 μ
                    l Ul −μUh +μz
                     , (1−μ) }, which is a suﬃcient condition for a firm, independently
  12
     We discuss the robustness of our results to the introduction of termination fees or other types of long-term
contracts in Section 6
  13
     For workers or suppliers, w can be viewed as the wage or the cost of the input. For customers, w can
be viewed as the discount that customers must be oﬀered to attract them away from a more established
competitor.
  14
     We also discuss the robustness of our results for the case in which shareholders’ wealth constraints are
nonbinding.
  15
     Under this assumption, the firm finds it profitable to retain both types of stakeholders rather than to
oﬀer a compensation that retains only some of them. In this setup, there is no pair of self-selecting payments
that allows the firm to retain both stakeholder types while paying them diﬀerent amounts.


                                                       8
of its quality, to find it optimal to oﬀer a compensation that retains all stakeholders during
the development period at t = 2. In essence, the previous suﬃcient condition requires that
both stakeholder types are present in non-negligible proportions and that each stakeholder
generates a larger revenue in the firm at t = 3 than his/her opportunity cost of abandoning
the firm.16


3        Attracting stakeholders with asymmetric informa-
         tion
In order to highlight the fundamental mechanism that makes transparency costly in our
model, we start the analysis by considering the simplified problem of a firm that must
attract rather than retain privately informed stakeholders. Specifically, the firm must attract
quick learners, who profit from an exogenous experience gain z when doing business with
an eventual winner firm, and slow learners who do not. Formally, this simplified problem
corresponds to a variation of the problem described in Figure 1 where (i) stakeholders are
at t = 2 once they know their type, and (ii) the investment z is exogenous.
       The analysis of the simplified problem will provide us with results that are valid for
the analysis of the late stages of the full game (by backwards induction). In particular, it
will show that greater transparency induces greater dispersion in stakeholders’ unobservable
valuation of their relationship with the firm, increasing the average information rents that
stakeholders are able to appropriate.

3.1       The required compensation

The magnitude of the compensation w2 required to attract the stakeholders at t = 2 depends
on the stakeholders’ perceptions of the firm. These perceptions diﬀer in each of the three
states, s = {u, g, b}, that can occur at t = 2: (i) in the no-news state (s = u), the firm’s type
  16
    As will be clear below, retaining all stakeholders rather than only the slow learners increases the retention
cost of a loser firm to μUh (to retain the quick learners) and gives a rent of (1 − μ)(Uh − Ul ) to the slow
learners. Similarly, for a winner, retaining all stakeholders rather than only the quick learners increases
retention cost to (1 − μ)Ul (to retain the slow learners), giving a rent of μ[Ul − (Uh − z)] to the quick learners.


                                                        9
remains unknown, (ii) in the good-news state (s = g), the firm is revealed to be a winner,
and (iii) in the bad-news state (s = b), the firm is revealed to be a loser.
          In the no-news state, the (minimum) compensation that attracts both stakeholder types
is
                                        wu = max{Ul , Uh − γz},                                      (1)

which reflects the fact that attracting a slow learner requires the firm to oﬀer compensation
equal to his opportunity cost of doing business with the firm, Ul , while attracting a quick
learner requires paying the diﬀerence between his corresponding opportunity cost, Uh , and
the expected value of the experience gain that he would get if the firm turns out to be a
winner, γz.
          In the good-news state, the required compensation is

                                         wg = max{Ul , Uh − z}                                       (2)

since a slow learner requires Ul , and a quick learner, who is in this case certain to appropriate
the experience gain z, would require Uh − z instead.
          Finally, in the bad-news state, the required compensation is

                                        wb = max{Ul , Uh } = Uh ,                                    (3)

since, there is no experience gain for a quick learner in a loser firm.
          In line with intuition, the required compensation is lower under good news than under
bad news (wg < wb ), and also lower under no news that under bad news (wu < wb ).
Moreover, attracting stakeholders is weakly less expensive under good news than under no
news, wg ≤ wu ; this inequality holds strictly if ∆U > γz.17
          In this framework there are two reasons why the required compensation diﬀers across
states. First, diﬀerent states imply diﬀerent experience gains to quick learners and hence
aﬀect the required compensation when quick learners have a larger opportunity cost of
     17
    Notice that if ∆U ≤ γz, then wg = wu = Ul since the minimum compensation is determined by the
opportunity cost of the slow learner in both states. In contrast, when if γz < ∆U then wg < wu = Uh − γz,
which implies that attracting a quick learner is always more diﬃcult than attracting a slow learner.

                                                   10
dealing with the firm. Second, if the expected experience gains of the quick learners are high
enough relative to the diﬀerence in reservation compensation across types, then the required
compensation is determined by the more stringent demands of the slow learners. In this
situation, the expected compensation across the states in which the firm’s quality is known
can diﬀer from the compensation required in the no-news state, implying the possibility that
transparency, as shown below, reduces firm value.

3.2       Expected costs of attracting stakeholders

Let w2 (d) denote the firm’s expected attraction cost as a function of the firm’s transparency
(i.e., the probability d that the firm’s type is publicly observed at t = 2). Clearly,

                             w2 (d) = d[γwg + (1 − γ)wb ] + (1 − d)wu .

From the expressions for wg , wb , and wu given above, we obtain the following result:

Proposition 1 In the stakeholder attraction problem,           expected attraction costs are given by
                        ⎧
                        ⎨ Ul + (1 − γ)∆Ud,                     if ∆U ≤ γz,
               w2 (d) =    Uh − γz + γ(z − ∆U)d,               if γz < ∆U < z,                        (4)
                        ⎩
                           Uh − γz,                            if ∆U ≥ z.

Therefore, if z > ∆U, the costs of attracting stakeholders are increasing in the firm’s degree
of transparency d; otherwise, they are independent of d.

       In words, when quick learners’ potential experience gains are large (i.e., z > ∆U), slow
learners are the costliest stakeholders to attract in the no-news and the good news state,
whereas quick learners are the costliest stakeholders to attract in the bad news state. In this
case, the required compensation in the no-news state, wu , is strictly lower than the expected
required compensation across the states in which the firm’s type is revealed, γwg +(1−γ)wb .18
Since in each state s the compensation ws is determined by the binding reservation utilities
  18
    Notice that wu reflects the requirement of slow learners if ∆U ≤ γz and quick learners if γz < ∆U < z.
Instead, γwg + (1 − γ)wb combines the requirements of both types since wg is driven by the requirements of
slow learners and wb by the requirements of quick learners.


                                                   11
of diﬀerent stakeholder types, the additional attraction costs that the firm must incur under
bad news (s = b) are not fully oﬀset by the reduction in case of good news (s = g). Thus,
the expected attraction costs are smaller in the absence of news and, then, increasing in the
firm’s degree of transparency d. Transparency increases the information rents appropriated
by the stakeholders.
       In contrast, when the quick learners’ potential gains are small (i.e., z ≤ ∆U), the required
compensation is driven in all states by the requirements of the quick learners. Specifically,
the expected attraction cost across the states in which the firm’s type is revealed is γwg +
(1 − γ)wb = Uh − γz, which equals the compensation required in the state of no news,
wu = Uh − γz. In this case, the firm’s degree of transparency d does not aﬀect stakeholders’
information rents and, hence, the attraction costs are independent of d.


4        Long-term relationships and the retention problem
In this section, we consider the extended case in which stakeholders are attracted at t = 1
(when they are ex-ante identical) and must be retained at t = 2 (after they learn their
types). As it turns out, the time structure of this extended model allows us to proceed
with the analysis by backward induction, and to take the results obtained in Section 3 as a
characterization of what happens after the start-up period.19
       Specifically, the expected cost of retaining the stakeholders at t = 2 coincides with the
w2 (d) as defined by equation (4). As discussed in the previous section, the asymmetric
information concerning stakeholders’ types at t = 2 allows the stakeholders to appropriate
rents, that is, to be paid a retaining compensation that exceed their net opportunity cost
of doing business with the firm up to t = 3. However, unlike in the attraction problem
discussed there, now the rents might be compensated at t = 1, if the stakeholders accept
a lower initial compensation that implicitly credits the firm for those information rents. In
the remainder of this section, we first look at the determination of the initial compensation
  19
    We treat the experience gain z as exogenous, and postpone the analysis of the underlying investment
decision to Section 5.


                                                  12
(and, as a result, the total stakeholder compensation) under a given degree of transparency
d. Then we discuss how the firm decides on d at t = 0 taking into account the trade-oﬀ
between the usual net benefits of transparency and its (sometimes negative) eﬀect on total
stakeholder compensation.

4.1       Total cost of stakeholder relationships

Let w1 (d) denote the initial stakeholder compensation, i.e., the firm’s payment to the stake-
holders over the start-up period (at t = 1). Since stakeholders anticipate the retaining
compensation at t = 2, w1 (d) must satisfy:

                             w1 (d) + [w2 (d) + μγz] − (Ul + μ∆U ) ≥ U,                                 (5)

where the term in brackets accounts for the expected monetary compensation and experience
gains obtained from t = 2 onwards, and the term in parenthesis reflects a stakeholder’s
expected reservation utility at that date.20 The diﬀerence between the term in brackets and
the term in parentheses is positive and measures the informational rents that stakeholders
appropriate from t = 2 onwards.
       According to (4), depending on the size of ∆U relative to γz and z, three parametric
regimes can emerge. To simplify the presentation, however, we will focus in the regime where
∆U ∈ (γz, z), which features retention costs that are aﬀected by the firm’s transparency d
and the experience gain z:21

                                   w2 (d) = Uh − γz + γ(z − ∆U)d.                                       (6)

       Under (6), the minimum w1 (d) that satisfies (5) is given by

                          b1 (d) = U − (1 − μ)(∆U − γz) − γ(z − ∆U)d.
                          w                                                                             (7)

From (7) it follows that, due to the informational rents anticipated at t = 2, stakeholders
                                     b1 (d) which is lower than their opportunity cost of
would accept an initial compensation w
  20
    Recall that stakeholders are ex-ante identical and learn their type before t = 2.
  21
    When ∆U ∈   / (γz, z) either d or z have no eﬀect on the expected retention costs which limits, but does
not contradict, the results of the analysis presented here.

                                                    13
dealing with the firm during the start-up period, U . Such an initial compensation is decreas-
ing in d because transparency increases the expected compensation required to retain the
stakeholders.
        b1 (d) < 0, the stakeholders’ wealth constraints at t = 1 (that is, the requirement
   When w
of w1 ≥ 0) are binding, so the minimum initial compensation is w1 (d) = 0 and the total
                                                    b1 (d) ≥ 0, then w1 (d) = w
stakeholder cost is W (d) = w2 (d). In contrast, if w                         b1 (d) and the
                                b1 (d) + w2 (d) become
total stakeholder costs W (d) = w

                            W (d) = U + (Ul + μ∆U ) − μγz ≡ w.                              (8)

Thus, if stakeholders’ wealth constraints are binding, the total stakeholder costs are in-
creasing in the firm’s transparency d; otherwise, these costs equal w (i.e., the stakeholders’
intertemporal expected reservation utility net of expected experience gains) and do not de-
                             b1 (d) is increasing in U and decreasing in d, we can establish
pend on d. In general, since w
the following result:

Proposition 2 Total stakeholder costs are given by W (d) = max{w, w2 (d)}, which is in-
creasing in the firm’s degree of transparency d when the stakeholders’ wealth constraints are
binding (i.e., for small U and/or large d) and, otherwise, is independent of d.

4.2    The transparency decision

At t = 0, firm value equals the present value of its gross revenue plus the net non-stakeholder-
related benefits of transparency minus the total stakeholder costs:

                                  V (d) ≡ Y + X(d) − W (d).                                 (9)

The firm makes its transparency decision in order to maximize V (d). Thus, except at the
point d = d¯ defined by w2 (d)
                            ¯ = w, if it exists, where W (d) is non-diﬀerentiable, the firm’s

optimal transparency decision must solve the first order condition:

                                       X 0 (d) = W 0 (d),                                  (10)

                                              14
which states that the conventional marginal net benefits from transparency, X 0 (d), must
equal the marginal stakeholder-related cost of transparency, W 0 (d). From (10) we obtain the
following result which is proven in the Appendix:

Proposition 3 When the stakeholders’ wealth constraints are binding (i.e., for small U
and/or large d∗ ), the stakeholder-related costs of transparency induce the firm to be less
transparent than under the conventional trade-oﬀs, d < d∗ . Otherwise, its transparency is
determined by the conventional trade-oﬀs, d = d∗ .

    Thus, when the stakeholders’ opportunity cost of dealing for the firm over the start-
up period, U, is small relative to d∗ ≡ arg max X(d), i.e., the degree of transparency that
would optimally resolve the conventional trade-oﬀs, the firm will choose a relatively con-
servative transparency level d < d∗ . Intuitively, this occurs when at d∗ the stakeholders’
wealth constraints are binding and, then, the higher cost of stakeholders’ retention during
the development period (increasing in the level of transparency) cannot be fully oﬀset by
reducing their compensation during the start-up period.


5     Endogenous relationship-specific investments
We now endogenize the experience gains z that quick learners obtain if the firm turns out to
be a winner. We consider such gains as the result of some innovative investments undertaken
by the firm during the start up period, after initiating its relationship with the stakeholders
(at t = 1) but before the possible resolution of the uncertainty about firm quality (at t = 2).
The investments that we have in mind include training programs that allow stakeholders (e.g.,
employees, customers or suppliers) to acquire the firm’s know-how, R&D investments that
widen the outside applicability of the firm’s proprietary technologies, or the establishment
of confidentiality procedures and licensing practices that limit the ability of those who do
not keep a relationship with the firm to develop marketable skills. We assume that these
investments, while observable for both the firm and its stakeholders, are unverifiable and


                                              15
hence non-contractible.22 We model them as a direct choice of z by the firm, at a cost
described by the strictly increasing and strictly convex function C(z) already described in
Section 2.23
       For brevity, we focus on the regime with ∆U ∈ (γz, z), i.e., we assume that the choice of z
is restricted to an interval [z, z] ⊂ (∆U, ∆U/γ).24 In addition, in order to highlight the eﬀects
channelled through the investment level z, we assume that the stakeholders’ opportunity cost
of dealing with the firm during the start-up period U is large enough for the stakeholders’
wealth constraints not to be binding at t = 1. Then, according to the analysis in Subsection
4.1, the total stakeholder compensation is, as in (8),

                                     w ≡ U + (Ul + γ∆U) − μγz,                                           (11)

which does not directly depend on the transparency decision d.25
       It is also worth noting that in (11), stakeholders’ expected gains from the innovative
investments, μγz, directly reduce w, which implies that stakeholders are willing to receive
such gains in lieu of their monetary compensation. Also, as we show, the firm’s transparency
choice d (made before the firm initiates the relationship with its stakeholders) acts as a
commitment device to ensure the stakeholders a certain level of investment z.

5.1       Contractible investment scenario

As a benchmark, we start by examining the case where the innovative investments z are
contractible and, hence, can be set at their first-best level. Since the stakeholders’ experi-
ence gains μγz reduce their monetary compensation, ignoring additive constants, the value
  22
     Maskin (1999) shows that the unverifiability problem could be solved with the use of a mechanism based
on the parties’ announcements. Nevertheless, we exclude the possibility of using this type of mechanism in
our analysis. This is in line with approach taken by the incomplete contracts literature (e.g., Aghion and
Bolton 1992 and Hart and Moore 2007), which argues that these mechanisms lack realism, are not robust to
the possibility of renegotiation, and may not be robust to small amounts of private information (i.e., Aghion,
Fudenberg, and Holden 2007).
  23
     See Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart (1995) for a theory of the firm that emphasizes the importance
of relationship-specific investments.
  24
     Technically, this could be guaranteed by assuming limz+ →∆U C 0 (z) = 0 and limz− → ∆U C 0 (z) = +∞.
                                                                                             γ
  25
     At the end of the section we briefly discuss the case of a small U in which the total stakeholder compen-
sation is directly aﬀected by d, as in (6).

                                                     16
maximization program can be expressed as:

                                      max            X(d) + [μγz − C(z)],                             (12)
                                  d∈[0,1], z∈[z,z]

whose first order conditions implicitly define the first-best solution (d∗ , z ∗ )

                                                 X 0 (d∗ ) = 0,                                       (13)

                                                 μγ = C 0 (z ∗ ).                                     (14)

Expressions (13) and (14) show that with contractible investments the transparency decision
is separable from the investment decision. In particular, transparency d∗ is determined by
the conventional non-stakeholder-related trade-oﬀs, exactly as in the case of exogenous z and
nonbinding wealth constraints considered in the previous section.26

5.2       Non-contractible investment scenario

We now consider the case of interest where the innovative investments z are not contractible.
As we show, the investment level z will be a decreasing function of the firm’s transparency.
Absent other transparency eﬀects, the firm will make the transparency choice that commits
it to choose the first-best z ∗ . In general, however, since there are other costs and benefits of
transparency, z ∗ will not be implemented.
       We proceed by backward induction: when z is chosen, the transparency d and the stake-
holders’ compensation w1 (d) have already been determined. So z is set to maximize the firm’s
continuation value, which is aﬀected by z through its eﬀect on the required compensation to
retain the stakeholders,
                                 w2 (d, z) = Uh − γz + γ(z − ∆U)d,                                    (15)

and the investment cost, C(z). Thus, ignoring additive constants, the firm solves

                                        max          γ(1 − d)z − C(z),
                                       z∈[z,z]

  26
    Notice that the marginal value of the z investment, μγ, is less than one because only quick learners in
winner firms obtain experience gains. These results can be generalized to a situation where both types of
stakeholders experience gains as long as the marginal valuations of the investments remained higher for the
quick learners in winner firms.

                                                        17
which has the first order condition

                                         (1 − d)γ = C 0 (z).                                 (16)

For each possible value of d, (16) defines a unique solution z = h(d), where, by the implicit
function theorem, h0 (d) = −γ/C 00 (z) < 0. This implies the following lemma.

Lemma 1 When the firm’s innovative investments z are not contractible, their level h(d) is
a decreasing function of the firm’s transparency d.

   Equation (16) captures an important feature of the analysis. In contrast to the first-best
case, the investment z and the transparency decisions d are not separable. Specifically, a
less transparent firm tends to invest more in its stakeholder relationships because, with less
information disclosure, the costs of stakeholder retention are more sensitive to changes in
stakeholders’ expected experience gains. In other words, the transparency decision d works
as a mechanism that allows the firm to commit to any desired level of z. Such a commitment
device, however, is costly for the firm because the transparency level that implements the
first-best level of z is generally diﬀerent from the first-best transparency level d∗ .
   Specifically, the second-best level of transparency, d∗∗ , takes into account its eﬀect on the
investment z and, thus, solves

                               max X(d) + [γμh(d) − C(h(d))],                                (17)
                               d∈[0,1]


where we have replaced h(d) for z in the terms that account for the benefits and costs of the
z investment. Under our assumptions, the objective function in the above maximization is
quasi-concave so a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a maximum is:

                             X 0 (d∗∗ ) = −h0 (d∗∗ )[γμ − C 0 (h(d∗∗ ))],                    (18)

which uniquely determines d∗∗ and, recursively, z ∗∗ = h(d∗∗ ).
   It is clear from (13) and (14) that, if h(d∗ ) = z ∗ , then d∗∗ = d∗ solves (18) and, thus, the
second-best solution coincides with the first-best solution. In general, however, under- and

                                                 18
over-investment can occur. A parameter that determines which of the cases holds is μ, that
is, the proportion of quick learners among the stakeholders. Specifically, by comparing (13)
and (16), and noting that if h(d∗ ) = z ∗ then d∗ = 1 − μ, we establish the following result:

Proposition 4 When the proportion of quick learner stakeholders μ is above (below) the
level μ∗ ≡ 1 − d∗ , the firm makes a conservative (aggressive) transparency choice, d∗∗ <
d∗ (> d∗ ), and underinvests (overinvests) in relationship-specific innovation, h(d∗∗ ) < z ∗
(> z ∗ ). Furthermore, as the proportion of quick learners increases, the firm reduces its
transparency and increases its relationship-specific innovation.

       The relation between transparency and the incentives to undertake relationship-specific
investments stems from the time inconsistency problem that aﬀects the firm’s investment
decision. Forward-looking stakeholders are willing to compensate the firm for their expected
experience gains by improving their terms of trade (i.e., by accepting a lower monetary
compensation). The firm level investment z, however, is set once the terms of trade for
the start-up period (attracting compensation) are already fixed; hence, at that point, it
only considers the eﬀect of z on the terms of trade for the development period (retaining
compensation). When, as a result of this, the firm anticipates a problem of underinvestment
(overinvestment) in relationship-specific innovation, it can partially correct the problem by
choosing lower (higher) transparency, since this makes the terms of trade of the development
period more (less) sensitive to z and thus increases (reduces) the incentives to invest in z.27
       The second part of the proposition states that when stakeholders are more likely to be
quick learners (but do not know their types yet), they are willing to accept a larger reduction
in their initial compensation in exchange for the potential experience gain z. Thus the optimal
z investment is increasing in the stakeholders’ ex ante probability of being quick learners, μ.
  27
    To understand why it is possible to have incentives to overinvest as well as underinvest one should note
that although the quick learners benefit from a higher z, a higher z reduces second period retention costs
and, thus, reduces the rents appropriated by the slow learners. Notice that, as shown by (14), the ex ante
optimal z increases with the proportion of quick learners, μ, while, as shown by (16), the ex-post choice of
z does not directly depend on μ but on the transparency level d.



                                                    19
5.3    What if stakeholders’ wealth constraints are binding?

We conclude this section with a brief discussion of the case in which the low value of stake-
holders’ opportunity cost of dealing with the firm during the start-up period, U, makes their
wealth constraints binding (so that w1 = 0). In this case, the future rents that stakeholders
appropriate under greater transparency cannot be transferred back to the firm. Hence, in
addition to the eﬀect channelled through the investment z, the transparency level d has a
direct eﬀect on the firm’s stakeholder costs, as already discussed in Section 4. Since in this
case the attracting compensation is set at the minimum level, the ex ante value and the
continuation value of the firm (which are the relevant criteria for the choice of d and z,
respectively) coincide and are equal to

                                   X(d) − w2 (d, z) − C(z),                               (19)

where w2 (d, z) is given by (15). Maximizing expression (19) with respect to d and z leads to
the following proposition:

Proposition 5 When stakeholders’ wealth constraints are binding (i.e., for small U), the
firm chooses a conservative transparency level d < d∗ , which is independent of the proportion
of quick learner stakeholders. Over- and under-investment in relationship-specific innovation
are possible.

    This result leads us back to the logic of Proposition 3. When stakeholders’ wealth con-
straints are binding, their compensation is paid after z is set so d plays no role as a commit-
ment device. Similarly to the exogenous z case, when z is endogeneous more transparency
leads to an increase in stakeholder retention costs and in total stakeholder costs as well.


6     Discussion of the results
In this section, we first discuss how the intuition developed in the preceding sections applies
to specific firms and stakeholder relationships. Then, we explain how some of our partial

                                              20
equilibrium assumptions can be justified within a market set up. Next, we examine the
robustness of our findings to a contracting environment in which stakeholders and firms can
stipulate penalties that discourage the breaking of their long-term relationships. Finally, we
comment on the robustness of our results to other possible modifications of the model.

6.1    Some illustrative stakeholder relationships

While stakeholder relationships are important for all firms, they seem to be essential to the
inception, development, and survival of new firms (see Bhide and Stevenson 1999). Indeed,
several aspects of our analysis make it especially relevant for understanding the costs of
transparency for these firms. In particular, we identify three key ingredients whose interplay
create transparency costs: (i) ex-ante uncertainty about an aspect of the firm’s prospects that
aﬀects stakeholders’ future careers, (ii) asymmetric information about stakeholders’ ability
to benefit from their experience with the firm, and (iii) the presence of either stakeholders’
wealth constraints or some non-contractible relationship-specific investments that aﬀect the
value of stakeholders’ experience with the firm.
   Arguably, the combination of these ingredients is more likely among high-tech start-up
firms with businesses that require that relatively sophisticated stakeholders get involved
in specialized firm-specific activities. In these situations, there is likely to be considerable
uncertainty about a firm’s potential and substantial room for asymmetries of information
regarding stakeholders’ abilities to take advantage of their relationship with the firm. For
a sucessful relationship, stakeholders in these firms may need to develop novel firm-specific
inputs, or to perform firm-specific tasks whose completion would aﬀect the value of their
experience. While the sharpest, most skillful or most ambitious employees, customers, sup-
pliers or venture capitalists may clearly extract a great deal from their association with an
industry leader, less able stakeholders may not extract much or find much of a diﬀerence
between dealing with industry winners and losers.
   Consider, for instance, the young, high-potential employees of a start-up attempting to
develop and introduce some innovative product. Conditional on the success of the product,


                                              21
the employees who absorb the “secrets” of the business can develop a profitable career in
related firms or might start a firm of their own. Our analysis indicates that attracting
and retaining the high-potential employees may be cheaper for the less transparent start-up
because postponing the discovery of whether the product is a winner or a loser can reduce
the overall employee costs and can be a credible device for the firm to commit to valuable
human capital development investments (which allows it to attract employees with lower
compensation).
       As another example, consider the suppliers of customized inputs of a new technology. If
such a technology becomes an industry standard, the more capable suppliers will benefit by
supplying a much larger market. Our theory predicts that, in this case, suppliers would be
willing to sell their inputs cheaper to the less transparent firm for reasons similar to those
that lead employees to accept overall lower compensation in the previous example.
       In the same vein, our theory can be applied to the relationship between, say, a software
company and the early customers of a new software product. If the product succeeds and
an updated version becomes dominant in the market, the more talented users who used the
earlier versions may be more eﬀective at developing profitable utilities and applications for
the now dominant software. In this case, our analysis suggests that either in the form of
higher (average) prices for the updated version of the application or as the result of the firm’s
commitment to a larger investment in the training of its customers, lower transparency can
allow the firm to extract higher surplus from its customers.28
       All in all, our theory predicts preference for less transparency than what one could infer
from the analysis of the standard transparency trade-oﬀs. We predict that the tilt toward less
transparency should be more noticeable among high-tech startups with employees, suppliers,
  28
    In the case of financial stakeholders, our theory would be hardly applicable to the anonimous holder
of a publicly issued security or to a passive financier that does not interact with the firm’s management.
In contrast, our findings are relevant for venture capital and for active investors such as angels and hedge
funds who are likely to develop valuable expertise by their association with innovators. Our theory sug-
gests a complementary between the firms which are less transparent about their prospects and the less
experienced financiers of the above classes. For obvious reasons, the transparency eﬀect associated with
wealth-constrained stakeholders does not apply to financial stakeholders. Yet the eﬀects due to the non-
contractibility of relationship specific investments may be very significant for the less experienced financiers.



                                                       22
and customers who care about the value of the experience gained by doing business with the
firm but are ex ante uncertain about both their own ability to acquire such an experience
and the actual value of the experience at stake.

6.2    Stakeholders in a market setting

We have analyzed the relationship between the firm and its stakeholders in a partial equilib-
rium setting where some key determinants of stakeholders’ attraction and retention costs–
their experience gains and opportunity costs of doing business with the firm–were exogenous.
One may wonder whether there are reasonable market settings in which our assumptions
regarding those variables could be justified in closer reference to first principles. In this
subsection we argue that the answer is yes.
   To start with, it is worth summarizing our assumptions regarding the determinants of
stakeholders’ reservation compensation: (i) at the start up period, the stakeholders’ oppor-
tunity cost of doing business with the firm equals U ; (ii) at the development period, slow
and quick learners’ opportunity costs of doing business with the firm are private information
and equal to Ul and Uh , respectively; (iii) experience gains z accrue solely to quick learners
associated with winner firms during the development period.
   These assumptions can be validated in the following market equilibrium setting. Consider
a two-sector economy in which young firms (startups) deal with unexperienced stakeholders
in one sector and mature firms operate with experienced (and possibly also unexperienced)
stakeholders in the other. The firm in our model is a representative firm of the first sector.
Stakeholders are experienced or unexperienced in regards to the specific business of a firm
or group of firms. One can think of startups as innovative enterprises in their corresponding
businesses so that they have no “experienced” stakeholders to whom first attract in the start-
up period, and the only “partly-experienced” stakeholders who they have for the development
period are their own. Our assumptions imply that, after dealing with a firm over the startup
period, stakeholders realize how much they learned from the relationship for such period and
can anticipate how much they will learn by keeping the relationship during the development


                                              23
period. Assumptions (ii) and (iii) capture the idea that, relative to slow learners, quick
learners extract more valuable experience in both periods and that the extra experience
obtained during the development period is exclusive of those stakeholders dealing with a
winner firm. Intuitively, there is a complementarity between the ability of a stakeholder to
learn and the quality of a firm to produce valuable experience. Our results can be extended
to more general specifications of this complementarity (e.g., experience also acquired in the
startup period), but at the cost of additional analytical complexity.
       Our assumptions are consistent with the idea that stakeholders can cash-in the value of
the experience acquired in the startup sector if they move to the mature sector. For instance,
this would occur if experienced stakeholders could be self-employed or run a business of their
own in the mature sector. In this case, the opportunity costs Ul and Uh would represent
their per-period net profits of moving to the mature sector immediately after the startup
period. If instead stakeholders move after the development period, slow learners would still
earn Ul per period and quick learners would make either Uh + z per period (if they are
associated to a winner) or Uh per period (otherwise). Notice that the fact that stakeholders
are self-employed or run their own business in the mature sector is compatible with Ul and
Uh being private information at the retention stage.29
       Notice that these interpretations of Ul , Uh , and z imply ∆U > 0 and z > 0, but do not
impose any particular constraint to the relative sizes of the diﬀerential experience gains of the
quick learners during the startup period, ∆U, and the value of the experience gains stemming
from the association between a quick learner and a winner firm during the development
period, z. Our results on the relevance of transparency only require that the former are less
important than the latter, ∆U < z or, in other words, that the quick-learner winner-firm
complementarity is important.
       One can interpret Ul and Uh without the requirement that the experience acquired during
the startup stage is valuable in the mature sector. To see this, suppose that z is the only
  29
   Alternatively, one could consider a mature sector that yields type-dependent net profits Ul and Uh . This
would occur if output were a function of a stakeholder’s experience and some form of performance-based
compensation were in place (e.g., piece rate compensation in the case of employees).


                                                    24
valuable experience, and that Ul , Uh reflect the stakeholders’ expectations about what they
could get by breaking their relationship with a loser firm and starting a new relationship with
a new startup of unknown quality. Under this interpretation, ∆U > 0 reflects the fact that
slow learners can never obtain z, while quick learners find it possible to get z by associating
with a winner. This interpretation also implies ∆U < z and, hence, corresponds to a case
in which transparency has costs as those identified in our analysis.
   As for the stakeholders’ opportunity cost of doing business with the firm at the startup
stage, U , the model imposes no particular restriction. The interpretation of Ul and Uh as
what each of the stakeholder types can earn somewhere else after accumulating experience
during the startup period suggests that it is reasonable that U < Ul + μ∆U. This additional
restriction, however, would not invalidate or qualify any of our results. Likewise, the results
also hold if U measures what an unexperienced stakeholder gets in his sector of reference
(e.g., in the startup sector or as an unexperienced-stakeholder in the mature sector).

6.3    Long-term contracts

In this subsection, we discuss whether a more general contracting environment would modify
our key results. We do so by revisiting the scenarios in which, according to the analysis in
previous sections, transparency is costly.
   In the scenario in which stakeholders’ wealth constraints are binding and experience
gains are exogenous (Section 4), the question is whether a long-term contract can isolate
the firm’s total expected stakeholder costs from the eﬀects of transparency, making the
distortion of the firm’s transparency decision unnecessary. The short answer is no, except
in the trivial–and arguably implausible–case in which stakeholders can fully commit to
do business with the firm for both periods. In such a case, stakeholders would accept a
total intertemporal monetary compensation of w when starting their relationship with the
firm and the firm’s transparency decision would be determined by the conventional non-
stakeholder-related trade-oﬀs.
   Notice that even if stakeholders cannot directly commit to deal with the firm for more


                                              25
than one period, an equivalent commitment can be obtained by introducing a pecuniary
penalty, L, imposed on stakeholders who rescind their relationship with the firm. However,
the penalty L would reduce stakeholders’ retaining compensation to w2 = w2 (d) − L only
if their attracting compensation were (at least) w1 = L, in which case, the total expected
stakeholder costs would be w1 + w2 = L + [w2 (d) − L] = w2 (d), as in the case without
penalties analyzed in Section 4. If this is the case, our previous results remain valid.
       In the scenario considered in Section 5, i.e., non-binding wealth constraints and endoge-
nous z, long-term contracts can improve matters only if they contribute to a better alignment
between the firm’s ex post incentive to invest in z (that depends on the sensitivity of re-
taining compensation to z) and the objective of ex ante value maximization (that calls for
minimizing the sum of stakeholder compensation and z costs). However, long-term contracts
cannot address the fundamental non-contractibility of z. They can either preserve the orig-
inal sensitivity of w2 to z or fully eliminate it, in which case the firm has no incentive to
invest in z.30
       This polar no-investment solution is surely inferior to the solution without long-term
contracts characterized in Section 5 if the proportion of stakeholders who are quick learners
is above the critical level μ∗ since, in such a case, the firm already underinvests in relationship-
specific innovation (see Proposition 4); investing zero would simply aggravate the problem.
In contrast, if the proportion of quick learners is below μ∗ (so that the firm overinvests in
relationship-specific innovation), it is possible that, by fully eliminating the sensitivity of the
retaining compensation to z, firm value increases relative to the solution characterized in
(18).31
  30
     Indeed, the sensitivity of w2 to z can be eliminated by either committing the firm to a very high
retaining compensation, so that all stakeholders are willing to continue their business with the firm in all
states, irrespective of the value of z, or by fixing a very high break-up penalty for the stakeholders, so
that they are willing to keep their relationship with the firm even with a zero retaining compensation and
regardless of the value of z. In either case, because w2 does not depend on z, the firm loses its incentive to
invest in z, irrespective of its transparency level.
  31
     Actually, in this case, the optimal z investment lies somewhere between the amounts invested when all
stakeholders receive either short-term or long-term contracts. As a result, the firm could implement the first-
best investment level by oﬀering long-term contracts to some of the stakeholders and short-term contracts to
the rest. In addition, this argument suggests that the problem of overinvestment in z (and the remedy based


                                                      26
6.4     Other robustness issues

The model considered so far embeds a number of simplifying assumptions (on the number
of stakeholder and firm types, the allocation of bargaining power, and the lack of variability
of the firm’s gross revenue with its type). These assumptions facilitate the algebra and
the fixing of intuitions but are not essential to the results. In particular, we have checked
that the mechanisms behind the transparency eﬀects that we identify still work when: (i)
there is a continuum of stakeholder types θ (i.e., stakeholders that diﬀer in their opportunity
costs of dealing with the firm in the development period, U (θ) = a + bθ where a, b > 0
and θ ∈ [0, 1], as well as in the experience gains obtained by dealing with a winner, θz), (ii)
there is a continuum of firm qualities (i.e., firms that diﬀer in z), (iii) stakeholders have some
bargaining power at the point of negotiating their retention compensation with the firm, and
(iv) the gross revenue of the firm, Y, varies with its quality and stakeholders’ compensation
can be made contingent upon it.32


7     Concluding remarks
The perceptions of stakeholders play an important role in getting a firm started and continue
to play an important role as the firm matures. As we emphasize in this paper, entrepreneurs
make a number of choices that can aﬀect the transparency of the firm and need to be
cognizant of how these choices can influence stakeholder perceptions. For example, as we
mentioned in the Introduction, transparency considerations can potentially influence how a
firm is financed, e.g., the choice of private versus public equity financing, and the timing of
their IPOs. There is a large literature on the costs and benefits of going public, some of
which describe the information generated by the due diligence and book building process of
the investment banker and the analysts. Our contribution to this literature is the observation
that the increased scrutiny by public investors and analysts is not necessarily a good thing.
on an aggressive transparency decision) is less pervasive than the problem of underinvestment in z (and the
remedy based on a conservative transparency decision).
  32
     Details of the derivations regarding the robustness of the results are available from the authors upon
request.

                                                    27
We provide a rationale for firms to (least temporarily) stay out of the lime light of the
public markets, and remain, say, a less transparent private firm that gets “the benefit of the
doubt”.33
       There are many other choices that firms make that can also aﬀect the extent to which the
firm is scrutinized. For example, an entrepreneur may choose to locate away from industry
clusters, like Silicon Valley, to keep a lower profile while the firm is getting established. The
firm may also want to avoid high profile investments , which are likely to attract the scrutiny
of journalists and analysts, and similarly, they might want to discourage would be suitors,
who might uncover unfavorable information in the course of their due diligence.
       Similar concerns may apply in the context of mergers and acquisitions. Branderburger
and Nalebuﬀ (1996), discuss the case of Continental Insurance, a company whose board
decided not to accept a lucrative takeover oﬀer from CNA that was conditional on due
diligence (p. 214). The board was concerned about the revealed information “including
the potential adverse eﬀects a possible decision by CNA (following such due diligence) not
to make an oﬀer could have on market and rating agencies’ views of the company and on
the willingness of insurance partners to proceed with transactions” (Continental Insurance’s
proxy statement, March 29, 1995).34
  33
     Investment banks have a legal mandate to investigate firms (i.e., perform due diligence) before marketing
their shares, and there exists evidence that suggests that institutional investors tend to be relatively informed
when they acquire shares in a secondary oﬀering (i.e., Gibson et al., 2004).
  34
     Similarly, on July 12, 2007, Reuters reported that, in the context of the dealings between Iberia Airlines
and TPG, a consortium interested in purchasing the airline, Iberia’s board agreed to provide additional
information but only in case it received a binding oﬀer that the board considered interesting for the company.
We interpret this as an attempt to immunize Iberia’s shareholders from the eﬀects of information revelation.




                                                       28
                                         APPENDIX


Proof of Proposition 3 The analysis that led to Proposition 2 makes clear that:
                                                      b1 (d) ≤ 0) for all d.
(1) If U − (1 − μ)(∆U − γz) ≤ 0, then W (d) = w2 (d) (w
(2) If 0 < U − (1 − μ)(∆U − γz) < γ(z − ∆U), then there exists some

                                   U − (1 − μ)(∆U − γz)
                              d¯ ≡                      ∈ (0, 1)                           (20)
                                        γ(z − ∆U)
              ¯ ≥ 0, which implies W (d) = w for d ≤ d¯ and W (d) = w2 (d) for d > d.
          b1 (d)
such that w                                                                        ¯

                                                          b1 (d) > 0) for all d.
(3) If U − (1 − μ)(∆U − γz) ≥ γ(z − ∆U ), then W (d) = w (w
For convenience, let us extend the definition of d making it take value 0 if U ≤ (1 − μ)(∆U −
γz) and value 1 if U ≥ (1 − μ)(∆U − γz) + γ(z − ∆U). Then, when looking for candidate
solutions to the first order condition (10), we can consider three exhaustive possibilities:
        ¯ In this case, we have W (d) = w so (10) becomes X 0 (d) = 0, whose solution is
(a) d < d.
                       ¯ the firm’s optimal transparency is d∗ , which is then exclusively
d = d∗ . Hence if d∗ < d,
determined by the conventional non-stakeholder-related trade-oﬀs captured by X(d).
        ¯ In this case, we have W (d) = w2 (d) so, using (6), (10) becomes X 0 (d) = γ(z−∆U),
(b) d > d.
whose solution is d = db < d∗ . Hence if db > d,                                   b which is
                                              ¯ the firm’s optimal transparency is d,

smaller than d∗ due to the stakeholder-related costs of transparency.
        ¯ Given the form of W (d), having a maximum at the non-diﬀerentiability point d¯
(c) d = d.
                                                 b d∗ ].
                  ¯ ≤ γ(z − ∆U ), that is, d¯ ∈ [d,
requires 0 ≤ X 0 (d)
                                   b d}
Therefore, the solution is d = max{d, ¯ < d∗ when d¯ < d∗ , and d = d∗ when d¯ ≥ d∗ . Finally,

given that d¯ is decreasing in U, the result stated in Proposition 3 follows immediately.¥




                                                29
                                   REFERENCES


Aghion, P., and P. Bolton (1992), An incomplete contracts approach to financial contract-
    ing, Review of Economic Studies, 59, 473-494.

Aghion, P., D. Fudenberg, and R. Holden (2007), Subgame perfect implementation with
    almost perfect information, mimeo, Harvard University.

Anand, B., and A. Galetovic (2000), Weak property rights and hold-up in R&D, Journal
    of Economics and Management Strategy 9, 615-642.

Anton, J., and D. Yao, (1994), Expropriation and inventions: Appropriable rents in the
    absence of property rights, American Economic Review 84, 190—209.

Anton, J., and D. Yao (2002), The sale of ideas: Strategic disclosure, property rights and
    contracting, Review of Economic Studies 69, 513-531.

Audia, P., and C. Rider (2006), Entrepreneurs as organizational products: Revisited in The
    Psychology of Entrepreneurship by J. Baum, R. Baron & M. Frese (Eds.), Hillsdale,
    NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Bhattacharya, S., and G. Chiesa (1995), Proprietary information, financial intermediation,
    and research incentives , Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 328-357.

Bhide, A., and H. Stevenson, 1999, Attracting stakeholders, in The Entrepreneurial Venture,
    W. Sahlman and H. Stevenson (eds.), Harvard Business School Publications, Boston,
    Massachusetts, 2nd edition.

Biais, B., and E. Perotti (2004), Entrepreneurs and new ideas, CEPR Discussion Paper no
    3864, London.

Brandenburger, A., and B. Nalebuﬀ (1996), Co-opetition, Currency and Doubleday, New
    York.

                                           30
Brittain, J., and J. Freeman (1986), Entrepreneurship in the semiconductor industry,
    mimeo, University of California at Berkeley.

Burkart, M., D. Gromb, and F. Panunzi (1997), Large shareholders, monitoring, and the
    value of the firm, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 693-728.

Cassiman, B., and M. Ueda (2006), Optimal project rejection and new firm start-ups,
    Management Science 52, 262-275.

Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia (1991), Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of capital, Journal
    of Finance 46, 1325-1359.

Easterbrook, F. (1984), Two agency-cost explanations of dividends, American Economic
    Review 74, 650-659.

Franco, A., and D. Filson (2000), Knowledge diﬀusion through employee mobility, Staﬀ
    Report 272, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Gans, J., and S. Stern (2000), Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing in the gale of
    creative destruction, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 9, 485-511.

Gibson, S., A. Safieddine, and R. Sonti (2004), Smart investments by smart money: Evi-
    dence from seasoned equity oﬀerings, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 581-604.

Gompers, P., J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein (2005), Entrepreneurial spawning: Public corpo-
    rations and the genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999, Journal of Finance 60, 577-614.

Gromb, D., and D. Scharfstein (2001), Entrepreneurial activity in equilibrium, mimeo,
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Grossman, S., and O. Hart (1986), The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical
    and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.

Hart, O. (1995), Firms, contracts and financial structure, Clarendon Press Oxford.

                                             31
Hart, O. and J. Moore (2007), Incomplete contracts and ownership: Some new thoughts,
    American Economic Review 97, 182-86.

Hellmann, T. (2007a), When do employees become entrepreneurs?, Management Science
    53, 919-933.

Hellmann, T. (2007b), Entrepreneurs and the process of obtaining resources, Journal of
    Economics and Management Strategy 16, 81-109.

Hellmann, T., and E. Perotti (2006), The circulation of ideas: Firms versus markets, mimeo,
    University of British Columbia.

Hermalin, B., and M. Weisbach (1998), Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their
    monitoring of the CEO, American Economic Review 88, 96-118.

Hermalin, B., and M. Weisbach (2007), Transparency and corporate governance, NBER
    WP No. 12875.

Lewis, T., and D. Yao. (2003), Innovation, knowledge flow, and worker mobility, Duke
    University Working Paper.

Maskin, E. (1999), Nash equilibrium and welfare optimality, Review of Economic Studies,
    66: 23-38.

Pagano, M., and A. Röell (1998), The choice of stock ownership structure: agency costs,
    monitoring, and the decision to go public, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 187-
    225.

Pakes, A., and S. Nitzan (1983), Optimum contract for research personnel, research em-
    ployment, and the establishment of rival enterprises, Journal of Labor Economics, 1,
    345-365.




                                           32
Perotti, E., and E.-L. von Thadden (2003), Strategic transparency and informed trading:
    Will capital market integration force convergence of corporate governance?, Journal of
    Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 61-85.

Saxenian, A. (1994), Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
    Route 128, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Subrahmanyam, A., and S. Titman (1999), The going public decision and the development
    of financial markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1045-1082.

Teoh, S. (1997), Information disclosure and voluntary contributions to public goods, RAND
    Journal of Economics 28, 385-406.

Verrecchia, R. (2001), Essays on disclosure, Journal of Accounting and Economics 32, 97-
    180.




                                          33
