                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        PATENTS, THICKETS, AND THE FINANCING OF EARLY-STAGE FIRMS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE SOFTWARE INDUSTRY

                                          Iain M. Cockburn
                                          Megan MacGarvie

                                        Working Paper 13644
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13644


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




This paper grew out of research for the LECG software patent project. Parts of it follow closely Cockburn
and MacGarvie (2007). We thank participants in the NBER-Kauffman conference "Entrepreneurship:
Strategy and Structure" (particularly organizers Thomas Hellmann and Scott Stern and discussant
Bill Kerr), Isin Guler, Lihui Lin, and Rosemarie Ziedonis for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Iain M. Cockburn and Megan MacGarvie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Patents, Thickets, and the Financing of Early-Stage Firms: Evidence from the Software Industry
Iain M. Cockburn and Megan MacGarvie
NBER Working Paper No. 13644
November 2007
JEL No. L1,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

The impact of stronger intellectual property rights in the software industry is controversial. One means
by which patents can affect technical change, industry dynamics, and ultimately welfare, is through
their role in stimulating or stifling entry by new ventures. Patents can block entry, or raise entrants'
costs in variety of ways, while at the same time they may stimulate entry by improving the bargaining
position of entrants vis-à-vis incumbents, and supporting a "market for technology" which enables
new ventures to license their way into the market, or realize value through trade in their intangible
assets. One important impact of patents may be their influence on capital markets, and here we find
evidence that the extraordinary growth in patenting of software during the 1990s is associated with
significant effects on the financing of software companies. Start-up software companies operating
in markets characterized by denser patent thickets see their initial acquisition of VC funding delayed
relative to firms in markets less affected by patents. The relationship between patents and the probability
of IPO or acquisition is more complex, but there is some evidence that firms without patents are less
likely to go public if they operate in a market characterized by patent thickets.


Iain M. Cockburn
School of Management
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cockburn@bu.edu

Megan MacGarvie
School of Management
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 522H
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mmacgarv@bu.edu
           Debate over whether the current U.S. patent system is promoting or hindering innovation

has reached a crescendo: reflecting growing skepticism among economists about the overall

impact of strengthened and expanded patent rights, Adam Jaffe has stated in testimony before

Congress the that “the patent system—intended to foster and protect innovation—is generating

waste and uncertainty that hinder and threaten the innovative process.”1 These concerns are

particularly acute in industries such as software and semiconductors, where products are highly

complex, each embodying thousands of innovations, and where technological progress tends to

be incremental and cumulative. In such circumstances, critics argue, any “stimulating” effect of

stronger patents on incentives to innovate will be offset, or even swamped, by the “stifling”

effect of higher transactions costs, increased threat of litigation, and constraints imposed on the

cumulative development of technologies by multiple blocking patents.

           Software has been a particularly important locus of innovation in the US economy, yet,

notably, much foundational innovation occurred in the absence of strong patent protection, and

until relatively recently many leading innovators in the industry, including highly significant

firms like Microsoft, filed relatively few patents. But changes in patent law and USPTO practice

in the mid-1990s generated a surge in patenting in software that continues unabated. With more

than 100,000 software patents issued in the US since 1990, and ever-greater complexity and

scale of software products, industry participants face an increasingly forbidding “thicket” of IP.

With even quite modest products containing millions of lines of code and thousands or tens of

thousand of inter-related component modules, any of which could potentially infringe one or

more patents, the cost of “clearing” new products for potential infringement can be very large.

Allegedly poor standards of patent examination in this area in the past may also have generated

large numbers of patents with inadequate disclosure, and excessively broad claims, raising the
1
    U.S. House of Representatives Oversight Hearing on the Patent System, February 15, 2007.


                                                                                                      2
costs of determining the scope of existing IP, and increasing uncertainty about possible future

litigation from competitors and non-competitors alike. Figure 1 shows how dramatic the

increase in software patenting has been. The figure plots the total number of patents in force that

are relevant to 27 distinct software product markets between 1980 and 2006. Over this period

the CAGR of the number of patents outstanding was 29.8%. Over the decade 1994 to 2004

alone, the number of patents in the average market grew by almost 500%, while the number of

active firms grew by less than 300%.


                      Figure 1: Total Patents in Force in 27 Software Markets


      200,000




      150,000




      100,000




       50,000




            0
                      82




                                      86


                                              88

                                                      90


                                                              92

                                                                      94


                                                                              96

                                                                                      98


                                                                                              00

                                                                                                      02


                                                                                                              04
              80




                              84




                                                                                                                      06
                   19




                                   19


                                           19

                                                   19


                                                           19

                                                                   19


                                                                           19

                                                                                   19


                                                                                           20

                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                   20
           19




                           19




       By 2006, the average market in this sample had 7370 patents in force, comprising over

145,000 claims. Data such as these suggest that costs associated with patents—such as searching

prior art, building patent portfolios, and defending against the threat of patent litigation—have

grown very substantially. In software, entrepreneurial firms and independent inventors have

played a very significant role in driving technical change, since the impact of these costs is likely



                                                                                                                           3
to be felt disproportionately by innovators with limited resources, and the pace of innovation

may therefore be particularly vulnerable in this industry to the proliferation of patents. To cite

just two authoritative observers, Donald Knuth, author of The Art of Computer Programming

and inventor of TeX, has stated that “I don’t think I would have been able to create TeX if the

present [patent] climate had existed in the 1970s,” while erstwhile entrepreneur Bill Gates has

opined that “If people had understood how patents would be granted when most of today's ideas

were invented and had taken out patents, the industry would be at a complete standstill today.”2

           “Innovation” is, of course, very difficult to measure consistently over time and across

technologies. In software, one useful indicator—recognizing the important role of new ventures

in driving innovation in this industry—is market entry and the founding of new firms. In a

related paper (Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007)), we find that there are fewer entrants into

software markets in which there are more patents, after controlling for the characteristics of the

firm and market (including the average importance of patents in the market and the stage of the

product lifecycle). Yet it is important to recognize that the “stifling” and “stimulating” effects of

patents go hand-in-hand. Patents may limit innovation in particular areas, or make it more

costly, but at the same time they may also promote innovation and entry by creating incentives

for R&D, by enabling trade in technology, or by facilitating investment in early-stage firms. In

Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007) we also found that firms holding patents related to a software

market are approximately three times more likely to enter that market than those who do not hold

patents—a finding that focuses our attention here on the economic mechanisms through which

patents can positively affect incentives to launch new products and new ventures, in particular

their impact on the ability of new entrants to secure external financing from various sources.



2
    Pignalberi (2004), Lessig (2002).


                                                                                                     4
         In this paper we attempt to characterize the extent to which entrants into a software

market at any given point in time face a patent “thicket”—i.e. a “a dense web of overlapping

intellectual property rights that a company must hack its way through in order to actually

commercialize new technology”3—and evaluate the impact of patent thickets on the interaction

between new software ventures and capital markets.

         We hypothesize that patent thickets affect the ability of software start-ups to raise money

from outside investors in two main ways. Firstly, the transaction costs of entering a market may

be higher when that market has a patent thicket. Patents that block a would-be entrant from

producing or selling its product mean that the entrant must either bear additional costs of

“inventing around” such patents, pay licensing fees to the patent holder, or accept potentially

severe ex post penalties.4 Noel and Schankerman (2006) provide evidence on the costs imposed

by patent thickets from a sample of publicly-traded software firms by showing that market value

decreases when patent rights held by a firm’s competitors are more fragmented, reflecting the

higher costs of negotiating with more parties.

         Secondly, the uncertainty of the firm’s future profit stream may be higher when it faces a

patent thicket. Lemley and Shapiro (2006) argue that there are two types of uncertainty

associated with patents: uncertainty about the commercial value of the property right granted to

the inventor, and uncertainty about the validity and scope of the property right. The latter form

of uncertainty may be especially prevalent in software, a field in which patents were until

recently not used to protect IP and which saw a dramatic growth of patenting following changes

in the USPTO’s patentability guidelines in the mid-1990’s. The lack of experience with software


3
  Shapiro (2001), p.2
4
  Infringing valid patents can present the entrant with very substantial ex post penalties, such as damages judgments
(tripled in the case of “willful infringement”) or the loss in value of assets stranded in the wake of an injunction
obtained by the patent holder.


                                                                                                                    5
patents at the USPTO, combined with the ambiguity associated with what is covered by many

patents in this sector, has meant that software developers face significant uncertainty about

existing prior art and the possibility of being sued for infringement. Bessen and Meurer (2008)

find that software patents are more than twice as likely as other patents to have claim

construction appealed to the Federal Circuit, and, which they take as an indicator of elevated

uncertainty about the boundaries of patents in software.5

         We look for evidence of the impact of increased transaction costs and greater uncertainty

on new ventures in “thicketed” markets in the following ways. First, higher anticipated

transaction costs should affect negatively affect investors’ valuations of start-up companies,

“raising the bar” for new entrants in terms of meeting minimum levels of profitability required

by outside inventors, and thus reducing the number of entrants that receive funding from outside

investors. Once a firm becomes an incumbent, the effect of thickets is less clear: thickets may

offer protection from entrants, or result in future additional transaction costs, with an ambiguous

effect on the value of the enterprise and the probability that a firm goes public, rather than being

acquired or wound up (after controlling for the positive effects of the firm’s own patent

holdings). Second, higher uncertainty about future profits should affect the timing of

investments. When investments are irreversible, the opportunity cost of current investment

(versus investment at a later date) increases with uncertainty. Thus, increases in uncertainty

increase the value of delaying investment. 6 We hypothesize that higher uncertainty over the

threat of litigation or other future patent-related costs increases the value of delaying investment.

5
  Brian Kahin (2004) cites the hearings in 2002 on Competition and Intellectual Property Law and Policy in the
Knowledge-Based Economy, held by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and the Department of Justice at which
Frederick J. Telecky of Texas Instruments stated that: “TI has something like 8000 patents in the United States that
are active patents, and for us to know what's in that portfolio, we think, is just a mind-boggling, budget-busting
exercise to try to figure that out with any degree of accuracy at all.” Kahin notes that, “If a company with TI’s
resources cannot assess what they have in-house, it is difficult to expect a small company entering a market to
evaluate what claims they may be facing.”
6
  Arrow (1968), Bernanke (1983), Dixit and Pindyck (1994), among others.


                                                                                                                       6
As a result, we expect that, after controlling for firm- and investor-level characteristics, firms

operating in markets characterized by denser patent thickets, or markets in which the relevant

prior art is less well defined, will see investments delayed. We look for evidence of delay in

duration models for the time elapsed until a new venture obtains funding from outside investors

(both venture capitalists and corporate investors) for the first time, and in competing hazard

models of the time they “exit” from the entrepreneurial phase via IPO or Acquisition. Third, we

examine which strategies may help firms succeed when faced with patent thickets. Following

Hall and Ziedonis (2003) and Ziedonis (2005), we hypothesize that start-up companies with

patents will be able to use them in cross-licensing negotiations to defend themselves against

litigation. These patents may then act to reduce the transaction costs associated with operating in

a “thicketed” market. These firms should also face less uncertainty, and thus we expect

investment will take place earlier.

       We believe this paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, it examines the

impact of patent thickets on early-stage firms. Despite the potential importance of such firms as a

source of innovation and productivity growth, we are not aware of other empirical research

which is has examined these effects on entrepreneurial (in our case, small, young, private) firms.

Secondly, we contribute to the literature on entrepreneurship by analyzing a data set that contains

both venture- or corporate-funded firms from the SDC universe as well as pre-funding start-ups

drawn from the CorpTech database. This allows us to examine how funded firms differ from

firms that do not obtain funding, and to analyze determinants of the timing of first investment.

While other research has looked at differences between venture-backed and non-venture-backed

firms in small samples, we are not aware of other papers that exploit as comprehensive a dataset

as the one we use here. Finally, we exploit a methodology inspired by the differences-in-




                                                                                                     7
differences approach to isolate the effect of stronger patent rights on entry and financing of early

stage firms.



       Literature Review

       The literature on the “stifling” vs. “stimulating” effects of patents has looked for evidence

of the impact of changing patent rights on innovation from quasi-natural experiments associated

with legal changes. These changes include the strengthening or instituting of patent systems in

countries that previously had weak or non-existent formal IPRs (Sakakibara and Branstetter

(2001) for Japan, Lanjouw and Cockburn (1997) for India, Moser (2005) on patent laws in the

19th century), changes in patent rights in confined to specific technologies (Scherer and

Weisburst (1995) on pharmaceuticals in Italy), or a variety of other changes to patent law or

patent office practice that enhance the strength of patent protection (Lerner (2002)). Hall and

Ziedonis (2001) document a surge in strategic patenting in the semiconductor industry following

pro-patent policy changes in the 1980s, and Ziedonis (2004) shows that semiconductor firms

patent more aggressively when the ownership of complementary patents is more highly

fragmented.

       Bessen and Maskin (2007) and Bessen and Hunt (2003), have argued that more-and-

stronger patent rights have induced a decline in R&D spending in industries affected by software

patents. Noel and Schankerman (2006) show that the market value of publicly traded software

firms decreases when patent rights held by a firm’s competitors are more fragmented, reflecting

the higher costs of negotiating with more parties. Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007) find that

software markets in which there are more patents have fewer entrants, after controlling for the

characteristics of the firm and market (including the average importance of patents in the market




                                                                                                   8
and the stage of the product lifecycle). However, patents also play a role in stimulating entry:

this paper finds that firms holding patents related to a software market are approximately three

times more likely to enter that market. Hall (2005) shows that patents have a particularly strong

correlation with market value for entrants, and suggests that they play a role in helping entrants

secure financing. A recent study of patents in the software industry by Mann (2006) shows that

software start-ups holding patents receive more investment from venture capitalists than those

without patents, consistent with Kortum and Lerner’s (2000) finding that venture-backed firms

hold more patents than start-ups receiving other types of funding. Arora, Fosfuri and

Gambardella (2001), Gans and Stern (2000), Gans, Hsu, and Stern (2002), and others have

highlighted the role of patents and other formal IP rights in supporting a “market for technology”

which provides an avenue for new entrants to realize value from innovation by licensing, or

selling themselves to incumbents. More recently, Gans, Hsu and Stern (2006) show that the

resolution of uncertainty over the scope of IP rights associated with the grant of a patent leads to

an increase in the probability of licensing for start-up companies, but find that patent grants are

less important for licensing in software than in other industries. Hsu and Ziedonis (2007),

controlling for a variety of covariates including firm-specific fixed effects, show that a doubling

in a start-up firm’s patent stock is associated with a 24% increase on average in investors’

valuations.

       In contrast to the number of papers that use datasets comprised exclusively of venture-

backed firms, the literature that models the probability that start-up companies obtain external

investment from other sources is relatively sparse. Hellmann and Puri (2002) provide evidence

on the impact of VC funding on start-ups, using a sample of venture-backed and non-venture-

backed firms. Kortum and Lerner (2000) perform a comparison of venture-backed and non-




                                                                                                      9
venture-backed firms in Massachusetts, using the CorpTech directory to identify the set of non-

venture-backed firms. Goldfarb et al. (2006) investigate VC’s funding decisions using a database

of all business plans submitted to a single VC between 1998 and 2002.

       Analyses of the role of uncertainty in the duration of investment in start-ups include

Gompers (1995) and Guler (2007). Gompers (1995) investigates at the relationship between the

staging of venture investment and agency costs in the presence of asymmetric information,

arguing that venture capitalists will monitor portfolio companies more frequently when agency

costs are higher, leading to more rounds of investment with shorter periods between rounds.

Guler (2007) studies the management of investments by venture capitalists as an example of the

management of real options, using the number of rounds of financing as an indicator of delayed

investment.

       Empirical analyses of exits via IPO include Lerner (1994), Gompers (1995), and more

recently, Giot and Schwienbacher (2007) and Ljungqvist, Hochberg, and Lu (2007). Factors that

have been found to influence the probability of going public include market conditions and

industry-specific effects, the stage of development of the firm, the geographical location of the

firm, the amount invested and number of investors, and the investors’ experience level. Giot and

Schwienbacher estimate a competing-risks model that allows for multiple types of exit. We

perform a similar analysis in this paper by considering the factors that lead to exit by IPO,

acquisition, or liquidation.



Empirical Approach

       As in Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007), our approach here is to estimate reduced form

regressions in which we look for evidence of an association between measures of patent thickets




                                                                                                    10
and indicators of entry and financing of new ventures, controlling for other market

characteristics, such as demand, market structure, and the state of technology.

        One obvious potential problem is endogeneity: the nature of the patent thicket prevailing

in these markets presumably reflects optimizing responses to the competitive environment. We

believe that any endogeneity bias is quite limited. First, in all of our regressions we use market

fixed effects, so that our identification comes from within-market changes in the patent thicket

and the outcomes of interest rather than from purely cross-sectional correlations. Second, while

incumbents may endogenously respond to the competitive threat posed by potential entrants by

filing additional patents, we believe the influence of this on patent thickets to be quite limited

and where it exists it will bias our coefficients toward zero, leading to underestimates rather than

overestimates of any causal effect of patents on entry. The timing of incumbents’ patent grants

(or their ability to obtain patent protection at all) is in large part affected by exogenous changes

in resources and policy at the Patent Office. The average time between patent application and

grant in our dataset is close to three years.7 Given the high speed of product cycles and turnover

in the software industry, incumbents filing patents in response to threats from competitors will in

most cases be unable to use the granted patents until well after entry has taken place, and the

infringing product has been superseded. Because of this, a substantial portion of the thicket

faced by entrants in any market is composed of patents obtained far in the past, and by non-

competitors. Thus, after controlling for time-invariant unobserved effects, and a variety of other

potential sources of bias (such as confounding growth in the patent thicket with maturity of the

technology in a market), endogeneity of our thicket measures created by incumbents’ responses

to time-varying shocks to the threat of entry appears not to be a major issue. In Cockburn and

7
  According to the USPTO website, “The length of this delay is determined by many factors, including PTO
workload, budget and manpower levels, and patent printing schedules…[for example,] The 1986 patent grant data
are lower than would have normally been expected due to a lack of printing funds.”


                                                                                                            11
MacGarvie (2007) we used an instrumental variables approach to address the potential

endogeneity of patenting by incumbents, and obtained essentially identical estimates.

       Here we additionally exploit a series of changes in the legal regime that substantially

expanded patentability of software inventions, the number of software patents granted increased

dramatically during the 1990s. These changes can be thought of as a quasi-experiment in which

the strength of issued patents exogenously increased, raising barriers to entry in markets with

more patents relative to markets with fewer patents. This allows us to examine market-level

patterns of entry and financing before and after changes in the legal regime using a differences-

in-differences approach. In this model, for any there to any bias arising from a correlation

between financing/entry and patents induced by omitted variables, the relationship between

financing/entry and the omitted variable(s) in question would have to occur simultaneously with

the changes in software patentability that took place during our sample. Revisiting Cockburn

and MacGarvie (2007), our first key result is that the rate of entry is negatively correlated with

the number of patents in a market, and that this correlation intensified following changes in

patentability standards. We find similar effects for our financing measures – the correlation with

patents in a market becomes more negative following market-specific regime changes in

patentability.

       This result is provocative, but leaves open the question of why exactly the rate of entry

falls, and in particular why young, specialized firms are more affected. One leading hypothesis is

that the intensification of patent thickets as barriers to entry reduces the expected profits of early-

stage firms, thus reducing the attractiveness of these companies as targets for investment.

       We therefore turn to a second hypothesis, that patent thickets affect entry by making it

more difficult for early-stage firms to acquire funding. Using the same differences-in-




                                                                                                     12
differences approach, we examine the impact of increased patenting on the financing of software

ventures at two stages in their life cycle: the period from birth to initial funding by external

investors, and the period from first funding by external investors through to exit via IPO or

acquisition.

       We focus on the following questions:

       1. Are start-up firms facing a patent thicket less likely to receive venture capital

investment or corporate funding? We hypothesize that firms operating in markets characterized

by patent thickets face higher costs of entry (consistent with Noel and Schankerman (2006)), and

that investors’ expected return on investment in such markets will be lower, leading to a

reduction in the likelihood of receiving outside funding

       2. Do thickets delay or reduce the likelihood of going public or being acquired, or do they

increase the likelihood of acquisition relative to IPO? If patent thickets are a significant barrier

to entry or source of increased costs for entrepreneurial firms, we expect that they will reduce

investors’ expected returns from an IPO and therefore reduce the probability of going public. On

the other hand, larger established companies may find it easier to navigate the patent thicket due

to deeper pockets or experience with the patent system, so that start-ups facing a thicket may be

relatively more likely to be acquired by other companies rather than go public.

       3. Do thickets delay and/or reduce investment (through their impact on uncertainty)?

With higher uncertainty we expect the option value of delaying an investment to be higher, and

therefore see investment take place later in markets with a higher degree of uncertainty about the

scope and validity of patents

       Recognizing the potential stimulating effects of patents, we also ask whether the above

effects of patent thickets are mitigated for start-up firms that themselves hold patents.




                                                                                                   13
Data

        Market and firm characteristics

        The firms we study are drawn from the CorpTech directory of technology companies,

which covers 19,717 public and private firms active in software markets over the period

1990-2004.8 We know the founding date of the firm, revenues and employment for most (but

not all) of the firms in the dataset, the patents held by the firm, information on corporate parents,

funding sources, and a number of other variables. To the CorpTech sample, we add data from

SDC’s VentureXpert database. We use information on the number of rounds received, the

amounts invested, the identities of investors, the stage of the investment, the founding date of the

venture, and whether the venture ultimately went public or was acquired, and the name of the

acquirer when relevant. We also use Compustat data on the sales, employment, and 2-digit SIC

codes of corporate investors.

        The CorpTech data contains fine-grained information on the product classes in which the

firm develops software (the “SOF category”). This self-reported variable can include products

under development as well as products already launched. CorpTech reports more than 290 SOF

categories, however many of these are quite vaguely defined, or appear to be defined in terms of

customer segments rather than in terms of a technology—e.g. “secondary school software, dental

practice management software, etc.” Furthermore mapping patents to markets is a challenging

and resource-intensive task. We therefore focus our analysis on 27 of these SOF-defined

markets, listed in Table A.1. These 27 markets were chosen primarily to facilitate subsequent

matching to patent data, primarily on the basis of our assessment as to whether the


8
  We define software companies as the firms listed in CorpTech as having at least one product classification
beginning with “SOF”, which is CorpTech’s code for software.


                                                                                                               14
technology/product is reasonably distinctive, and we could define a set of keywords that could be

fruitfully searched in the abstract of patent documents.9

         Tables 1a and 1b show the number of firms of various types in successive CorpTech

years and in each market. As can be seen from these tables, there is substantial variation in the

cross-section and over time in the size of these markets, in terms of the number of producers, the

number of entrants, the number of “new” entrants (i.e. firms founded no more than two years

before they appeared as entrants in the CorpTech database) and the fraction of these entrants that

receive external funding from either VCs or corporate investors. The number of “new” entrants,

as opposed to firms which are new to the market in question, but already have an established

presence in other markets, is quite small—averaging 2.2 per market per year over the entire

sample—particularly in relation to the number of incumbents, which averages more than 157.

(This figure is likely to be an underestimate of the fraction of entrants into these markets that are

“new”, reflecting issues with the way that CorpTech collects data, and our quite stringent screen

for identifying new versus continuing ventures.) Among these new entrants, 16% receive

external funding from VCs prior to the year in which they enter the market, while only 6%

receive funding from a corporate investor at this point in their lifecycle.

         Tables 2a and 2b provide some further summary statistics on the markets into which

these firms are entering. We do not have market-level sales data, but we construct a proxy based



9
  Clearly there is some potential for selection bias to influence our results, however we believe that the criteria used
to choose these markets are independent of entry and exit dynamics and the sample of 27 SOFs does not appear to
be markedly different from the other 262 in terms of firm characteristics and entry and exit rates (see the Appendix).
One area in which our sample differs, however, is in terms of the average number of patents held by firms active in
the market. The average firm active in one of the sample markets has 29 patents, while the average firm in a market
omitted by the sample has only 18 patents, and this difference is statistically significant. Note though that this
difference arises by construction: it is difficult, if not impossible to identify patents related to many of the more
vaguely defined markets. In our judgment, therefore, this subset of markets is reasonably representative of software
products in general.



                                                                                                                     15
on the sales of firms active in a market.10 On average, markets in this sample have a total of

$1.7bn in annual sales, with substantial growth over time. Markets range widely in size, from

less then $70MM per year in sales to over $6.5BN.

         Patents

         Identifying the set of patents relevant for firms operating in a particular market is not a

trivial task. Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007) describe the process used to match USPTO patent

classifications to the CorpTech SOF categories.11 In short, we used a combination of text

searching and reading the manual of patent classification to identify the set of key patents

associated with each market. Using the mapping between patent classes and CorpTech product

markets described above, we obtained all the relevant patents in these classes from the NBER

Patent Database. Table 3 shows the annual count of patents that meet these criteria, by grant

date and application date. There is a striking increase in the number of patents over time: annual

patent grants relevant to this set of 27 product markets increased more than 40-fold between

1980 and 2006. The table also shows the number of patents expiring each year, either because

they have reached full term, or because the assignee has failed to pay maintenance fees. These

expirations represent a non-trivial fraction of the total number of patents in force: in the late

1990s, for example, new patents were being added to the sample at a rate of about 7000 per year,

while about 1200 were being removed from the “patent stock.” (Once patents expire, they are

excluded from our subsequent calculations.)


10
  For firm i active in in market j as well as n other markets, we compute average sales per market in market j as
SALESi/n (the total sales of the firm divided by the number of markets in which it is active). We then add up the
average sales per market for all firms active in the market. CorpTech contains a numerical sales variable as well as a
categorical variable that indicates the range in which the firm’s revenues fall. A significant portion of observations
on the former are missing, and we fill in these observations with the mid-point of the range indicated by the
categorical sales variable.
11
  Arora et al (2007) use a related approach to create a comprehensive concordance between USPTO classes and
software product categories.


                                                                                                                   16
       Tables 4a and 4b present statistics on the characteristics of the 108,863 patents issued

since 1977 that we have determined to be relevant to one or more the 27 product markets

considered here. As can been seen in Table 4a, there are very large changes over time in patent

characteristics such as the average number of claims, which doubles between 1980 and 2006, the

average number of backward citations, which almost triples over this period, and the average

number of citations to non-patent literature, which increase 10-fold. While some of the growth

in citations reflects growth in the pool of references available to be cited, these figures also

suggest significant changes in the nature of the patent rights being awarded and the stringency of

patent examination.

       As Figure 2 shows, there is substantial variation the numbers of patents issued in

different technology classes as well as in trends in patenting in different technology classes

                                                               Figure 2


                                       Patents granted by year, selected USPTO classes

             1800
                                                                                                704: language
             1600                                                                               analysis

             1400
                                                                                                705: financial /
                                                                                                business
             1200

             1000                                                                               706: artificial
                                                                                                intelligence
              800

              600                                                                               709:
                                                                                                multicomputer
                                                                                                processing
              400
                                                                                                711: memory
              200

                0
                  85


                          87


                                  89


                                          91


                                                  93


                                                          95


                                                                   97


                                                                           99


                                                                                   01


                                                                                           03
               19


                       19


                               19


                                       19


                                               19


                                                       19


                                                                19


                                                                        19


                                                                                20


                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                   17
After mapping these classes to product markets this variation is reflected in substantial cross-

sectional and time series differences between these markets in the number of patents granted. As

can be seen in Table 4b, in some markets only a few hundred patents met our search criteria,

while in others there are more than 16,000 patents issued over the sample period. Less

substantial differences are also apparent in the average number of claims and in the amount of

patent and non-patent prior art that is cited. (Note though that ANOVA F-tests strongly reject

the hypothesis of equality of means across markets for all of these measures.)

         Markets also differ in the extent to which the patent thicket has grown over time. As

shown in Table 4a, the compound annual growth rate of patents in force between 1980 and 2006

is positive for all markets, but ranges from 12% per year to 31%.

Quantitative measures of patent thickets

         Patents that block a would-be entrant from producing or selling its product can clearly be

a significant barrier to entry. The entrant must either bear additional costs of “inventing around”

such patents, pay licensing fees to the patent holder, or accept potentially severe ex post

penalties.12 As a first step towards characterizing the patent “landscape” in a market, we

therefore compute the cumulative stock of patents in the markets in which each ventures

operates, as an indicator of the overall amount of intellectual property faced by the venture.13

         However, it may not be just the absolute number of patents in an area that can deter entry,

but also the extent to which those patents form a “thicket” in the sense of generating transactions

costs above and beyond simple blocking power. As Shapiro (2001) puts it, “a patent thicket is a

12
   Infringing valid patents can present the entrant with very substantial ex post penalties, such as damages judgments
(tripled in the case of “willful infringement”) or the loss in value of assets stranded in the wake of an injunction
obtained by the patent holder.
13
   We do this in two ways. Following the literature, we compute a stock of patents based on the flow of patents
relevant to each market that issued each year, using the perpetual inventory method and the “Griliches constant”
15% depreciation rate. Alternatively, we also total the number of patents relevant to the market that are in force in
any given year, assuming a 17 year term, and taking account of patents that expire earlier due to failure to pay
maintenance fees.


                                                                                                                   18
dense web of overlapping intellectual property rights that a company must hack its way through

in order to actually commercialize new technology. With cumulative innovation and multiple

blocking patents, stronger patent rights can thus have the perverse effect of stifling, not

encouraging, innovation.”14

         Ziedonis (2004) and Noel and Schankerman (2006) argue that a key factor driving

transactions costs may be the degree to which ownership of patent rights is fragmented. Suppose

a prospective entrant were to obtain licenses from holders of blocking patents. The factors

determining the total cost of obtaining licenses to allow entry are complex. All else equal, we

expect that the more patents that must be licensed, the higher the total cost of entry. However,

particularly in complex technologies, patents are frequently bundled or pooled, or jointly

licensed, thus total costs of entry may not have a simple linear relationship to the number of

patents blocking the would-be entrant. Another salient feature of “thickets” is the higher costs

associated with negotiating with many parties. To the extent that there are fixed costs of

conducting a negotiation, having to conduct more negotiations will drive up costs. In addition,

the outcome of a complex bargaining process conducted with many licensors, each of whom has

some holdup power, may result in higher total costs—i.e. the height of the “royalty stack” may

rise non-linearly in the number of its components.

         Following Ziedonis and Noel and Schankerman we capture this second effect by

measuring the concentration of IP ownership in each market using patent citations.15 Patent

citations are references to existing patented technologies, listed in the patent document.16 Since

these citations delimit the property rights represented by a patent by describing related claims

14
   P. 2
15
    In Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007) we use an alternative measure, a count of the number of cited assignees in
each market.
16
   “Prior art” is not confined to patents, indeed most forms of printed publication describing the claimed invention
can constitute prior art, as can public knowledge, use, or sale of the technology.


                                                                                                                       19
contained in other patents, citations made by a patent give an indication of the extent to which a

technological area is already covered by intellectual property rights and is thus (in principle)

foreclosed to entrants who do not obtain a license. Assuming that the share of citations received

by an assignee proxies the importance of negotiating with that assignee, we postulate that in a

market which has many cited assignees but where citations go disproportionately to a small

number of firms, entry costs may actually be lower than in a market with fewer assignees each of

which receives a similar share of total citations. To capture this effect, we calculate the

Herfindahl index of citations over assignees for each market in each year.17 Table 5 shows the

mean values of this measure over time and for each market in our sample.

         Some of these patent measures will be correlated with the maturity of the technology.

Gort and Klepper (1982), for example, document an increase in patenting as technologies reach

the late stages of the product life cycle. We want to separate the effects of increased patenting at

any given stage of the technology life cycle from the natural accumulation of larger patent stocks

as time passes. To control for the average maturity of technology in the product market, we use

the modal citation lag. Since the number of citations to a patent is a function of the number of

potential citations, we estimate the modal lag using a framework that adjusts for this effect. For

each product class and citing-cited year pair, we compute the citation frequency, or ratio of

actual to potential citations (see Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999)), and then identify the citation lag

(citing year – cited year) with the highest citation frequency for a given product class and citing

year.18 If the modal lag in a product category is short, it implies that the most highly cited


17
   We also experimented with using the Herfindahl index of citations across assignees to measure concentration of
patent rights, but obtained very similar results to those based on the four-assignee concentration index. These results
are available from the authors upon request.
18
   We compute the citation frequency as the ratio of the number of observed citations to the number of potential
citations. That is, if Ckgd is the number of citations made to patents in market k in citing year g to patents granted in
market k in cited year d, Pkg is the number of patents granted in class k in year g, and Pkd is the number of patents
granted in class k in year d, the citation frequency is Ckgd/(Pkg Pkd)


                                                                                                                     20
patents in that market were granted recently, which suggests that the market is at a relatively

early stage of the product cycle.19 Average values by year are listed in Table 2a.

Quantitative measures of uncertainty about patent rights

         Capturing market participants’ ex ante uncertainty about the scope and validity of the

patents that they face is clearly a substantial challenge. Based on discussions with practitioners

and our reading of the ongoing debates about “patent quality” we identify two aspects of patents

that may signal that their scope and validity may be difficult to assess. First, we look at the

number of non-patent references cited as prior art. Software patent applications (and their

review by the patent office) have been widely criticized for failing to recognize or consider

relevant prior art in the form of articles in professional journals, trade press, widely circulated

product manuals and the like, which could potentially have sharply reduced the scope of claims

allowed. According to this view, patents with very few citations to this type of prior are more

likely to be held invalid if subjected to legal challenge. (Of course, it may be that these patents

reflect truly innovative inventions for which no prior art existed.) Arguably, therefore, markets

with many of such patents are ones in which the degree to which the technology space is

“covered” is particularly hard to assess.

         Secondly, we compute the average number of claims per patent in a market. Arguably

that the difficulty of assessing the scope of a patent is increasing in the number of claims. One of

the USPTO’s recent initiatives to improve patent quality has been to limit the number of claims

in a patent to no more than 25 (with no more than 5 independent claims.) Further, Allison et al.

(2004) show that patents with larger numbers of claims are more likely to be litigated, and while

the likelihood of litigation is undoubtedly related to the value of the patent, it is also more likely


19
  The usefulness of this variable as an indicator of the stage of the product cycle obviously depends on the
assumption that the key inventions are patented, or at least that the patented inventions


                                                                                                               21
to occur when parties disagree over the validity or scope of the patent—i.e. when there is greater

uncertainty.20 We calculate the ratio of the number of claims allowed on a patent to the number

of patents (both US and foreign) cited. Our reasoning is that patents with a very large number of

claims and very few citations to prior art are whose validity and scope are likely to be

particularly difficult to assess. (Such patents are sometimes referred to by practitioners as

“problem patents.”)

          Mean values of these measures for each market in our sample are shown in Table 5. The

average patent has 2.15 patent citations per claim, with industry averages ranging from 1.67 to

2.72. Variation in this ratio across markets is statistically significant: an ANOVA F-test strongly

rejects the hypothesis of equal industry means (P<0.0001).



RESULTS

I. Impact of patent thickets at the market-level

          Tables 6 and 7 give estimates of the impact of patent thickets on market level measures of

activity by new software ventures. In Table 6, the dependent variable in the regressions in the

number of new entrants in each market in each sample year. In Table 7 we look at the impact of

patent thickets on three measures of financing activity: the number of firms receiving an initial

round of funding from external investors in that market-year, the median amount invested per

firm in that market-year, and the number of IPOs in that market/year.

          In each of these regressions we focus on the number of patents in force as an explanatory

variable, controlling for market size, market structure and demand using market and year fixed

effects, the number of incumbents (and its square), the growth rate of sales, for the quality of



20
     See also Bessen and Meurer (2006).


                                                                                                    22
patents in the market using the average number of forward citations received per patent in force,

and for the maturity of the technology in the market using the modal citation lag.

           As discussed above, we also present “differences-in-differences” estimates that make use

of the fact that the expansion of software patentability took place at different times for different

types of software. Though driven to some extent by pressure from patent applicants, arguably

these changes are exogenous to the extent of the patent thicket in a particular market. Briefly,

these regime changes were as follows. In 1972, the Supreme Court’s ruling in Gottschalk v.

Benson held that because software is essentially a collection of algorithms, it could not be

patented. However, in 1982 in the Diamond v. Diehr ruling, the court allowed for patenting of

software tied to physical or mechanical processes, such as the program implemented in the

method for curing rubber at issue in the case. While patents were granted during the 1980s for

inventions with a substantial software component, and the distinction between patentable and

non-patentable subject matter in this area was progressively shifted and weakened by various

court decisions and creative drafting of patent claims, the effectiveness of patent protection for

software was far from clear, with many leading software companies filing only limited numbers

of applications, or eschewing software patents altogether. This uncertainty was resolved in the

mid 1990s, when the 1994 Federal Circuit decision In re Alappat drew a definitive distinction

between unpatentable software in the form of “a disembodied mathematical concept…which in

essence represents nothing more than a ‘law of nature,’ ‘natural phenomenon,’ or ‘abstract idea’”

and patentable software that is “rather a specific machine to produce a useful, concrete, and

tangible result.”21 A series of further court decisions in 1994 and 1995 following Alappat

culminated in a new set of guidelines, issued by the Commissioner of Patents in May of 1996,



21
     In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526, 1544 (Fed. Cir. 1994), quoted in Sterne and Bugaisky, p. 222


                                                                                                     23
which allowed inventors to patent any software embodied in physical media.22 Further

expansion of software patentability came in 1998 with the State Street Bank & Trust vs.

Signature Financial Corp. (“State Street”) decision, which eliminated the requirement that the

software algorithm be tied to a “physical transformation.”

           As a result of this evolution of legal and administrative doctrine over the 1980s and 90s,

some categories of software patents became more clearly obtainable, and more easily

enforceable before others. While, software used in manufacturing or “embedded” in hardware

devices was covered prior to the 1996 change in guidelines, software more generally was

covered after 1996, and financial or business methods software became clearly patentable after

State Street in 1998. The markets in our sample fall into three groups that were affected by these

“regime changes” at different times: those for which software was patentable before 1996

(manufacturing software), those for which it became patentable in 1996 (other types of software

not including those affected by State Street), and those for whom patentability increased in 1998

(financial software and internet-related software). Using the standard differences-in-differences

specification, we therefore we include in the regression the log of the number of patents in a

market, the regime-change dummy, and the interaction of the latter two variables. The

coefficient on this interaction term gives the change in the effect of the market’s patents on the

dependent various following the expansion of the strength of patents that are relevant to the

market. Figure 3 shows the average number of patents granted in each market, grouped by the

applicable regime change. As the figure shows, changes in the volume of patenting and the

timing of these changes behave quite differently across the three groups, reflecting the

differential impact of the regime changes in 1996 and 1998. Group 1, the set of software

markets characterized by manufacturing applications, shows a stable increase over time. Group
22
     Sterne and Bugaisky, p. 223


                                                                                                     24
2, the set we classify as primarily affected by the legal decisions following Alappat and the

change in USPTO guidelines as of 1996, see a dramatic jump after 1996 followed by a return to

trend. Markets in the third group, which were affected by Alappat but also by State Street in

1998, see an increase after 1996 and continue to grow until 2000, when the USPTO began

performing more rigorous examinations of business methods patents (the “second pair of eyes”).

This change would seem to account for the dip in the number of patents granted in group 3 after

2000.

                         Figure 3: Patents granted by year and type of software

                900

                800

                700

                600

                500

                400

                300

                200
                100

                   0
                    85

                            87


                                    89


                                            91

                                                     93


                                                              95

                                                                      97


                                                                              99


                                                                                      01


                                                                                              03

                                                                                                      05
                 19


                         19

                                 19


                                         19


                                                  19

                                                           19


                                                                   19

                                                                           19


                                                                                   20

                                                                                           20


                                                                                                   20




                                                 Group 1           Group 2         Group 3




Group 1: Automatic teller machine software, Robotic software, Quality control software, Peripheral device drivers
Group 2: Voice technology software, Natural language software, Neural network software, Fax software, Internet tools, Wide
area network software, Local area network software, File management software, Hierarchical DBMS software, Relational DBMS
software, Database query language software, 3D representation software, Electronic message systems software, Desktop
publishing software, Artificial intelligence R&D, Geographic information systems software, Disaster recovery software,
Security/auditing software, Performance measuring software
Group 3: Invoicing/Billing Software, Tax preparation and reporting software, Inventory management software, Order
entry/processing software




                                                                                                                       25
       Patents and entry

       Table 6 reports coefficient estimates from Poisson regressions on the number of entrants

in each market-year. Standard errors are clustered by market. Column (1) of Table 6 confirms

the findings reported in Cockburn and MacGarvie (1997)—after controlling for market structure,

demand etc, the number of patents in force in the market has a substantial negative and

significant effect on the number of entrants with an elasticity of -0.438. In Column (2) we

include measures of uncertainty about the scope of patent rights, and the negative and significant

coefficient on the number of claims per patent citation suggests that markets in which there are a

preponderance of such “problem patents” see less entry. Column (3) of Table 6 gives the

“differences-in-differences” estimates. Interestingly, there was an overall increase in entry

following the regime change (see the positive and significant coefficient on the dummy

indicating a market was post-regime-change). However, the negative and significant coefficient

on the interaction term indicates that markets with more patents saw larger reductions in entry

following the regime change when compared with other post-regime-change markets with fewer

patents as well as pre-regime-change markets. In columns (3) and (4) we report results estimated

separately for “de novo” entrants versus “diversifiers” (entry into new product markets by firms

that are already established in other markets. The marked difference in the estimated coefficients

on the number of patents in force and on the interaction term suggest that these negative effect of

patent thickets on entry is largely driven by the impact on the de novo entrants.

       This finding is provocative because it suggests that small, specialized firms are more

affected by increases in the strength of IP rights than established firms. One mechanism through

which this effect may operate is the financing of early-stage firms. If increases in barriers to




                                                                                                   26
entry reduce the expected profitability of entrants, they will also reduce their attractiveness to

investors and may make it more difficult for de novo entrants to raise capital.

Note that coefficient on the interaction term (the “treatment effect” from strengthening patent

rights in the market) is the average treatment effect measured in terms of elasticities. Though it

is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level, this coefficient conceals substantial

differences in the marginal “treatment effect” measured in numbers of entrants computed for

each observation. In Table 6 we report estimates of the marginal effect of the interaction term at

the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the market size distribution.23 As Figure 4 shows, while the

estimated marginal interaction effects are all negative, some are quite small and not statistically

distinguishable form zero. As Figure 4 also shows, there appears to be a relationship between

the magnitude of marginal interaction effects and market size that is not fully captured by the

control variables in the regression. Larger marginal effects tend to be found in markets with

more incumbent firms, suggesting a more complex relationship between the patent landscape and

competition than is captured by this simple regression model.




23
  These effects were obtained by calculating the pre- and post-regime change difference in the partial derivative
with respect to the log of patents in the market, using Stata’s predictnl command. This command computes standard
errors via the delta method.


                                                                                                              27
                                                     Figure 4:
                      Marginal effect of interaction of regime change dummy and the log of
                            patents in market plotted against the size of the market

                                                                   0
                marginal effect of D(regime) X ln(Patents in market)
               -3                -2               -1




                                                                       0   200           400            600   800
                                                                                 Number of incumbents




           Patents and initial funding

           Turning to the impact of patent thickets on financing, the first two columns of Table 7a

present results from Poisson regressions on the number of new ventures receiving their first

round of financing from external investors.24 As before, standard errors are clustered by market,

and all regressions have market and year fixed effects. The dependent variable is the number of

firms in market j who have not previously received external financing and who obtain such

investment for the first time in year t. (The following section describes in greater detail how this

indicator is constructed, and performs a comprehensive analysis of the probability a firm receives



24
     See the discussion of firm level results below for details on the construction of this variable.


                                                                                                                    28
initial investment by a given year. Here we present a preview of these findings by examining the

broad market-level patterns in initial financing episode and patenting in the market.)

       The number of firms in a market receiving investment for the first time in year t will

depend on a) the number of firms “at risk” (i.e. the number of early stage firms that haven’t

previously received investment), b) the stage of development of firms in the market (the average

age of the firms), and c) the expected profitability of the entrants. We use the same variables as

in the entry regressions to control for demand and market structure, but also include a count of

the number of firms “at risk” which is the total number of new ventures identified as being

present in the previous sample year.

       In column (1) the coefficient on the number of patents in force is large and negative,

implying that software ventures that enter markets with larger patent thickets see are less likely

to receive funding from outside investors. In this regression the estimated coefficient is only

marginally significant, though when the market structure variables are excluded the estimated

coefficient is -1.07 and strongly significant. In column (2) we use the differences-in-differences

specification, and here a large and strongly significant coefficient is estimated on both the

dummy for change in regime and the interaction term. We conclude that patent-intensive

markets saw a reduction in initial investment by external parties in early-stage firms relative to

low-patent markets following the expansion of software patentability in the 1990s.

       In Table 7b we include measures of the uncertainty of patent rights. As can be seen in

columns (1) and (2) these have little effect on the result for number of patents in force, but we

find a negative and significant effect on entry of the mean share of non-patent references in the

citations made by patents in the market. (In the differences-in-differences specification in

column (2) the estimated coefficient is larger and more significant. In specifications where we




                                                                                                     29
include interaction terms with the uncertainty variables they are not significant.) This result is

consistent with idea that markets in which patents have relatively more references to the

technical literature—i.e. are more clearly distinguished from the prior art, and perhaps more

likely to be held valid—appear to make new ventures less attractive to outside investors.



       Patents and funding levels

       Columns (3) and (4) of Tables 7a and 7b report regression results where the dependent

variable is the amount of financing received by firms active in each market in year. Here we use

the log of the median amount invested across all transactions in a given market/year as the

dependent variable. When we use the log of the total amount invested in all transactions (or try

to model the amount received by each venture in a firm-level regression) the regression performs

very poorly. We believe that this reflects the very high level of measurement error in the amount

of financing received at the transaction level, which creates some very large and influential

outliers, as well as difficulties in adequately capturing heterogeneity across different rounds and

unobserved aspects of individual transactions.

       In Table 7b we find the opposite “main effect” of patent thickets on funding levels than

was the case for the volume of entry: the coefficient on the number of patents in the market is

positive and significant, with an elasticity around +1. We attribute this to a strong

selection/threshold effect, whereby the higher entry costs associated with patent thickets result in

smaller firms requiring lower amounts of external investment being denied funding. As before,

however, the “treatment effect” of strengthening patent rights is negative and significant: relative

to markets with fewer patents in force, strengthening patent rights in markets with a large thicket

results in a leftwards shift in the distribution of external investments in software ventures. The




                                                                                                     30
uncertainty variables (columns (3) and (4) of Table 7b) have no significant effect on funding

amounts, and controlling for these subtler aspects of the patent landscape in each market has

little impact on the estimated effect of the number of patents in force.



       Patents and IPOs

       Finally, columns (5) and (6) in Tables 7a and 7b present results from a Poisson regression

on the number of IPOs in each market/year. Consistent with patent thickets being, on net,

beneficial to incumbent firms in Table 7b we find a large, positive main effect of the number of

patents, but with a negative and significant interaction term. Relative to markets with fewer

patents, strengthening patent rights in markets with a large number of patents in force appears to

make software enterprises less attractive to investors in public markets. However the very large

positive coefficient estimated on the regime change dummy points to possible difficulties in

identifying this effect separately from other factors affecting IPOs. For example, the “tech

stock” bubble of the late 1990s is somewhat coincident with the changes in legal regime. We

experimented with using the level of the NASDAQ index and the book-to-market ratio in the

ICT industry as control variables but found that their inclusion did not substantially alter the

main findings and we concluded that the influence of aggregate forces such as these were better

captured by the year dummies included in these regressions.

       Including the uncertainty measures in these regressions (columns (5) and (6) of Table 7b)

has a substantial impact on the estimated effect of the number of patents. The coefficients lose

significance, while the estimated effect of the uncertainty measures are large and significant.

Taken at face value, the estimates suggest that investors in public markets are less willing to

invest in firms operating in markets where there are more “problem patents” with a high ratio of




                                                                                                   31
claims to citations made, but more willing to invest in firms operating in markets where the

average patent cites a larger amount of technical literature as opposed to other patents.




II. Impact of patent thickets at the firm level


       The market level results, though provocative, do not permit any investigation of our other

hypotheses about the effect of uncertainty about patent-related costs being to delay investment.

By looking at firm-level data, we can measure the timing of investments and test for any impact

of patent thickets and our other measures of uncertainty about the scope of patent rights. We can

also control for the degree to which investors concerns about patent thickets are mitigated by

new ventures holding their own patents. (See Gans, Hsu, and Stern.) Cockburn and MacGarvie

(2007) find a substantial positive effect of own patent holdings on the probability of entry into a

market, suggesting that this may also be an important factor in funding decisions.



Receipt of initial funding from VCs and corporate investors

       As discussed above we hypothesize that, if patent thickets reduce a venture’s expected

profits, investors faced with two otherwise identical companies will choose the one operating in

a less “thicketed” market.

       In order to test this hypothesis, we would ideally have a dataset comprised of firms that

sought external funding and were either granted or denied such funding. While this type of data

is very difficult to find, we have created what we believe to be a reasonable approximation of

such a dataset using a sub-sample of firms extracted from the CorpTech directory. CorpTech

lists more than 19,000 software companies active at some point between 1992 and 2004, but is




                                                                                                   32
unlikely to capture the entire population of software firms. To the extent that firms that appear

on CorpTech have passed some threshold of success that warrants their inclusion in the

directory, our sample may not be entirely representative of the universe of entrepreneurial

companies. Inference based on firm-level census data would allow for unbiased estimates of the

effects of patent thickets on investment in early stage firms. Lacking such data, our estimates

may therefore provide a lower bound for the effects of interest.

       From the CorpTech sample we select firms founded in 1990 or later that are active in no

more than one of our 27 product classes. For firms that appear in CorpTech more than one year

after being founded, we extrapolate the firm-level data on firm size backwards. We eliminate

firms that have already gone public or been acquired.

       CorpTech reports the initial source(s) of capital for the firm, for all smaller firms founded

between 1992 and 2002. This variable allows us to construct a database comprised of firms that

obtain funding at an early stage from venture capitalists or corporate investors and firms that do

not obtain such funding. We use CorpTech to identify the set of firms that did and did not

receive funding, and we use VentureXpert to identify the timing of first investment. Kaplan,

Sensoy and Stromberg (2002) show that VentureXpert omits 15% of financing rounds and 20%

of financing committed. To ensure that we do not mistakenly classify firms that receive external

funding but are not listed on VentureXpert, we drop from the sample 290 firms that are listed on

CorpTech as having VC or corporate investment prior to 2002 but that do not appear on

VentureXpert. We also drop firms for which no information is available from CorpTech on

initial sources of capital. We are left with a sample of 951 firms, of which 475 receive external

funding for the first time between 1992 and 2002.




                                                                                                    33
           Using information on the first round of investment from VentureXpert, we create a

dummy variable equal to 1 if firm i receives venture or corporate financing for the first time in

year t, 0 before year t, and missing after year t. This variable takes on a value of zero in all years

for firms that never receive funding before 2002. We then perform duration analysis using the

Cox Proportional Hazard model.25

           Figure 5a gives the Kaplan-Meier survival curves estimated from these data for firms

grouped by where their target market falls in the distribution of the numbers of patents in force.

(Here “survival” means failure to attract outside funding.)

                                                  Figure 5a:
                          Kaplan-Meier Estimates of Survival Functions for the Hazard
                                        of Obtaining Outside Funding
               1.00
               0.75
               0.50
               0.25
               0.00




                      0                            5                                10
                                                 analysis time

                                              25<=pc<75              pc<25
                                              pc>75                  pc>90




           There is no obvious difference across these groups, but once the survival functions are

adjusted for the size of the market (number of incumbents and number of incumbents squared,




25
     Essentially similar results are obtained using logit Discrete-Time Hazard models.


                                                                                                     34
we see quite striking differences in the impact of patent thickets.26 As can be seen in Figure 5b,

the Kaplan-Meier estimates show that software ventures in the most thicketed markets have a

very small probability of obtaining outside funding, while there are marked differences in the

survival curves across markets corresponding to differences in the quartiles in the patenting

distribution, with the likelihood of funding at any given duration falling as we move from lower

to higher percentiles (after adjusting for market size).

                                             Figure 5b:
              Kaplan-Meier Estimates of Survival Functions for the Hazard of Obtaining
              Outside Funding, Adjusted for the Number of Incumbents in Each Market
           1.00
           0.75
           0.50
           0.25
           0.00




                  0                            5                              10
                                             analysis time

                                         25<=pc<75             pc<25
                                         pc>75                 pc>90




        These results show the importance of controlling for market characteristics, and in the

hazard models, our explanatory variables include year and product market fixed effects, and the

modal citation lag for patents in the market. Other market-level controls relating to profitability


26
  These graphs were created using Stata’s sts graph command, which estimates separate Cox regressions for each
percentile group. Adjusting for the number of incumbents means that the number of incumbents and the number of
incumbents squared were included as covariates in the Cox regression.


                                                                                                             35
in the firm’s target market include the number of incumbents in the market and the number of

incumbents squared, and the growth of sales in the market.27 Variables relating to the patent

landscape include the log of the patent stock in the market and the Herfindahl over assignees of

citations made by patents in the market.28 Firm-level explanatory variables include the

aforementioned dummies for firm size range, implicitly the age of the firm (since the “duration”

variable is years since the birth of the firm), and the number of patents granted and pending.

         Table 8 contains results from these regressions, reported as hazard ratios. Looking at the

control variables, relative to baseline, the hazard of receiving funding is significantly higher (and

thus delays in funding are shorter) in faster growing markets. In general the hazard of funding is

nonlinearly related to the number of competitors in the market, with an initial increase and then

decrease, first rising with the this measure of the size of the market—presumably reflecting an

increase in expected profits due to a reduction in the market power of incumbents or a reduction

of barriers to entry created by network effects—then falling as the number of incumbents

increases, which could reflect the fact that large numbers of incumbents indicate more mature,

more crowded, and less attractive markets. The dummies for the range of firm size (not reported,

but available upon request) display a concave relationship between firm size and the hazard of

initial funding. These results are somewhat sensitive to the selection of control variables, but

adding or dropping control variables has little effect on the estimated coefficients on the patent

variables.




27
   The inclusion of a proxy for the CR4 of sales in the market was rejected by a likelihood ratio test. The same is true
of the log of the number of forward citations per patent in the market.
28
   This is computed by taking patents associated with a given market (SOF) in application year t, and calculating the
share of their backward citations received by each of a set of assignees. Assignee names were cleaned using a
combination of an algorithm and manual inspection. Backward citations to patents granted no more than ten years
previously are omitted.


                                                                                                                    36
        The “patent landscape” variables display a pattern consistent with several of our

hypotheses. In all of the regressions, increases in the total number of patents in the market are

associated with a substantial and statistically significant reduction in the hazard of receiving

funding (or, equivalently, longer delays in receiving funding). Conversely, we find a positive

and significant effect on the hazard of receiving funding for software ventures that have their

own patents. Consistent with the idea that investors are forward-looking (and with anecdotal

evidence) a much larger and statistically significant effect is found for the number of patents

pending than for the number of patents granted.

        In column (2), the differences-in-differences specification shows that the negative effect

of patent thickets is larger in markets where patent rights were strengthened relative to those

where it was not. Comparing columns (1) and (2) with (3) through (5), a one standard deviation

increase in the number of patents in the market is associated with a reduction in the hazard of

being funded on average of 0.01 (one percentage point). After 1996, this increases to

approximately a reduction in the hazard of funding by 0.04 for a one standard deviation increase

in the patent stock in the market. Given that the mean probability of obtaining funding in a given

year is 0.085 overall and 0.102 after 1996, this effect appears to be of considerable importance.

The significance of these results are robust to clustering at the market level. The “average

treatment effect” implied by the interaction term is statistically significant. However, though the

marginal effect computed for each observation is always negative, it is not always significant.

Table 8 gives the average marginal interaction effect, and the average standard error, estimated

from a logit discrete-time version of the Cox continuous time model.29




29
  These marginal effects are again computed using Stata’s predictnl command. See Ai and Norton (2003) for more
on the estimation of interaction terms in nonlinear discrete choice models.


                                                                                                            37
        Comparing estimates using the full sample of data to those obtained for the sub-sample of

observations after 1996 (the major shift in the legal regime governing software patentability)

shows that the impact of patent thickets was much larger during this period. Consistent with the

quite large negative interaction term effect in column (2), the hazard of receiving funding is

substantially lower for this subsample than for the full sample. The marginal effect of the

number of patents in force is almost four times larger after 1996 than for the full sample.

        Column (4) of Table 8 reports results from including measures of bargaining costs. In

Cockburn and MacGarvie (2007) we found that these had a significant effect on entry. (We

report results only for the post-1996 subsample. Coefficients were insignificant but of the same

sign and similar magnitude when the same specification was used on the full sample.)

Consistent with the hypotheses about bargaining costs and the concentration of patent ownership

discussed above, we find a positive effect of the Herfindahl of patent citations over assignees

within each market on the hazard of receiving initial funding. In other words, an initial round of

funding by external investors is more likely to be obtained by software ventures operating in

markets were IP ownership is more concentrated. Our alternative measure of bargaining costs, a

quadratic in the number of cited assignees, is insignificant.



Exits

        Table 9 presents results of a model of the probability that a new venture ultimately exits

from the “entrepreneurial phase” by going public, being acquired by another firm, or is

liquidated or truncated in the dataset. The unit of observation for this analysis is a calendar year,

and we use a competing risks discrete time hazard model in which we use a multinomial logit for

probability of each of these mutually exclusive outcomes being observed in each year. The




                                                                                                   38
dependent variable is equal to 0 in each year prior to exit via IPO or acquisition, 1 in the year

that the firm goes public, and 2 when the firm exits via acquisition. Firms that are censored or

liquidated take on a value of zero in all periods. (Competing risks can be estimated using this

type of multinomial logit model provided the competing risks are independent, see Allison

(1982).) The market-level variables are as described above. We also include controls for

characteristics of the investors in each venture (total patents held by investors, the number of

investments from corporate investors as opposed to VCs, and the cumulative number of IPOs by

firms in which investors had previously invested) and of the venture itself (total amount invested

to date, and number of patents held.) The sample is restricted to firms from the sample used in

the initial funding regressions that received at least one round of funding. Characteristics of

investors are measured only in years in which the firm receives a round of investment, and a

dummy variable is included to indicate years in which the firm received investment.30

         Consistent with the market level results on IPOs, the multinomial logit regressions

reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 indicate that the hazard of going public or being

acquired is higher in markets with more patents, though the coefficient is not significant. We

also find that the hazard of exiting from the sample in these ways is increasing in the number of

patents owned by the venture (a strongly significant effect) and increasing in the total amount of

outside investment to date (though only marginally significant.)

         In the differences-in-differences specification in columns (3) and (4) we also obtain a

result consistent with the market-level findings: a significant positive effect of the number of

patents in the market on the probability of exiting via IPO, although the interaction effect with

the legal regime change is negative. Again, we interpret this as evidence that patent thickets tend


30
  The coefficient on this variable is not reported but is available upon request. We also estimated models in which
an observation was a firm-round, rather than a firm-year, and obtained comparable results.


                                                                                                                  39
to protect incumbents, but only up to a point. When patents are strengthened by changes in the

legal regime, the effect is smaller (though not significantly so). The effect on the hazard of

exiting via acquisition is negative, but not significant, and because the data are ill-conditioned

(due to sparse cell counts) we are unable to obtain stable estimates of the regime dummy

interaction effect for the exit via acquisition outcome. The impact of patent thickets is very

apparent when we estimate the model on the subset of firms that did not obtain any patents of

their own. As can be seen in columns (5) and (6), these firms are much less likely to exit via

IPO, relative either to liquidation/censoring or to acquisition, in markets with a large patent

thicket. This finding is striking in light of the fact that only a minority of the firms in our sample

( 22%) hold patents by the time of exit. An important question for future research is why, given

the apparent differences in success rates between patent-holding and non-patent holding firms,

relatively few firms in these markets filed patents during this time period.




Summary and Conclusions


       The impact of stronger intellectual property rights in the software industry is

controversial. One often under-emphasized means by which patents can affect technical change,

industry dynamics, and ultimately welfare, is through their role in stimulating or stifling entry by

new ventures. The mechanisms through which patents can impact this process are, as ever,

complex. Patents can block entry, or raise entrants’ costs in variety of ways, while at the same

time they may stimulate entry by improving the bargaining position of entrants vis-à-vis

incumbents, and supporting a “market for technology” which enables new ventures to license

their way into the market, or realize value through trade in their intangible assets. Some of the




                                                                                                     40
impact of patent thickets may therefore be felt in the interaction of new ventures with the capital

markets, and here we find evidence that the extraordinary growth in patenting of software has

had a variety of effects on the financing of software companies.

       Our analysis of an unusually complete data set that contains information on software

ventures that do not obtain outside funding as well as those that do attract VC and corporate

investments provides evidence that patents significantly affect the likelihood of obtaining

funding for early-stage firms. Interestingly, the number of a firm’s patents pending is positively

and significantly related to the probability a firm obtains initial funding, while the number of

patents already granted is not—outside investors appear to be focused on these firms’ “pipeline”

of IP assets under development. . The estimated effect is quite large: each additional patent

pending increases the hazard of funding by around 10%. Start-up software companies operating

in markets characterized by denser patent thickets see their initial acquisition of VC or corporate

funding delayed relative to firms in markets less affected by patents. This effect does not appear

to be present on average once funding has been obtained and new ventures have become

incumbents. If anything, our market-level estimates of the conditional correlation between the

number of IPOs in a market and the patents in force there suggest that firms operating in markets

with a large number of patents may be more attractive to investors in public markets, stimulating

IPO activity and thus the payoff to early-stage investors. We do however find that changes in the

legal regime that strengthen patent rights significantly lower the correlation between patents in a

market and the number of IPOs. In a firm-level analysis that controls for additional

characteristics of pre-IPO firms, these results are maintained, but they are statistically weak (the

estimated coefficients are have the same sign but rarely significant) and again the effect only

works up to a point. Interestingly, we find a significant negative correlation between the hazard




                                                                                                   41
of going public and the number of patents in a market for the start-up firms that do not

themselves hold patents. Firms without patents operating in thicketed markets are also

significantly more likely to be acquired than to have an IPO. Measures of uncertainty about of

the scope and validity of patents also appear to play a role in investment decisions, though our

results are less robust. We find that there is less entry into markets where patents have a higher

ratio of claims made to the amount of prior cited. We also find a statistically significant

association between our measures of patent-related uncertainty and the number of IPOs in a

market in a given year. Investors in public securities appear to be more willing to invest in

software companies operating in markets in which there are fewer “problem patents” and in

which patents cite more non-patent prior art. However we find no evidence for our hypothesized

relationship between higher levels of uncertainty and delays in the timing of initial financing of

new software companies by venture capitalists and corporate investors.

       One of the most statistically robust (and provocative) findings of this paper is the

importance of new ventures obtaining their own patents. Firms that have higher numbers of

patents and patent applications pending are more likely to receive funding from outside

investors, and more likely to subsequently “exit” from the entrepreneurial phase through IPO or

acquisition. These findings may in part reflect the value to outside investors of the ability to

obtain patents as signal of the quality of a new venture’s technology and/or management. Hsu

and Ziedonis (2007) show that larger numbers of patent applications are associated with higher

valuations of early stage semiconductor companies, and attribute this in part to factors other than

the information about a firm’s technology that is provided by patents. Beyond this “capabilities”

argument, we suggest that when faced with a patent thicket, patents also confer significant

competitive advantages on entrant firms in minimizing transactions costs associated with




                                                                                                   42
incumbents’ patent holdings. But despite these facts, only 16% of the firms in our regression

sample (and only 22% of the firms that ultimately got funding) ever filed for a patent during our

sample period. If the benefits from holding patents are as substantial as our results suggest, it is

puzzling why more of the firms that were active in these markets during this period did not

obtain them. One explanation may be that causality between funding and patent applications

runs in the opposite direction: it may be that investors require early stage firms to file patent

applications as a condition of receiving funds, or that applications are observed

disproportionately by firms that get funding and are more able to support the substantial costs of

patent prosecution. In these data we only observe applications that are subsequently granted, so

this may be a significant source of bias if large numbers of unobserved applications are

abandoned by firms who are not funded.

       This paper documents a number of mechanisms through which patents confer private

benefits to software companies. These benefits appear to have been substantial, and are reflected

in the extraordinary surge in patenting in this industry. However these incentives to obtain

patents may ultimately become collectively self-destructive. Our differences-in-differences

estimates of the relative impact of strengthening patent rights show a generally negative effect on

entry and financing of software firms in the most heavily thicketed markets. Continued

accumulation of patents may therefore result in the “stifling” effects identified here swamping

the offsetting “stimulating” effect on innovation.




                                                                                                    43
References

Ai, C., and E. Norton, (2003), “Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models”, Economics
    Letters, 80 (2003) p. 123-129.

Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for Technology: Economics of
   Innovation and Corporate Strategy. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.

Arora, A. and C. Forman (forthcoming), “Software”, in J. Macher and D. Mowery (eds.),
       Running Faster to Keep Up: Prospering in Global Innovation Networks, National
       Research Council.

Arora, A. M. Drev, C. Forman, and M. D. Alpman (2007), “A Note on the Classification of
       Software Patents”, working paper.Allison, P. (1984) Event History Analysis: Regression
       for Longitudinal Event Data, Newbury Park: Sage Publications, Inc.

Bessen, J. and E. Maskin (2007) “Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation.” forthcoming in
       RAND Journal of Economics.

Bessen, J. and Meurer (2006), “Patent Litigation with Endogenous Disputes”, American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2006.

Bessen, J. and M. Meurer (2008) Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats and Lawyers Put
       Innovators at Risk, forthcoming, Princeton University Press.

Bessen, J. and R. Hunt (2003) “An Empirical Look at Software Patents.” Journal of Economics
       and Management Strategy 16, no. 1, pp. 157-89 (2007).

Branstetter, L. and M. Sakakibara (2001), “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation?,”
       RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 32, no. 1, Spring 2001, pp. 77-100.

Cockburn, I. (2005) “State Street Meets the Human Genome Project.” Chapter in R. Hahn (ed.)
      Intellectual Property Rights in Frontier Industries: Bioinformatics and Software.
      Washington, DC: Brookings-AEI Joint Center.

Cockburn, I. and M. MacGarvie (2006), “Entry, Exit and Patenting in the Software Industry”,
      NBER Working paper No. 12563.

Cockburn, I. and S. Wagner (2007) “Patents and the Survival of Internet-Related IPOs.” NBER
      Working Paper No. 13146.

Dushnitsky, G. and M.J. Lenox. (2005) “Corporate Venture Capital and Incumbent Firm
      Innovation Rates” Research Policy, 34(5):615-639.

Dushnitsky, G. and Z. Shapira (2007) “Innovation Incentives Meet Organizational Reality:
      Comparing Corporate and Independent Venture Capitalists”, working paper.



                                                                                              44
Gans, J., D. Hsu and S. Stern, (2002). “When Does Start-Up Innovation Spur the Gale of
       Creative Destruction?,” RAND Journal of Economics, 33(4): 571-586

Gans, J., D. Hsu and S. Stern, (2007). “The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property Rights on
       the Market For Ideas: Evidence From Patent Grant Delays,” NBER Working Paper No.
       13234

Gans, J. and S. Stern (2000) “Incumbency and R&D Incentives: Licensing the Gale of Creative
       Destruction,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4): 485-511.

Giot, P. and A. Schwienbacher, (2007) “IPOs, trade sales and liquidations: Modelling venture
        capital exits using survival analysis,” Journal of Banking & Finance, Volume 31, Issue 3,
        March 2007, Pages 679-702

Goldfarb, B. D. Kirsch, and M. .Pfarrer (2005), “Searching for ghosts: Business survival,
       unmeasured entrepreneurial activity, and private equity investment in the Dot-Com Era”
       Working paper.

Gompers, P. (1995). Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital. Journal
     of Finance 50(5), 1461-1489.

Gort, M. and S. Klepper (1982) “Time Paths in the Diffusion of Product Innovations.” Economic
       Journal, 92(367), pp. 630-653.

Graham, S. J. H. and D. C. Mowery (2003) “Intellectual Property Protection in the U. S.
      Software Industry.” Chapter in W. M. Cohen and S. A. Merrill (eds.), Patents in the
      Knowledge-Based Economy, Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Guler, I. (2007) “An Empirical Examination of Management of Real Options in the U.S. Venture
        Capital Industry,” Advances in Strategic Management.

Hall, B. (2004) “Exploring the Patent Explosion.” NBER Working Paper No. 10605.

Hall, B. and M. MacGarvie (2006) “The Private Value of Software Patents.” NBER Working
       Paper No. 12195.

Hall, B.H. and R.H. Ziedonis, 2001. “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical Study of
       Patenting in the US Semiconductor Industry, 1979-95,” Rand Journal of Economics,
       32(1): 101-128.

Heller and Eisenberg (1998) “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anti-commons in Biomedical
        Research” Science, 280(5364): 698–701.




                                                                                              45
Hellmann, T. and M. Puri (2002) “Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-up
      Firms: Empirical Evidence,” The Journal of Finance, February 2002, Vol. 57, No. 1, pp.
      169-197

Hsu, D. and R. Ziedonis (2007), “Patents as Quality Signals for Entrepreneurial Ventures,”
       working paper.

Kaplan, S., B. Sensoy, and P. Stromberg (2002), “How well do venture capital databases reflect
      actual investments?”, working paper.

Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (2000), “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation,”
      RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4), 2000, 674-692.

Lessig, L. (2002), Keynote address to the Open Source Convention on July 24, 2002.
        http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/policy/2002/08/15/lessig.html?page=2 (accessed May
        29, 2007)

Lanjouw, J. and I. Cockburn (2001) “New Pills For Poor People? Empirical Evidence After
      GATT.” World Development, 29(2), pp. 265-289.

Lemley and Shapiro (2005), “Probabilistic Patents”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19,
      p. 75, 2005

Lerner, Josh. (2002) “150 Years of Patent Protection.” American Economic Review, 92(2), pp.
       221-225.

Lerner, 1994 J. Lerner, Venture capitalists and the decision to go public, Journal of Financial
       Economics 35 (1994), pp. 293–316

Ljungqvist, A., Hochberg, Y., Lu, Y., (2007). “Whom you know matters: Venture capital
      networks and investment performance”. Journal of Finance.

Mann, R. J. and T. Sager (2005) “Patents, Venture Capital, and Software Start-Ups.” University
      of Texas Law School, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 57, September 2005.

Merges, R. P. (2006) “Patents, Entry and Growth in the Software Industry.” Working paper, UC
      Berkeley School of Law.

Moser, P. (2005), “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from 19th-Century
       World's Fairs”, American Economic Review, vol. 95 (4) , pp. 1215-1236

Murray, F. and S. Stern (2007), “Do formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free Flow of
      Scientific Knowledge? An Empirical Test of the anti-Commons Hypothesis.”
      Forthcoming at Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.




                                                                                                  46
Shapiro, C. (2001) “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross-licenses, Patent Pools, and Standard-
       Setting.” In Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1. Adam Jaffe, Joshua Lerner, and
       Scott Stern, (eds.), MIT Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Smith, B. L. and S. O. Mann (2004) “Innovation and Intellectual Property Protection in the
       Software Industry: An Emerging Role for Patents.” University of Chicago Law Review,
       71, pp. 241-264.

Ziedonis, R. H. (2007) “Don't Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technology and the Patent
       Acquisition Strategies of Firms”, Management Science, 50: 804 - 820.




                                                                                             47
                    Table 1a: Number of firms per market – mean by firm type and year

                                                          Number        Share of new
                                                          of new          entrants      Share of new entrants
Year      Incumbents     All entrants   Diversifiers      entrants       VC-funded       Corporate-funded
1994            82.63            9.81          8.89             0.93        0.04                0.04
1996           109.22          15.74          13.30             2.44        0.14                0.02
1998           132.00          19.07          16.74             2.33        0.12                0.05
2000           176.59          13.74          12.22             1.52        0.17                0.04
2002           200.85            7.81          4.41             3.41        0.26                0.09
2004           243.48          23.41          20.93             2.48        0.25                0.11
 All           157.46          14.93          12.75             2.19        0.16                0.06




                    Table 1b: Number of firms per market – mean by firm type and SOF

                                                           Number      Share of new
                                                           of new        entrants      Share of new entrants
  SOF      Incumbents      All entrants    Diversifiers    entrants     VC-funded       Corporate-funded
  ac_b          489.83            24.67          21.00         3.67        0.11                0.08
  ac_t          117.00             6.33            6.17        0.17        0.00                0.00
  ai_a           73.50             7.00            6.33        0.67        0.17                0.00
   ai_l          13.50             2.00            1.33        0.67        0.08                0.08
  ai_n           17.00             2.00            1.67        0.33        0.00                0.00
  ba_a           25.00             1.67            1.33        0.33        0.17                0.00
  cs_f           88.17            12.50          10.83         1.67        0.04                0.00
   cs_i         377.67            51.17          40.67        10.50        0.34                0.14
   cs_l         142.00            13.00          11.17         1.83        0.21                0.04
 cs_w            67.83             9.83            9.00        0.83        0.25                0.08
 Dm_f           373.00            44.17          38.67         5.50        0.21                0.13
dm_mh            39.83             4.00            3.33        0.67        0.17                0.08
dm_mr           167.17            12.67          10.50         2.17        0.13                0.04
 dm_q           103.00            16.17          14.33         1.83        0.25                0.08
 ma_c            12.17             1.00            1.00        0.00        0.00                0.00
 ma_q            74.33            17.00          15.33         1.67        0.08                0.00
 oa_gd          121.00            10.00            7.83        2.17        0.26                0.17
oa_me           142.17            15.33          12.67         2.67        0.28                0.18
  oa_p           51.33             4.50            3.67        0.83        0.17                0.00
 sv_ar           34.00             0.83            0.83        0.00        0.00                0.00
  ts_er         109.67             9.33            8.50        0.83        0.04                0.00
  ut_h           80.17             7.33            7.00        0.33        0.08                0.00
   ut_r          54.17             7.67            6.67        1.00        0.33                0.17
  ut_x          279.00            28.33          23.33         5.00        0.39                0.14
  ut_y          192.00            28.67          23.33         5.33        0.24                0.05
 Wd_i           593.50            35.33          31.17         4.17        0.11                0.00
 wd_o           413.50            30.67          26.50         4.17        0.28                0.06
   All          157.46            14.93          12.75         2.19        0.16                0.06




                                                                                                                48
   Table 2a: Market Characteristics – by year

           Total Sales      CR4 for    Modal backward
Year         $MM             Sales       citation lag
1994                316        0.73          3.15
1996                461        0.71          4.15
1998                662        0.68          5.37
2000              4,825        0.50          6.04
2002              1,903        0.59          7.30
2004              2,025        0.50          7.70
 All              1,699        0.62          5.62



  Table 2b: Market Characteristics – by market

              Total Sales    CR4 for   Modal backward
   SOF          $MM           Sales     citation lag
   ac_b            2,073        0.34        5.33
   ac_t              853        0.66        3.50
   ai_a            1,138        0.66        6.50
    ai_l             254        0.95        7.17
   ai_n              219        0.93        7.17
   ba_a              465        0.80        5.33
   cs_f              867        0.62        4.67
    cs_i           6,577        0.28        4.67
    cs_l           3,610        0.50        4.67
  cs_w             1,357        0.67        4.67
  dm_f             3,550        0.30        5.00
 dm_mh               266        0.86        5.50
 dm_mr             2,160        0.53        5.50
  dm_q             1,302        0.54        5.50
  ma_c                68        0.95        5.50
  ma_q               723        0.62        6.00
  oa_gd            1,842        0.61        4.67
 oa_me             1,371        0.50        6.00
   oa_p              528        0.72        6.50
  sv_ar            1,324        0.92        5.33
   ts_er           1,761        0.70        4.50
   ut_h            1,410        0.73        4.33
    ut_r             805        0.68        5.67
   ut_x            4,366        0.45        7.00
   ut_y            2,729        0.54        6.33
  wd_i             2,692        0.29        7.50
  wd_o             1,554        0.36        7.17
    All            1,699        0.62        5.62




                                                        49
            Table 3: Patent Counts by year

Year   Grants     Applications   Expirations   Total patents
                                                 in force
1980        366           680              .           2359
1981        394           755              .           2987
1982        491           859              .           3797
1983        552           860              .           4659
1984        739           861              .           5870
1985        851           920              .           7307
1986        873          1096              .           8759
1987       1091          1363              .          10557
1988       1076          1567              .          12296
1989       1632          1856              .          14900
1990       1463          2116              .          17272
1991       1595          2237              .          19816
1992       1735          2569              .          22882
1993       2095          2805              .          26702
1994       2400          3738           439           31162
1995       2688          5694           774           35775
1996       3497          7032           734           41892
1997       3676          8693          1049           48219
1998       6706          9523           974           61406
1999       7149         10753          1290           75457
2000       7049         12270          1259           88718
2001       7561         11634          1435         102808
2002       7777          9200          1795         118032
2003       8219          5121          2091         133597
2004       9123          2070          2131         150981
2005      10781           590          2017         169093
2006      16285            36          2669         199191
 All     107864        108898         18660




                                                               50
                             Table 4a: Patent Characteristics – by year

Grant Year   # Patents    Mean #     Mean # of US    Mean # Foreign   Mean # non-      Mean # forward
             Granted     of claims   patents cited    patents cited      patent         cites within
                                                                       references          5 years
  1977            382        12.35           6.06              0.03             0.27               4.07
  1978            351        14.15           5.98              0.04             0.35               4.03
  1979            266        12.24           6.26              0.12             0.50               4.02
  1980            366        12.65           6.79              0.18             0.49               4.87
  1981            394        12.39           7.24              0.25             0.58               4.85
  1982            491        12.54           7.37              0.32             0.68               5.24
  1983            552        12.69           7.35              0.42             0.73               5.58
  1984            739        11.93           7.24              0.38             1.00               6.19
  1985            851        11.70           7.51              0.41             0.78               6.35
  1986            873        11.85           7.38              0.58             0.79               5.84
  1987           1091        11.63           7.54              0.41             0.86               6.86
  1988           1076        12.18           7.57              0.61             1.16               6.17
  1989           1632        13.56           8.18              0.86             1.34               6.38
  1990           1463        13.47           8.36              0.76             1.69               6.45
  1991           1595        13.40           7.96              0.75             1.50               6.73
  1992           1735        14.45           8.92              0.94             2.08               7.85
  1993           2095        14.50           8.56              0.95             2.07               9.06
  1994           2400        14.58           8.91              1.05             2.40               9.67
  1995           2688        14.52           9.66              1.11             2.32               9.53
  1996           3497        16.01          10.76              1.20             3.03             10.87
  1997           3676        17.13          11.35              1.18             3.72             10.77
  1998           6706        18.89          11.48              1.27             3.53             10.81
  1999           7149        20.44          12.23              1.29             4.03             10.54
  2000           7049        20.95          12.83              1.19             4.05               9.44
  2001           7561        20.76          14.22              1.53             4.22               9.34
  2002           7777        22.10          13.76              1.57             4.06                   .
  2003           8219        22.38          14.82              1.66             4.28                   .
  2004           9123        22.84          14.95              1.61             4.08                   .
  2005          10781        22.79          16.00              1.99             5.34                   .
  2006          16285        22.44          19.11              2.21             6.98                   .
   All         108863        19.79          13.44              1.47             4.09               9.12




                                                                                                           51
                                   Table 4b: Patent Characteristics by Market

 SOF      Total #      CAGR of #         Mean #     Mean # of      Mean # of       Mean # of       Mean # of
          Patents    patents in force   of claims   US patents      Foreign        non-patent     forward cites
          Granted      1980-2006                      cited       patents cited    references     within 5 years
  ac_b         189             21.6%        26.06         17.48             2.07          17.17            16.79
  ac_t          41             14.0%        17.24          9.85             0.63           6.59             4.36
  ai_a        8385             16.1%        19.64          9.98             1.22           4.68             6.63
   ai_l       2981             13.8%        19.09         10.00             1.32           4.10             6.29
  ai_n        1482             26.5%        19.24         10.65             0.93          10.11             6.40
  ba_a        1242             15.7%        19.36         18.88             2.38           2.59             8.64
  cs_f       13629             25.5%        22.36         17.52             1.35           4.98            15.32
   cs_i      13629             25.5%        22.36         17.52             1.35           4.98            15.32
   cs_l      13629             25.5%        22.36         17.52             1.35           4.98            15.32
 cs_w        13629             25.5%        22.36         17.52             1.35           4.98            15.32
 dm_f         8943             22.1%        22.81         13.30             0.92           5.36            13.41
dm_mh       10169              219%         23.54         13.46             0.92           5.60            13.21
dm_mr       10169              21.9%        23.54         13.46             0.92           5.60            13.21
 dm_q       10169              21.9%        23.54         13.46             0.92           5.60            13.21
 ma_c         1055             16.8%        17.38         13.84             2.09           4.53             6.37
 ma_q          332             31.2%        20.51         13.37             1.57           2.28             7.70
 ma_tc       16809             13.7%        17.56         10.98             1.01           2.40             7.09
 oa_gd        6057             15.5%        19.20         10.62             1.66           3.51             6.20
oa_me          742             31.5%        23.45         18.38             1.49           5.64            18.68
oa_mv          724             12.7%        16.82          9.84             3.48           1.89             6.57
  oa_p        3126             18,7%        20.29         13.64             1.06           5.08             9.75
 sv_ar        2261             28.5%        20.05         10.51             0.86           9.48             6.86
  ts_er      13445             16.1%        16.82         12.00             2.16           1.33             7.39
  ut_2        1166             21.2%        23.59         12.13             0.75           5.00            11.65
  ut_h      13164              14.8%        17.59         13.18             1.01           2.08             8.34
  ut_o      12508              22.4%        23.32         13.62             0.94           5.50            13.09
   ut_r     15536              14.7%        18.73         13.63             1.07           2.77             9.50
  ut_x        3092             22.5%        23.32         18.83             2.72           8.42            14.75
  ut_y      16811              13.7%        17.56         10.98             1.01           2.39             7.09
 wd_i         1681             19.0%        20.02         16.50             1.84           3.77             9.26
 wd_o         5076             20.1%        23.66         17.94             2.15           8.84            13.00
   All     227684                           20.69         14.01             1.28           4.38            10.53




                                                                                                                   52
                   Table 5a: Thicket Measures – by year

 year   # of claims per     Mean # of non-      # of cited    HHI index        CR4 of
        patent citation    patent references    assignees     of citations    citations
1994               2.29                 2.09       189.96             0.05         0.34
1996               2.11                 2.66       331.65             0.05         0.33
1998               2.04                 3.26       564.78             0.04         0.29
2000               2.16                 4.67       683.07             0.04         0.28
2002               2.13                 4.91       869.93             0.03         0.25
2004               2.17                 5.29     1054.70              0.03         0.27
 All               2.15                 3.81       617.45             0.04         0.29


                  Table 5b: Thicket Measures – by Market

SOF      # of claims per     Mean # of non-      # of cited    HHI index        CR4 of
         patent citation    patent references    assignees     of citations    citations
ac_b                2.13                15.88        55.33             0.14         0.51
ac_t                1.67                 3.63        14.80             0.12         0.51
ai_a                2.22                 3.80       548.33             0.02         0.24
ai_l                2.21                 3.07       301.83             0.02         0.25
ai_n                1.92                 7.23       217.83             0.03         0.27
ba_a                2.62                 1.81       272.33             0.05         0.31
cs_f                2.29                 3.14     1274.67              0.03         0.27
cs_i                2.29                 3.14     1274.67              0.03         0.27
cs_l                2.29                 3.14     1274.67              0.03         0.27
cs_w                2.29                 3.14     1274.67              0.03         0.27
dm_f                2.09                 4.01       859.83             0.04         0.32
dm_mh               2.18                 4.09       993.17             0.04         0.32
dm_mr               2.18                 4.09       993.17             0.04         0.32
dm_q                2.18                 4.09       993.17             0.04         0.32
ma_c                1.80                 2.46       153.33             0.03         0.29
ma_q                1.77                 1.04        67.83             0.05         0.31
oa_gd               2.20                 2.28       562.00             0.02         0.21
oa_me               2.72                 3.37       195.00             0.05         0.33
oa_p                2.34                 3.59       378.67             0.04         0.33
sv_ar               2.04                 7.14       294.67             0.03         0.26
ts_er               1.68                 1.03       757.00             0.02         0.21
ut_h                1.93                 1.48       892.83             0.03         0.24
ut_r                1.97                 2.51       589.67             0.03         0.25
ut_x                2.31                 4.30       404.67             0.04         0.31
ut_y                2.16                 2.01       810.83             0.02         0.20
wd_i                2.29                 2.56       366.17             0.04         0.28
wd_o                2.28                 4.97       749.50             0.05         0.29
All                 2.15                 3.81       617.45             0.04         0.29




                                                                                           53
                                       Table 6: Market-level results on entry
             Poisson regressions with year and market fixed effects and standard errors clustered by market

                                              (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)
                                              Entrants                                  De novo                      Diversifiers
Key Patent Variables
Ln(Market's patents)                          -0.438        -0.493       -0.411         -0.570        -0.465         -0.365        -0.358
                                              (0.140)***    (0.137)***   (0.139)***     (0.290)**     (0.304)        (0.143)**     (0.139)**
Average claims per cite in market                           -0.371
                                                            (0.182)**
Non-patent share of prior art                               0.089
                                                            (0.358)
D(Regime change)                                                         0.687                        1.779                        0.473
                                                                         (0.283)**                    (0.894)**                    (0.230)**
D(Regime change)*ln(market’s patents)                                    -0.068                       -0.231                       -0.039
                                                                         (0.035)**                    (0.126)*                     (0.025)
Control Variables
Ln(Avg Quality of market’s patents)           -1.043        -0.927       -0.849         -0.653        0.010          -1.111        -1.012
                                              (0.324)***    (0.346)***   (0.346)**      (0.810)       (0.750)        (0.349)***    (0.366)***
Incumbents (in hundreds)                      0.869         0.953        0.902          1.207         1.240          0.791         0.816
                                              (0.111)***    (0.116)***   (0.102)***     (0.231)***    (0.236)***     (0.087)***    (0.082)***
Incumbents (in hundreds) squared              -0.067        -0.075       -0.070         -0.105        -0.108         -0.059        -0.060
                                              (0.013)***    (0.015)***   (0.012)***     (0.024)***    (0.024)***     (0.011)***    (0.010)***
Growth of revenues                            0.143         0.145        0.188          0.166         0.206          0.114         0.156
                                              (0.072)**     (0.079)*     (0.072)***     (0.112)       (0.131)        (0.076)       (0.077)**
Modal citation lag                            -0.028        -0.048       -0.033         0.001         -0.004         -0.020        -0.023
                                              (0.013)**     (0.015)***   (0.014)**      (0.037)       (0.037)        (0.014)       (0.014)*
Constant                                      6.604         7.023        5.589          1.794         -1.589         6.747         6.234
                                              (1.651)***    (1.818)***   (1.780)***     (3.620)       (3.413)        (1.752)***    (1.839)***
Observations                                  162           162          162            162           162            162           162
Log likelihood                                    -422.8        -419.5        -418.4         -231.5        -229.4         -383.5        -381.2

                                              Median marginal effects of interaction terms
D(Regime change)*ln(market’s patents)                                         -1.539                        -0.47                       -0.883
median standard error                                                          0.793                        0.433                        0.503
median p-value                                                                  0.04                        0.271                        0.083
   Average effect below 25th percentile of
                              market size                                      -0.651                       -0.309                      -0.342
   Average effect above 75th percentile of
                              market size                                       -5.93                       -1.815                        -3.4

   Robust standard errors in parentheses
   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                         54
                             Table 7a: Market-level results on financing and IPOs



Estimation method                                     Poisson                      OLS                         Poisson
                                                Number of firms in           Log of the median
Dependent variable                            market j receiving initial   amt invested in firms     # of IPOs in market j in
                                                 funding in year t          in market j in year t            year t
                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
Patent variables
Ln(Market's patents)                          -0.704        -0.788         0.911      1.171         2.446          3.181
                                              (0.418)*      -0.61          (0.517)*   (0.463)**     (1.315)*       (1.417)**
D(regime change)                                            -2.759                    2.919                        6.554
                                                            (2.80)***                 (1.008)***                   (1.697)***
D(regime change) X ln(patents in market)                    -0.395                    -0.423                       -0.712
                                                            (4.100)***                (0.079)***                   (0.230)***
Control Variables
Ln(Avg Quality of market’s patents)           -0.334        0.935          -0.142     0.445         5.727          8.135
                                              (0.563)       -1.099         (0.847)    (0.755)       (1.796)***     (1.798)***
Modal citation lag                            0.100         0.010          0.010      -0.018        -0.241         -0.289
                                              (0.060)*      (0.044)        (0.044)    (0.053)       (0.247)        (0.260)
Incumbents (in hundreds)                      -0.001        0.000          0.000      0.000         -2.032         -1.650
                                              (0.002)       -0.41          (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.793)**      (0.841)**
Incumbents (in hundreds) squared              -0.000        0.002          -0.007     -0.002        0.179          0.140
                                              (0.000)       -0.75          (0.005)    (0.004)       (0.125)        (0.130)
Growth of revenues                            -0.164        -0.27          -0.146     0.006         -0.060         -0.112
                                              (0.173)       -0.01          (0.155)    (0.137)       (0.599)        (0.658)
# firms "at risk"                             0.010         0.017          0.019      0.014         0.024          0.023
                                              (0.003)***    (0.004)***     (0.012)    (0.011)       (0.014)*       (0.013)*
average age of firms "at risk"                -0.995        -1.016         -0.008     -0.009        -0.091         -0.126
                                              (0.126)***    (0.174)***     (0.031)    (0.029)       (0.053)*       (0.060)**
Constant                                      5.334         -6.032         3.397      -1.559        -41.305        -59.849
                                              (5.349)       -10.683        (1.707)*   (8.069)       (13.943)***    (13.745)***
Observations                                  231           231            206        206           168            168


   All regressions include market and year fixed effects.
   Robust standard errors clustered by market in parentheses.
   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                 55
                             Table 7b: Market-level results on financing and IPOs



Estimation method                                     Poisson                      OLS                        Poisson
Dependent variable                              Number of firms in           Log of the median
                                                                                                     # of IPOs in market j in
                                              market j receiving initial   amt invested in firms
                                                                                                             year t
                                                 funding in year t          in market j in year t
                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)
Patent variables
Ln(Market's patents)                          -0.667        -0.962         0.959      1.165         1.855         1.618
                                              (0.430)       (0.530)*       (0.558)*   (0.466)**     (1.462)       (1.377)
Average claims per cite in market             -0.238        -0.100         0.938      0.359         -2.849        -3.002
                                              (0.595)       (0.582)        (0.709)    (0.641)       (1.404)**     (1.354)**
Share of non-patent references                -0.991        -1.869         0.969      0.186         4.698         7.101
                                              (0.516)*      (0.391)***     (0.539)*   (1.043)       (1.320)***    (3.288)**
D(regime change)                                            -1.959                    2.616                       -4.617
                                                            (2.044)                   (1.419)*                    (4.053)
D(regime change) X ln(patents in market)                    -0.542                    -0.378                      0.302
                                                            (0.138)***                (0.078)***                  (0.288)
Control Variables
Ln(Avg Quality of market’s patents)           -0.799        -0.451         0.112      0.441         8.413         8.563
                                              (0.806)       (0.786)        (0.789)    (0.817)       (2.201)***    (2.248)***
Modal citation lag                            0.102         0.059          0.004      -0.016        -0.375        -0.375
                                              (0.061)*      (0.049)        (0.039)    (0.050)       (0.251)       (0.248)
Incumbents (in hundreds)                      -0.001        0.003          0.000      0.000         -1.217        -1.185
                                              (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.766)       (0.753)
Incumbents (in hundreds) squared              -0.000        -0.000         -0.009     -0.004        0.096         0.094
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)*       (0.005)*   (0.004)       (0.113)       (0.111)
Growth of revenues                            -0.181        -0.244         -0.079     0.016         -0.147        -0.225
                                              (0.176)       (0.169)        (0.125)    (0.144)       (0.658)       (0.658)
# firms "at risk"                             0.009         0.006          0.020      0.015         0.027         0.028
                                              (0.003)***    (0.003)**      (0.012)    (0.012)       (0.013)**     (0.013)**
average age of firms "at risk"                -1.027        -1.174         -0.015     -0.012        -0.139        -0.123
                                              (0.151)***    (0.141)***     (0.034)    (0.031)       (0.066)**     (0.059)**
Constant                                      10.970        8.400          0.899      -0.877        -51.164       -53.484
                                              (6.968)       (7.003)        (7.501)    (6.763)       (18.460)***   (16.581)***
Observations                                  231           231            206        206           168           168


   All regressions include market and year fixed effects.
   Robust standard errors clustered by market in parentheses.
   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                56
                                   Table 8: Hazard model of initial funding episode
                          Dummies for Year, Market and Employment size range category included.
                                            Standard errors clustered by firm.
                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
                                                                                                                               Discrete-
Patent variables                                        Full sample                         Post-regime change                 time*
Ln Patents in Market                            0.708          0.791            0.140          0.124          0.153            1.221
                                                (0.259)        (0.276)          (0.111)**      (0.100)***     (0.124)**        (0.176)
Firm’s patents pending                          1.112          1.117            1.103          1.102          1.099            1.145
                                                (0.059)**      (0.056)**        (0.055)**      (0.055)*       (0.055)*         (0.073)**
Firm’s patents granted                          0.996
                                                (0.047)
D(Regime Change)                                               3.261                                                           3.105
                                                               (2.727)                                                         (2.726)
D(Regime Change) X ln (Patents in Market)                      0.765                                                           0.754
                                                               (0.096)**                                                       (0.101)**
Herfindahl of citations in market                                                              1.148
                                                                                               (0.062)***
Average claims per citation in market                                                                           3.282
                                                                                                                (3.236)
Share of non-patent prior art                                                                                   0.146
                                                                                                                (0.173)**
Control variables
# incumbents                                    1.003           1.004           1.010          1.009            1.010          1.003
                                                (0.002)         (0.002)*        (0.004)**      (0.004)**        (0.004)**      (0.001)**
# incumbents squared                            0.999           0.999           0.999          0.999            0.999          0.999
                                                (0.000)**       (0.000)**       (0.000)**      (0.000)**        (0.000)**      (0.000)***
Growth of revenues                              1.180           1.147           1.115          1.049            1.047          1.104
                                                (0.086)**       (0.087)*        (0.153)        (0.149)          (0.151)        (0.089)
Firm size range effects                         Y               Y               Y              Y                Y              Y
Year effects                                    Y               Y               Y              Y                Y              Y
Market effects                                  Y               Y               Y              Y                Y              Y
Log likelihood
Number of observations                          5372            5372            3708                            3708           5345

                                             Marginal effects of selected patent variables
ln Patents in market                             (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
marginal effect of one std. dev. increase         -0.014       -0.010         -0.042           -0.043          -0.041         0.036
Firm’s Patents pending
marginal effect of one unit increase              0.007        0.007          0.007             0.007          0.007          0.009
D(Regime Change) X ln (Patents in Market)
Average marginal effect of one log-unit increase in patents                                                                   -0.026
Average standard error of marginal effect                                                                                     0.016

       Coefficients expressed as hazard ratios. Marginal effect of the interaction term calculated using Stata’s predictnl command.
       * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                       57
           Table 9: Competing Hazards Multinomial Logit Model of IPO/Acquisition
         Dummies for year, market, stage of investment, and employment size range included.
                                Standard errors clustered by firm.

                                      (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)       (6)
Sample                                          All firms                     All firms           Firms without patents
Outcome                               IPO            Acquisition   IPO          Acquisition      IPO       Acquisition

Patent variables
Ln Patents in Market                  1.480         1.113          1.925*       0.408            0.298**   1.109
                                      (0.673)       (0.277)        (0.735)      (0.716)          (0.165)   (0.320)
Firm’s patents                        1.254***      1.180**        1.264***     1.171**
                                      (0.102)       (0.093)        (0.086)      (0.089)
Investor's patents                    1.000         1.000          1.000**      1.000            1.000     1.000
                                      (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)          (0.000)   (0.000)
D(Regime Change)                                                   0.669        111,842.655
                                                                   (1.535)      (16504339.039)
D(Regime Change) X                                                 0.970        3.123
ln (Patents in Market)                                             (0.374)      (5.866)
Control variables
ln Total amount invested              1.230         1.119*         1.192        1.108*           1.262     1.117
                                      (0.227)       (0.071)        (0.196)      (0.069)          (0.225)   (0.089)
Corporate investors                   1.062         1.032          0.837        1.007            0.098*    1.156
                                      (0.427)       (0.379)        (0.313)      (0.376)          (0.124)   (0.426)
Investors' previous IPOs              1.001         0.992*         1.002        0.993*           0.997     0.994*
                                      (0.002)       (0.004)        (0.002)      (0.004)          (0.004)   (0.003)
Number of incumbents                  0.996         0.947          1.782**      1.040            0.674     1.000
                                      (0.259)       (0.172)        (0.466)      (0.187)          (0.246)   (0.213)
Incumbents squared                    1.009         0.998          1.013**      0.999            1.000     1.000
                                      (0.006)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.004)          (0.015)   (0.005)
growth of sales                       1.000         1.000          1.000***     1.000            1.000     1.000
                                      (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)          (0.000)   (0.000)

Observations                          2434          2434           2434         2434             1893      1893

 All regressions include market and year fixed effects, and dummy variables for the most recent stage of investment
 reached (round) and employment size range.
 Robust standard errors clustered by firm in parentheses.
 Coefficients expressed as hazard ratios.
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                          58
                                 Appendix

                                  Table A.1
Timing of regime changes in software patentability for markets in the sample
                                     Pre-1996
              ba_a      Automatic teller machine software
              ma_c      Robotic software
              ma_q      Quality control software
              ut_h      Peripheral device drivers
                                    After 1996
              ai_a      Voice technology software
              ai_l      Natural language software
              ai_n      Neural network software
              cs_f      Fax software
              cs_i      Internet tools
              cs_l      Wide area network software
              cs_w      Local area network software
              dm_f      File management software
              dm_mh     Hierarchical DBMS software
              dm_mr     Relational DBMS software
              dm_q      Database query language software
              oa_gd     3D representation software
              oa_me     Electronic message systems software
              oa_p      Desktop publishing software
              sv_ar     Artificial intelligence R&D
              ts_er     Geographic information systems software
              ts_er     Geographic information systems software
              ut_r      Disaster recovery software
              ut_x      Security/auditing software
              ut_y      Performance measuring software
                                    After 1998
              ac_b      Invoicing/Billing Software
              ac_t      Tax preparation and reporting software
              wd_i      Inventory management software
              wd_o      Order entry/processing software




                                                                               59
