                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE IMPACT OF LITIGATION ON VENTURE CAPITALIST REPUTATION

                                         Vladimir Atanasov
                                          Vladimir Ivanov
                                            Kate Litvak

                                       Working Paper 13641
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13641


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We would like to thank the Kaufmann Foundation and the Center for Research in Entrepreneurial
Activity at the University of Kansas for their generous financial support for this project and Bernard
Black, Hugh Colaco, Jorge Farinha, Vladimir Gatchev, Thomas Hellmann, Yael Hochberg, Cliff Holderness,
Josh Lerner, Craig Lewis, Mike Long, Ron Masulis, Ramana Nanda, Jack O’Reilly, Diana Pop, Scott
Stern, David Stolin,Christopher Vizas, and participants at the NBER Entrepreneurship Conference,
Annual Meetings of the Canadian Law and Economics Association, Batten Young Scholar Conference,
Washington Area Finance Conference, FMA and FMA-European meetings, and seminars at Toulouse
Business School and the University of Kansas for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Vladimir Atanasov, Vladimir Ivanov, and Kate Litvak. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Litigation on Venture Capitalist Reputation
Vladimir Atanasov, Vladimir Ivanov, and Kate Litvak
NBER Working Paper No. 13641
November 2007
JEL No. G24,G34,K22

                                             ABSTRACT

Venture capital contracts give VCs enormous power over entrepreneurs and early equity investors
of portfolio companies. A large literature examines how these contractual terms protect VCs against
misbehavior by entrepreneurs. But what constrains misbehavior by VCs? We provide the first systematic
analysis of legal and non-legal mechanisms that penalize VC misbehavior, even when such misbehavior
is formally permitted by contract. We hand-collect a sample of over 177 lawsuits involving venture
capitalists. The three most common types of VC-related litigation are: 1) lawsuits filed by entrepreneurs,
which most often allege freezeout and transfer of control away from founders; 2) lawsuits filed by
early equity investors in startup companies; and 3) lawsuits filed by VCs. Our empirical analysis of
the lawsuit data proceeds in two steps. We first estimate an empirical model of the propensity of VCs
to get involved in litigation as a function of VC characteristics. We match each venture firm that was
involved in litigation to otherwise similar venture firm that was not involved in litigation and find
that less reputable VCs are more likely to participate in litigation, as are VCs focusing on early-stage
investments, and VCs with larger deal flow. Second, we analyze the relationship between different
types of lawsuits and VC fundraising and deal flow. Although plaintiffs lose most VC-related lawsuits,
litigation does not go unnoticed: in subsequent years, the involved VCs raise significantly less capital
than their peers and invest in fewer deals. The biggest losers are VCs who were defendants in a lawsuit,
and especially VCs who were alleged to have expropriated founders.


Vladimir Atanasov                                   Kate Litvak
Mason School of Business                            University of Texas School of Law
College of William and Mary                         klitvak@law.utexas.edu
vladimir.atanasov@mason.wm.edu

Vladimir Ivanov
University of Kansas
vivanov@ku.edu
1. Introduction

          The view that contracting has its limits and often reputation serves as a disciplining

device is well understood and accepted in finance and economics (see Fama [1980], Crocker

and Reynolds [1993], and Banerjee and Duflo [2000]). However, there is little empirical

evidence on whether parties that behave opportunistically in a repeated game setting with

incomplete contracts (where reputation matters the most) suffer negative reputational

consequences, and how big the negative effects are.1 Our goal with this paper is to fill this

void in the literature by investigating whether opportunistic behavior leads to reputational

losses.

          The focus of our study is the venture capital industry. We choose this industry

because in our opinion it represents an excellent example of a setting with repeated

interaction where reputation matters a lot. The repeat players are the VCs and the pool of

entrepreneurs.2 The industry is plagued by uncertainty and information asymmetries and

contracts set in such an environment are necessarily incomplete (Williamson [1985]).

Venture capitalists invest in startup companies which are associated with significant

uncertainty and lack of information. The pervasive uncertainty and informational

asymmetries between the VC and their investors, and between VCs and entrepreneurs, are

managed with complex contracts and incentive structures. Still, as the incomplete contracts

literature postulates, no contract can prevent unforeseen contingencies to cause future


1
  In a study of Indian business groups, Gopalan, Nanda, and Seru [2007] find that the first bankruptcy in a
business group leads to a loss in reputation as evidenced by the drop in the amount of external finance raised,
investments and profits, and an increased likelihood of bankruptcy of other healthy members of the group.
However, in their sample loss of reputation is not necessarily due to opportunistic behavior.
2
  Although any individual entrepreneur is rarely a “serial” entrepreneur (Bengtson [2006]), at any point in time
there are multiple entrepreneurs competing for VC financing. Thus information about opportunistic behavior of
a VC with respect to one entrepreneur would be available to future entrepreneurs.
conflicts between the parties involved. Incomplete contracting might lead to ex post

opportunism (Williamson [1985], Goldberg [1985], Masten [1988]) and/or ex ante

investment distortions (Tirole [1986], Hart and Moore [1988]).

          Moreover, the contracts between VCs and entrepreneurs are notably one-sided. VCs

have huge power over portfolio companies. A large literature examines the provisions of

these contracts, and explains them as protecting VCs against the risk of misbehavior by

entrepreneurs (e.g., Hellmann, 2001; Kaplan and Stromberg, 2003 (KS hereafter)). In these

studies, the VC is viewed as the principal, the entrepreneur is the agent, and the contract

protects the principal.

          But what protects the entrepreneur against misbehavior by VCs? VCs are not angels.

"[T]hese guys eat their own young" warns one entrepreneur on a popular website, referring to

Sequoia Capital, one of the very top and presumably most reputable VC firms.3 Perhaps this

is why contracts between VCs and their investors provide significant protections to investors

(Litvak, 2007). In contrast, the contracts between VCs and entrepreneurs do little to protect

entrepreneurs against VCs; in important ways they invite VC misbehavior.

          The question of what constrains VCs has been all but ignored in the literature.

Instead, good behavior is usually assumed. For example, KS explicitly state that VCs

“receive few or no private benefits of control”, while Gilson and Black (1998) assume a

market for VC reputation, which constrains VCs to honor an unwritten implicit contract to let

successful entrepreneurs take their company public and thus retain control. In the presence of

such one-sided contracts, reputation is one of the key mechanisms that can mitigate VC

opportunism. The information provided by lawsuits offers one avenue for policing VC


3
    Rebecca Buckman, "Web Site Puts the 'Vent' Into Venture Capital", Wall Street Journal, Aug. 7, 2007.



                                                                                                           2
reputation. However, apart from theoretical discussion and a few anecdotes in a single paper

(Cumming and Macintosh, 2004), there has been no examination of lawsuits involving VCs,

their frequency, their outcomes, and how they may affect VC reputation.

       We begin here to study VC litigation and its effect on the market for VC reputation.

We hand-collect a large sample of lawsuits involving VCs, many filed by entrepreneurs,

many making facially plausible claims of VC expropriation. The mere existence of this

number of lawsuits suggests that VC behavior is a potential problem.

       We use the hand-collected dataset of lawsuits to achieve three central goals. The first

is to analyze and describe the previously unexplored world of lawsuits involving VCs and

study the relationships, contracts, and conflicts of interest which caused the lawsuits. We

analyze the nature and time distribution of lawsuits and relate it to broad economic

conditions surrounding litigation, prior litigation and performance history of the VC, and to

the changes in law that affect litigation in the VC industry – most notably, the Private

Securities Litigation Act of 1995, which was adopted to control class actions involving

public companies, but also (and apparently unintentionally) sharply limits the ability of

entrepreneurs to sue VCs in federal court. We study the litigants’ choices of courts, legal

claims, factual accusations; the rates of early dismissals and appeals; the identities of parties

involved in VC-related litigation; the success of each category of litigants and each type of

claim, and so forth.

       We find that VC-related litigation is common, complex, and involves multiple diverse

parties; that VCs themselves are active in filing law suits and appeals; that most participants

are sophisticated in their choice of legal fora and claims; that both famous and rookie VCs

are sued; and that a large portion of VC-related litigation involves claims of exploitation of




                                                                                                    3
founders and early equity investors by VCs through asset transfers, dilution, freezeout, and

other such schemes permitted by the letter of the contract, but not by its spirit. Our analysis

of lawsuits complements the work of KS in important ways. We show that the large

contractual powers of VCs documented by KS lead in many cases to extreme conflicts and

alleged abuse culminating in entrepreneur-initiated lawsuits.

       Second, we ask what factors predict a VC’s propensity to be involved in litigation in

general, and in certain types of law suits in particular. Not all law suits are created equal –

some involve claims of much more egregious VC misconduct than others; some are more

likely to be frivolous than others; and some are more likely to include a VC as one of many

deep pockets (rather than allege specific misconduct by a specific VC) than others.

Accordingly, we study predictors of different types of law suits.

       Third, we study the reputational effects of lawsuits involving VCs. Lawsuits are

extreme events which result from a fundamental breakdown in communication or contractual

arrangements. By looking at such extreme events, even if most lawsuits do not lead to any

direct financial penalties for the VCs, limited partners, entrepreneurs, and other VCs may

infer that something is wrong at the organizational level of the VC partnership and will avoid

such VCs. We use two principal proxies for reputation. First, VCs raise a series of funds,

and thus regularly return to investors to raise new funds. The size of future funds may proxy

for the VC's reputation with investors. Second, the number and quality of deals which VCs

invest in serve as proxy for the VC’s reputation with entrepreneurs.

       We document that although VCs win the vast majority of cases brought against them,

being sued is associated with reputational consequences. VCs who have been involved as

defendants in lawsuits raise significantly smaller funds after the lawsuits and invest in a




                                                                                                  4
smaller number of deals. The negative effects on VC fundraising and deal flow are especially

strong when VCs are involved in shareholder oppression lawsuits or eventually lose, either at

the motion to dismiss or trial stage.

       Some caveats and cautions. First, we can assess only association, not causation. One

can tell a variety of non-causal stories which are consistent with our results. For example

VCs who suffer an exogenous hit to their reputations could both attract lawsuits and raise

smaller funds. Second, we do not assess here the merits of the lawsuits. Still, our evidence

suggests that VC misbehavior is potentially a serious concern, and that lawsuits may be one

means through which reputations are policed.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some

background on VC litigation, investments, and fund raising and develops our hypotheses.

Section 3 discusses the lawsuit data. We present the results of our litigation propensity

models in Section 4 and our pre-versus-post lawsuit analysis of VC fund raising and peer

reputation in Section 5. Section 6 concludes. Appendix A describes in more details a few

examples of lawsuits involving VCs, while Appendix B provides more details on the data

manipulations.



2. Background and Hypotheses

2.1. VCs and litigation

       How could VCs end up embroiled in litigation? This could happen for several

reasons. One of them is opportunistic behavior on the part of VCs. Venture capitalists usually

enjoy significant power and control within their portfolio firms. They sit on the board of

directors, hold the majority of voting rights, have substantial liquidation rights, and




                                                                                               5
frequently use anti-dilution clauses and vesting provisions when contracting with

entrepreneurs. Informal control rights involve rights attached to VCs’ participation in future

financing rounds. One example is the right of first refusal, which effectively gives current

VCs control over the identity of the firm’s future investors, the size of their stake in the

company, and the timing and terms of future investments. In KS’s study of VC contracts with

entrepreneurs, when the startup does well, control is shared (not equally, but significantly)

among VCs, founders, and other parties. When the startup’s performance deteriorates,

control shifts to VCs.4

        Furthermore, VCs have the power to hire and fire CEOs and replace founders.

Hellmann and Puri (2002) find that VC-backed firms are more likely and faster to replace the

founder with an outside CEO than similar non-VC-backed firms. Kaplan and Stromberg

(2004) find that VCs are more likely to intervene (for example, recruit new management or

take some other action which the entrepreneur is likely to view as a conflict) as VC control

increases. In many cases, founder compensation contracts provide that when founder is fired,

her stock options evaporate and even her vested stock can repurchased by the VCs at cost (or

even at zero). Most employment contracts provide no protection against termination. Finally,

the structure of VC investment, commonly in preferred shares with significant liquidation

preferences and redemption rights, puts them in a superior position to common stockholders

in acquisitions or liquidations.

        These contractual and non-contractual features allow VCs to mitigate the uncertainty,

moral hazard, and informational asymmetries associated with investing in startup firms.

These same features, however, may also lead to opportunistic behavior on the part of VCs.

4
  Lerner (1995) also finds that VCs add more members to the board when the performance of the startup
deteriorates.



                                                                                                   6
The preferred equity holdings and other contract features generate conflicts of interests

between the VC and founders (Fried and Ganor, 2005), while the control rights attached to

preferred equity give VCs an opportunity to advance their interests at the founders' expense.

Contractual rights could also allow VCs to directly expropriate common shareholders

(founders and other early investors, such as "angels"), using financial transactions such as

dilution and freeze-outs. We call these oppressive transactions "equity tunneling."5

          Another possibility involves expropriation of firm assets. VCs often hold stakes in a

number of firms in the same or related industries. In addition, VCs tend to encourage their

portfolio firms to enter into strategic relationships with one another, the so-called “Keiretsu

network” (see Lindsey, 2003). Thus, they could arrange for one portfolio firm to purchase

intellectual property, services, or other assets from another portfolio company at a price that

advantages the buyer. We call this "asset tunneling" (Ueda, 2004; Dushnitsky and Shaver,

2007). If the VC holds different ownership stakes in different portfolio firms, it has an

incentive to transfer assets from the firms with low ownership to the firms with high

ownership. These incentives are very similar to those of the controlling shareholder of a

business group (pyramid). Asset tunneling might be profitable even when the VC has the

same ownership in all firms. First, the VC’s payoff from an investment in a company may be

non-linear in firm value because of the option features of the securities they hold (e.g.

convertible preferred shares). This makes the VC's payoff convex in firm value (the VC is

better off having one super-performing firm and one poor-performing firm than two

mediocre performing firms). Second, combining assets from several portfolio firms might

produce difficult-to-value synergy. Unless VCs are meticulous in compensating founders of


5
    For a taxonomy of tunneling, see Atanasov, Black, and Ciccotello (2007).



                                                                                             7
each contributing firm for such asset transfers (which they have little financial incentive to

be), these transfers are likely to benefit one firm, at the (relative) expense of the others.

        VCs could also become involved in litigation when a portfolio firm goes bankrupt. A

significant portion of VC-backed startups get liquidated. Creditor lawsuits against

shareholders are common when a firm goes into bankruptcy, and VCs are a tempting deep-

pocketed target. In addition, VCs can be defendants in class-action lawsuits initiated by

shareholders in VC-backed IPO firms. Typically, these class-action suits are directed towards

underwriters and company directors and officers. However, sometimes VCs are also named

as defendants.

        VCs might also initiate litigation if they feel they were victims of misbehavior of

other VCs, large equity investors of their portfolio firms, or banks. VCs may also sue their

limited partners for unfulfilled capital call obligations; many partnership agreements give

VCs the right to use courts to collect defaulted contributions. Last, VCs can get involved as

plaintiffs or defendant in intellectual property lawsuits.

2.2. Prior Literature

        The academic literature on litigation involving VCs is sparse. There are several

theoretical papers that deal with the possibility of VC opportunistic behavior. Ueda (2004)

models potential expropriation on the part of the VCs and suggests that banks could mitigate

this conflict. Landier (2001) models a situation where both the VC and entrepreneur hold

each other up. Yosha (1995) and Bhattacharya and Chiesa (1995) develop models where a

financier has the incentive to support the spillover of interim knowledge across firms in her

portfolio since that increases the likelihood of breaking even on each individual investment.




                                                                                                8
         Cumming and MacIntosh (2004) offer a descriptive treatment of VC litigation and a

few anecdotes. There are also a smattering of practitioner articles, offering advice to VCs and

their lawyers (see Bartlett and Garlitz, 1995; Christopher, 2001; Etzel, 2002; Fellers, 2002;

LeClaire, Kendall, and Taft, 2005; and Padilla, 2001). The common thread in these articles is

litigation arising from "down rounds" – that is, financing rounds where the price per share is

lower than in previous rounds. Down rounds, especially insider down rounds (where the only

investors are VCs who have invested in previous rounds), usually create significant dilution

of founders and other common shareholders. Other early-round investors can also be diluted,

especially if there is a pay-to-play provision involved.6 However, other transactions,

including freeze-outs and asset transfers can also lead to lawsuits.

2.3. The role of reputation

         VCs could behave opportunistically toward founders. Their formal contracts with

entrepreneurs provide the ability to do so, and few contractual constraints. As we will see,

background legal rules also provide few constraints -- VCs are often sued, but rarely lose.

Yet if opportunistic behavior were too widespread, venture capital could not flourish as it

has, nor could formal contracts be written, in equilibrium, in the strongly pro-VC manner that

one observes. So there must be informal constraints on VC behavior.

         One central mechanism that limits opportunistic behavior by VCs is reputation -- with

investors, other VCs, acquirers of VC backed firms, investors in VC-backed IPOs, current

and potential entrepreneurs, and current and potential employees of VC-backed firms.




6
  A pay-to-play provision provides that investors who do not participate in a given financing round lose their
liquidation preferences or anti-dilution protections, and sometimes also forces non-participants to convert their
preferred stock into common stock.



                                                                                                               9
2.3.1. Reputation with Investors in VC Funds

       Because venture funds are organized as limited partnerships, VC have to go back to

investors to raise capital for new funds (they usually raise a new fund every 2-3 years). More

reputable VCs are able to raise more capital, raise it faster, and negotiate better terms with

their limited partners (for example, they might be able to charge higher management fees

and/or take a bigger cut of the profits of the fund). Kaplan and Schoar (2005) find that more

experienced VC funds tend to perform better.

       However, the need to preserve reputation with investors will not directly constrain

VC opportunism directed at angel investors and founders. After all, what is good for the VC

is generally good for investors in the VC fund as well. Investors should care about VC

mistreatment of entrepreneurs only if the VCs actions adversely affect future deal flow, by

more than the gain in the current deal.

2.3.2. Reputation with Other VCs

       VCs often syndicate investments with other VCs. A VC with a better reputation

among other VCs will presumably find it easier to syndicate its own investments, and will

receive better syndication offers from other "lead" VCs. For example, Lerner (1994) finds

that reputable VCs tend to syndicate with other reputable VCs.

       The need to preserve reputation with other VCs will constrain some VC activities that

might harm entrepreneurs. Consider equity dilution. If all VCs from Round 1 participate pro

rata in Round 2, all can happily set a low Round 2 price that dilutes common shareholders.

However, if some Round 1 VCs do not participate in Round 2, or participate less than pro

rata (call these "nonparticipating VCs”), they will be diluted too, and will be acutely aware of

the fairness of the Round 2 price. The need to satisfy nonparticipating VCs on fairness will




                                                                                             10
help to ensure fairness vis-à-vis common shareholders as well. The same is true for asset

tunneling if, as will often be the case, different VCs have different stakes in the asset seller

and the asset buyer.

        However, the need to preserve reputation with other VCs will not always constrain

VC opportunism directed at angel investors and founders. What is good for one VC is often

good for other VCs who invest in the same company. In this situation, other VCs will object

to mistreatment of entrepreneurs by a lead VC only if they will suffer a reputation loss with

entrepreneurs or other VCs whose expected cost outweighs their gain in the current deal. An

indirect channel is also possible -- if a VC deals opportunistically with an entrepreneur this

time, other VCs may worry that they will suffer similar treatment the next time.

        Finally, the tightness of VC community may play against a complaining founder,

instead of against the misbehaving VC, if the merits of complaints are hard to estimate and if

VCs tend to support their own and distrust “trouble-makers.” The “no lunch in this town”

gossip that one can often hear in founder circles indicates that the fear (warranted or not) of

VCs’ implicit collusion not to fund complaining founders may restrict the flow of

information about VC misbehavior and thus induce more misbehavior.7

2.3.3. Reputation with Acquirers and IPO Investors

        VCs exit from investments by selling them to acquiring companies or to public

markets through an IPO. For both markets, a chief worry of buyers is the seller's superior

information about the portfolio company's true value. A reputation for sharp dealing with

entrepreneurs could spill over and affect a VC's ability to sell portfolio companies.



7
  The recently launched website, thefunded.com, gives some illustrations of founder gossip. Notably, founders
are willing to share information only anonymously and in the way that makes it difficult to link a discussed VC
to a particular online commentator.


                                                                                                             11
           There is empirical evidence on the importance of reputation during VC exits through

IPO. Brav and Gompers (1997) show that VC-backed IPOs do not suffer the long-run

underperformance that is found in other IPOs. Lin and Smith (1998), find that more reputable

VCs are less likely to sell overpriced shares in an IPO. Baker and Gompers (2003) find that

IPOs backed by reputable VCs have more independent boards and less powerful CEOs than

non-VC-backed IPOs and IPOs backed by less reputable VCs. Wongsunwai (2007) finds that

startups backed by high-quality VCs have more independent boards and after they go public

they have lower abnormal accruals and are less likely to experience a financial restatement.

2.3.4. Reputation with Entrepreneurs

           A reputation for dealing fairly with entrepreneurs can generate future high-quality

deal flow or better financing terms. For example, Black and Gilson (1998) argue that a

central part of VC contracting with entrepreneurs is an implicit contract to return control to a

successful entrepreneur by exiting through IPO, rather than through selling the company, if

both options are available. Hsu (2004) shows that entrepreneurs are willing to accept lower

valuations in order to secure financing from reputable VCs.

           Another effect of VC reputation is proposed by Bachmann and Schindele (2006). In

their model, if a VC who has a reputation for not stealing entrepreneurs’ ideas, entrepreneurs

will be willing to expend more effort on developing these ideas which results in better startup

performance. In addition, trustworthy VCs may be better able to resolve contentious issues

that arise between entrepreneur and investors. They will be like good managers who are able

to resolve issues without the need to resort to litigation, which could be very costly for both

the startup and the VCs.8


8
    We thank Scott Stern for suggesting this possibility.



                                                                                              12
2.4. Interactions between VC Reputation and Litigation

        In the prior sub-section, we discussed a number of channels through which a market

for reputation could constrain VC incentives to behave opportunistically. But reputation

markets can work only if the markets include repeat players, or if information about

reputation can be credibly transferred to new entrants. Other VCs are repeat players. So,

perhaps, are acquirers of VC-backed firms. Buyers of shares in VC-backed IPOs can observe

the performance of past IPOs with the same VC sponsors. Investors in VC funds are repeat

players, but they will be concerned about reputation only indirectly, and may have little

direct access to information about VC misbehavior.

        In contrast, entrepreneurs, and employees in VC-backed firms, are often one-timers.

Some entrepreneurs will use experienced VC lawyers, who are repeat players, and may know

VC reputations, but not always. Moreover, the top VC law firms often represent VCs, and

will be reluctant to tell stories on clients or potential clients.

        For the market for VC reputation to work reasonably well, one therefore needs to

identify an information transmission mechanism or mechanisms, which will credibly signal

VC misbehavior and warn off future entrepreneurs and employees. Litigation by founders of

a VC-backed firm against VCs can be one such mechanism -- we make no claim that it is the

only one. Standard signaling theory posits that for a signal to be credible, it must be costly.

Litigation is highly costly for founders who sue VCs, who must incur legal expenses,

emotional stress, and the near-certainly that they will never again obtain VC funding for a

future venture. Founders may wrongly feel aggrieved, simply because their business idea

failed, without any fault on the VC's part. But there is a very good chance that they feel

seriously aggrieved, or they wouldn't sue, and a respectable chance that there is substance to




                                                                                            13
their grievance.       Thus, litigation has the potential to convey a signal to others --

entrepreneurs, employees, other VCs, and so on -- to be careful when dealing with the

defendant VC.9

        The signal is surely noisy. The plaintiff's version of the facts is available in the court

complaint, and will sometimes be persuasive by itself. In the internet era, realistic public

access to complaints -- rather than theoretical access, if you knew the case number and

wanted to take a trip to the courthouse, obtain the file, and manually copy the complaint -- is

gradually becoming more common -- indeed, that access made this research project possible.

But the other side of the story will often be harder to obtain from the public record.

Litigation success is surely a marker for VC misbehavior, but a plaintiff loss conveys much

less. A complaint may be factually accurate, depict highly opportunistic behavior, and yet

the plaintiff will still lose the case, perhaps at an early stage. Repeat litigation against the

same VC will thus provide a stronger signal than a single suit.

        Litigation by other parties does not send as clear a signal. When a firm fails and

creditors sue, they often sue all of the shareholders, not only the VCs, and their complaints

often do not involve the type of behavior that would compromise a VC's reputation with

entrepreneurs or other VCs. Class action shareholder lawsuits after a company goes public

typically claim faulty disclosure by the company, not tunneling by the VC.



9
   Entrepreneurs will also likely informally share information about VC misbehavior, independent of litigation.
VCs will similarly chat about behavior by other VCs. One can imagine an extreme case in which entrepreneurs
and other VCs pay no attention to litigation in forming opinions about a VC's reputation. Litigation would then
be a byproduct of VC misbehavior -- some founders will sue, others will only complain to their buddies.
Litigation would then not directly send a signal of misbehavior -- that information would be communicated in
other ways -- but would still be associated with misbehavior. More plausibly, both channels will operate.
Entrepreneurs and VCs will communicate informally, but litigation will be a subject of conversation, and will
strengthen the credibility of informal complaints. Our empirical predictions are the same whether litigation
directly conveys information about misbehavior, or is only associated with misbehavior that is communicated in
other ways.


                                                                                                           14
        We therefore formulate the following two hypotheses about VC reputation and

litigation by entrepreneurs:

Hypothesis 1: More reputable VCs are less likely to face lawsuits, especially lawsuits by

founders claiming equity or asset tunneling.



Hypothesis 2: Lawsuits alleging tunneling by VCs will be associated with a drop in VC

reputation, which will be reflected in reduced fundraising and lower quantity and quality of

deal flow.

        These two hypotheses are tested against the null that litigation has no effect on VC

reputation. Maybe most of the lawsuits are frivolous, filed by disgruntled entrepreneurs or

other investors. Since most of the entrepreneurs tend not to be repeat players, they might be

trying to extract whatever money they can from the VCs with the lawsuits.10 Also, even if a

lawsuit has some merit, its importance for the VC’s reputation might be dampened

significantly by the success of VC’s other investments and its rapport with investors and

other VCs.


3. Data and Summary Statistics of Lawsuits

        To test for the effect of tunneling on VC reputation, we use a sample of lawsuits

involving VCs over the period 1976-2007. Our principal search strategy is to collect lawsuits

from Westlaw by searching for complaints and judicial opinions which use search terms such

as “venture capital” together with terms such as "dilution," "freeze out," "founder" etc."

        In particular, we perform the following searches in Westlaw. First, we search the

database “Federal & State Cases, Combined” for terms like “atl5(venture capital!)”;
10
  Bengtsson (2006), for example, finds that 92% of the entrepreneurs involved in early-stage firms that
received first round VC financing in the period 1991-2003 are one-time entrepreneurs.


                                                                                                          15
“name(kpmg) and venture capital!” (yields 110 cases). Then, we search the database “filings-

all” for terms “TI(“venture capital”)”, which yields 260 filings; for terms “TI(“name of the

company”), which yields 246 relevant results; for terms “TI(“venture partners”), which

yields 337 filings, 39 relevant cases. Then, we search the source “Dock-All” for terms

“venture capital”, getting 863 dockets, of which 415 contain relevant records. Overall, we

found about 700 relevant records in Westlaw, or which by now we have read and coded 186

opinions.

         This search procedure avoids the usual problem of collecting cases from PACER or
         11
Lexis.        The standard procedure of collecting cases from Lexis produces only judicially-

resolved cases. Such searches do not include ongoing litigation, as well as cases that were

voluntarily dismissed, settled, removed to a different court, and so forth. In contrast, we look

at both resolved and unresolved cases, including very recent ones. Our searches are also

superior to searches in PACER because PACER contains only federal cases.

         This search does have several weaknesses. For example, because we are searching by

the names of VC firms, not names of individual venture capitalists, we may not capture

shareholder suits where a venture capitalist serves as a director, but the VC firm is not sued.

The VC firm will indemnify the director, so VC directors are tempting targets.

         We read each case and excluded those that do not involve litigation by or against a

venture capital firm. The defendant's name is not dispositive, because some non-VC firms

include the term "venture," "venture partners," or even "venture capital." We also cannot

fully rely on matching the names with VentureXpert because many of firms marked as


11
  Information on the exact searches we ran is available from the authors on request. We ran some early
searches on Lexis as well, but it turned out that once we had searched Westlaw, there was little need to also
search Lexis as well. We also searched court records in jurisdictions likely to have significant numbers of VCs
and thus VC lawsuits, but this proved to be an extremely inefficient way to gather information.


                                                                                                             16
“venture” by VentureXpert are in fact private equity, not venture firms. We then match the

firm against the VentureXpert database (by hand, since many names are similar but not

identical). If a firm is not included in VentureXpert, but it appears likely from the complaint

or judicial opinion that the firm is a VC firm, we search Google for the firm name and verify

whether the firm is indeed a venture capital firm. Consequently, we drop nine lawsuits which

involve companies which are clearly not VCs. 12 Sometimes, this process leads to alternate

VC firm names which let us match the firm with VentureXpert. If we have a case involving a

VC firm that is not included in VentureXpert, we retain that case for the analysis of litigation

alone, but we cannot use it for the analysis of litigation propensity and post-litigation changes

in VC behavior. From VentureXpert, we collect data on VC age, investment and industry

focus, number of funds, fund size, portfolio firms, and syndication partners (see the

Appendix for more details).

        To account for time-series variations in the VC industry, which are well documented

in the literature (for example, see Gompers and Lerner, 2000), we scale the size of VC funds

by the total amount of committed VC capital in the year in which a particular fund is raised.

For each firm in our sample we compute firm size as the sum of the scaled fund sizes in the

pre-litigation. We then use pre-litigation firm size and firm founding year to find matching

peer-companies which are not involved in litigation (see the Appendix for more details on the

matching procedure).

        Even some very reputable firms, such as Kleiner Perkins, Charles River Ventures,

Sevin Rosen Associates, and New Enterprise Ventures are involved in different litigation

cases with some of their portfolio firms. Also, there are different types of VCs in our sample:


12
   For example, "Mia Venture Capital" turns out to be a small "boiler room" brokerage' "Midwest Venture
Partners" invests in real estate, and so on.


                                                                                                    17
traditional VCs (like Kleiner Perkins and Charles River Ventures), corporate VCs (E*Trade

and Heizer Corporation), and venture arms of financial companies (Prudential Ventures and

Citigroup). The cases involve startups from various industries and geographical locations.

Most of our cases are concentrated in the late 1990s and particularly the early 2000s.

          Tables 1 and 2 report the main characteristics of the particular lawsuits in our sample.

We outline some interesting patterns in the analysis below and provide more details about a

few typical lawsuits in Appendix A.

          Parties. When VCs are involved in litigation, they are usually defendants (73%, or

130 cases). Among parties who bring suits against VCs are: other equity investors of VC-

backed startups (20 cases, or 22% of all suits where VCs are defendants); startups themselves

(24 cases, or 26%) (these in effect consist of a blend of founders and other equity investors);

founders (13 cases, or 14%); non-founder employees of startups (8 cases, or 9%); other VCs

(9 cases, 10%); banks (1 case) (a creditor of a VC-backed startup), and limited partners of

venture funds run by VCs (2 cases, or 2%).

          A surprising result is that VCs originate or co-originate 27% or all VC-related

litigation (47 of 177 cases). When VCs sue, they unsurprisingly go for deep pockets. In 34%

of VC-initiated cases, VCs sued their own startup companies; in 25% of cases, they sued

other VCs. VCs rarely sue founders (1 case) and limited partners of their venture funds (2

cases).

          When founders are involved in litigation, they are almost always plaintiffs. Only one

case in our sample involves a defendant founder; that founder was closely affiliated with VCs

and was sued together with VCs by another founder.




                                                                                               18
       VCs like to sue, but they even more like to appeal: while they initiate 27% of

lawsuits, they file a whopping 50% of all appeals in our sample (19 appeals out of 38 total

appeals). VCs are particularly likely to appeal cases in which they are plaintiffs – they appeal

17% of cases they file, but only 9% of cases filed against them. In contrast non-VCs appeal

43% of cases that they file and 43% of cases filed against them by VCs.

       Overall, VCs sue and appeal surprisingly often; when they sue, they understandably

seek deep pockets.

       Outcomes. Plaintiffs in VC-related litigation usually fail, at least in cases that end up

in court (it is possible that meritorious cases settle without a formal showing in court). VCs

won only 21% of cases that they brought in and that reached resolution. Non-VCs win 28%

of resolved cases they bring. A large number of cases are dismissed at the outset: 19% of

VC-initiated law suits and 22% of non-VC-initiated law suits ended up dismissed for either

procedural or substantive reasons.

       Tunneling Allegations. About half (47%) of all VC-related law suits involve

allegations of tunneling (see Appendix A for more detailed descriptions of typical tunneling

lawsuits). Curiously, both VC and non-VC plaintiffs are likely to allege tunneling: VCs do it

in 32% cases they bring; non-VCs do it in 52% of cases.

       Among non-VC plaintiffs, the largest category claiming tunneling is the startup itself

(26%) (mostly founders, other employees, and earlier equity investors); equity investors

directly (22%); founders (14%), and employees (9%). Within the universe of tunneling cases

brought against VCs, most popular allegations are wrongful transfers of assets, conducted in

a variety of creative ways (16%); sales of companies on terms unfavorable to founders and




                                                                                                 19
other equity investors (19%); expropriation of profitable opportunities (12%); dilution (7%),

and freezeouts (6%). Nearly half (40%) involve hard-to-classify, creative tunneling schemes.

       When VCs themselves claim being victims of tunneling, the most common alleged

perpetrators are usually the startup itself (34%) (usually some combination of founders or

current managers and other equity investors); other VCs (25%); and other equity investors

(6%). Popular methods include sales of companies on unfavorable terms (20% of all

tunneling cases brought by VCs), expropriation of profitable opportunities (20%), dilution

(20%), and other creative tunneling methods (53%).

       Legal Claims. VCs’ favorite legal claims are intentional tort (usually fraud) (40% of

all cases filed by VCs); breach of contract (13%); non-intentional tort (usually negligent

action, like negligent misrepresentation) (9%); violation of corporate laws (9%), followed by

intellectual property, securities, and employment claims (7% each).

       Among legal claims brought against VCs, the most popular are intentional tort (38%)

(usually fraud, misrepresentation, or interference with contractual relations); violation of

securities laws (17%) (usually fraud in connection with the sale of securities, where VC is

attached only because of its large holding in a company); non-intentional tort (usually

negligent action, like negligent misrepresentation) (11 %); and violations of corporate laws

(often breach of fiduciary duty by VC-appointed directors), employment law (7% each), and

bankruptcy and breach of contract claims (5% each).

       The dominance of the intentional tort claim in cases against VCs is important, but

unsurprising. Contracts between VCs and founders (and other parties in portfolio companies)

give VC a very large amount of discretion. Founders (or at least their lawyers) are well aware

that they are betting on VCs’ good will, and that their stake in the company can be easily




                                                                                               20
wiped out if VC chooses to do so. When this happens, traditional contract and corporate

claims are normally not available for founders, who instead are left to rely on claims of fraud.

Fraud and other intentional tort cases brought by founders and non-VC equity investors in

startups are not very successful: 20% of them are dismissed before trial, and VCs eventually

win 94% of those that reach resolution in court.

       What is more surprising, intentional tort is also the single most common claim raised

by VCs. The implication is that there is enough vagueness in venture capital contracts that

VCs themselves find themselves unable to bring a simple breach of contract or corporate

claim when the relationship goes sour. 20% of intentional tort cases raised by VCs are

dismissed before trial (same number as for such cases brought against VCs), and VCs

ultimately lose 94% of their intentional tort cases.

       Litigation. There is ample evidence of forum shopping. Overall, most cases are

brought in federal courts (60%), but in some states, plaintiffs are substantially more likely to

seek federal courts than in other states. In NY, 80% of cases in our sample were brought in

federal courts, likely because New York federal courts are known for their high quality,

while state courts are slow and inefficient. Similarly, all of our FL cases were brought in

federal courts, as are most IL cases (88%), again likely reflecting the comparative quality of

federal and state courts in those states. In contrast, only two of the 21 DE cases were brought

in federal courts (both securities); DE chancery court is substantially better for business

litigants than federal court. CA, MA, and TX are more even – 60%, 54%, and 60% of their

VC-related cases are brought in federal courts.

       VCs seem to dislike NY – only one of the 47 cases that they filed is in New York

(federal securities claim); at the same time, NY is second only to CA for non-VC plaintiffs,




                                                                                              21
capturing 12% of law suits. One possible explanation is that NY cases are disproportionally

securities, which is an uncommon claim for VC plaintiffs. This explanation is wrong – most

cases brought by non-VC plaintiffs in NY (63%) are not securities cases. This further

supports the conclusion that plaintiffs choose NY federal courts over state courts for the

quality, not because they are constrained by the legal theory they bring. Almost half of all

NY cases brought against VC include the breach of contracts and torts claims – traditionally

state law doctrines that could be litigated in state courts.13

         The Effect of PSLRA. Despite its title, the Public Securities Litigation Reform Act of

1995 (PSLRA) applies to private companies as much as it applies to public ones. Federal

courts explicitly mention PSLRA in 12% of all federal securities cases brought after the

adoption of statute; all those cases were dismissed on procedural grounds (and because of

PSLRA). However, the effect of PSLRA on VC-related litigation is unclear. The rate of

procedural dismissals of federal securities cases remains roughly the same before and after

the passage of the PSLRA. Oddly, the rate of all dismissals of federal securities cases has

declined by about 40%. One explanation is that the quality of post-PSLRA cases is higher,

either because weak cases are not filed at all or because weak cases are now brought in state

courts instead.

         Outcomes. Our sample contains 118 (67%) cases that reached judicial resolution and

59 cases (33%) that are either still ongoing or have been dropped or settled without ever

reaching a judicial decision. In most cases, plaintiffs lose. If we remove cases that have not

yet reached resolution, VCs win 17% of cases). VCs are more successful in defending cases



13
  It is possible that non-VC litigants in NY chose federal courts partly because plaintiffs and defendants reside
in different states, but it is not clear why this rationale shouldn’t also apply in CA, MA, TX, and PA, where
cases are more evenly split between state and federal courts.


                                                                                                               22
brought against them (winning 18% of resolved cases) than in securing a victory for their

own suits (winning 9% of resolved cases).


4. Probabilistic Models of VC litigation

       In this section we examine the likelihood that a VC will end up involved in litigation.

We are interested in the characteristics of VCs that get sued, and more importantly, whether

reputation reduces the likelihood of a lawsuit, as Hypothesis 1 implies. Since we have

various types of lawsuits in our sample – shareholder oppression, operation tunneling, change

in control transactions, securities class actions, suits for fraud and breach of contract, etc. –

we also try to determine what types of VCs get embroiled in these various lawsuits.

       We use two econometric techniques when we model the likelihood of litigation. First,

we employ a probit model where the dependent variable is equal to one if the VC participates

in a lawsuit and zero otherwise. To estimate the model we need VC firms that do not engage

in lawsuits. For each lawsuit-VC combination, we select a peer VC firm, matched on age and

cumulative assets under management which does not get involved in lawsuits (see Appendix

B for exact matching procedure). This analysis allows us to test Hypothesis 1. Second, we

rank VC lawsuits according to the severity of the alleged VC misbehavior, and use an

ordered probit model to explain what factors determine whether VCs get involved in more

innocuous lawsuits, such as bankruptcy or class-action suits, as opposed to expropriation type

of lawsuits.

       In all of these models we use a set of control variables which may explain the

likelihood and intensity of litigation. First, since in the probit model we use matching firms

as the set of firms without litigation, and since we match on VC age and funds under

management, we use a third proxy for VC reputation – the median fraction of portfolio firms


                                                                                                    23
that go public for all the funds raised prior to the year of litigation. Hypothesis 1 predicts that

more reputable VCs will be less likely to engage in litigation and in more severe types of

lawsuits. Second, we use dummy variables for the stage and industry focus of our sample

firms. Stage is a dummy equal to one if the VC firm specializes in early-stage firms, and zero

otherwise. We expect that VCs focusing on early-stage firms will be more likely to get

involved in litigation since uncertainty in those firms is higher, contracts are more

incomplete, and the success rates are relatively law compared to more mature firms. In such

an environment, the likelihood of VC opportunism (or the disagreement on whether VC’s

behavior constitutes opportunism) might be very high. In addition, Fluck, Garrison, and

Myers (2005) model the entrepreneur-VC relationship and one of the predictions from their

model is that later stage syndication resolves the VC hold-up problem by assuring the

entrepreneur more favorable terms in later rounds. Since there are fewer investors financing

early-stage companies, VCs might be tempted to behave opportunistically.

       In addition, we use the past deal flow as a control variable, since we expect firms with

more deals to be more likely to get involved in litigation. Prior deal flow is the number of

companies the VC firm’s funds invested in prior to the year of litigation, scaled by the total

number of VC backed companies in the year each fund was established. We also use various

industry dummies in the models. Diversified is a dummy equal to one if the VC firm makes

diversified investments (across industries and stage), and zero otherwise. Lastly, we also

include year and location dummies. Information on VC industry and stage preferences and

location comes from VentureXpert.

       Table 3 presents summary statistics for the VCs in our litigation sample and their

matching firms. The sample VCs and the corresponding matching firms are very similar in




                                                                                                24
terms of firm age (the average difference is 0.1). The sample VCs tend to be larger (on

average by 30%) in terms of aggregate fund size prior to the litigation. This, however, works

against our finding any significant results with respect to Hypothesis 2, since the sample VCs

will be more likely to have larger funds under management and deal flow after the litigation.

There are no significant differences with respect to stage or diversified industry preferences.

4.1. What determines a VC’s involvement in litigation?

       Table 4 presents the estimates of a probit and ordered probit model of VC litigation.

The first two models use the full sample. We find that more reputable firms are less likely to

participate in a lawsuit. The coefficient on Percentage IPOs is negative and significant at the

10% level. In economic terms, the coefficient estimate suggests that high reputation reduces

the likelihood of litigation by roughly 36%. In addition, we document that VC firms that

focus on early-stage investments are more likely to get sued. The coefficient on the Stage

dummy is 0.385, which is significant at the 5% level. The marginal effects imply that focus

on early-stage investments increases the likelihood of litigation by approximately 15%.

Conversely, if a VC firm has a larger deal flow, it is more likely to get embroiled in a

lawsuit. In Model 2, the coefficient on Prior deal flow is 2.90, which is significant at the 1%

level (t-stat=4.87). These results continue to hold when we include time dummies (Model 2).

       In Model 3 we include only VCs (and their corresponding matching firms) that are

defendants in lawsuits. Most of the results continue to hold in this sub-sample. The

coefficient on Percentage IPOs decreases, but it is still significant at the 10% level. This

suggests that more reputable VCs are also less likely to end up in a lawsuit as defendants,

which is presumably the more costly type of lawsuit compared to a lawsuit in which the VC

is a plaintiff. Likewise, the coefficient on Prior deal flow remains positive and statistically




                                                                                                  25
significant, suggesting that VCs with a lot of deals are more likely to get involved in

litigation.

        Lastly, in Model 4 we include only VCs that are involved in tunneling-type lawsuits.

The evidence suggests that reputation does not matter for these lawsuits. Again, the

coefficients on Stage and Prior deal flow are positive and significant, suggesting that firms

focusing on early-stage startups and investing in a lot of startups are more likely to engage in

tunneling-type transactions. However, the coefficient on Percentage IPOs, although

negative, is not significant anymore. As mentioned above, there is a wide variety of VCs

involved in these types of lawsuits, both highly reputable and less reputable. This fact has

significant implications for the theories predicting that reputation constrains opportunistic

VC behavior (see, for example, Bachmann and Schindele, 2006).

        The last model in Table 4 represents an ordered probit model, where we rank the

types of lawsuits from relatively innocuous (e.g., when the VC is the plaintiff) to more severe

misbehavior (e.g., financial or operational tunneling). The results are similar to the results

from the probit model. It appears that more reputable VCs are less likely to get involved in

tunneling type of transactions. The coefficient on the reputation proxy is negative and

statistically significant. Thus, the evidence in Table 4 suggests that reputation does prevent

VC opportunism, as well as expropriation-type behavior such as dilution, asset transfer, and

freeze-out. This finding supports Hypothesis 1.


5. Impact of litigation on VC fundraising and deal flow

        We next examine the impact of litigation on the reputation and performance of the

VCs involved in the lawsuits. Our Hypothesis 2 predicts that VCs involved in litigation

would suffer reputational consequences and those would be more severe the more egregious


                                                                                                 26
the actions of VCs are. We use two proxies for VC reputation in our analysis – the size of

funds raised and the number of companies in which each VC invests (deal flow). We test for

significant changes in those measures after the litigation. The last test involves changes in

VC performance following the litigation. Our performance measures are the fraction of

portfolio firms that go public or have what we call “a successful exit” (an IPO or an

acquisition). We perform a cross-sectional analysis using matching firms. Each reputation

and performance variable is adjusted by the value of the corresponding reputational or

performance measure of the control firm. For the tests in this section we use the sub-sample

of lawsuits which commenced in or before year 2004. The reason is that we want to allow

VCs time to raise new funds after the lawsuit. Since VCs raise new funds every 2-3 years

(see Fenn, Liang, and Prowse (1997)), we decided to stop at year 2004. This yields a sample

of 158 unique lawsuit-VC observations.

5.1. Post-litigation funds raised

       One important issue in the empirical analysis in this section is the fact that some

sample VCs and control firms do not raise any funds after the litigation. This is important

information that should be taken into consideration. There are various reasons why these

firms do not have funds after the lawsuits, one of them being the impact of the lawsuit. At

any rate, this presents us with the dilemma of whether we should keep these observations in

the sample or throw them away. We deal with this issue in two ways. First, if a sample VC or

a matching firm does not have any funds after the litigation year, we assign a value of zero to

the funds raised variable. In our sample, the fraction of firms that do not have funds after

litigation is higher for the matching firms. By setting these fund sizes to zero, we introduce




                                                                                                 27
bias that works against finding any support for Hypothesis 2.14 Second, we repeat our

analysis using only those VCs and corresponding matching firms that have post-litigation

information. Consequently, we exclude all cases where a sample firm has post-litigation

observations and its control firm does not, or vice versa. For robustness we present results in

Panel A for matching based on VC firm age and funds under managements and in Panel B

for matching based on VC firm age and percent investments going IPO.

        The results of the test for changes in finds raised by each of the VCs in our sample

following the litigation are presented in Table 5. They do provide support for the negative

reputation effect of lawsuits. First, looking at the full sample we find that on average VCs

embroiled in litigation experience a decrease in the size of funds raised after the year of the

lawsuit. The result is significant at the 1% level for both means and medians. For example,

before the lawsuit the scaled difference in funds under management between VCs in our

sample and matching firms is 0.0675, while after the lawsuit this difference decreases

significantly to -0.0043 (p-value of t-test for equality of means is 0.01).

        Next, we focus on the sub-sample of lawsuits in which VCs are defendants, which has

128 unique lawsuit-VC observations. This is where we expect the effect of litigation to be the

strongest. We find that the difference in post-litigation funds raised between sample VCs and

control firms is larger (-0.0065) than that for the whole sample (-0.0043). The difference in

both means and medians pre- and post-litigation remains statistically significant. When we

consider cases where the VC is defendant and it lost the case, the differences are even bigger

and again statistically significant. The difference in post-litigation funds raised between

sample VCs and control firms is now -0.0095, although the sample size drops to 24


14
 More of the control firm-adjusted post-litigation fund measures for our sample firms will be positive, thus
making it less likely to observe significant changes from the pre-litigation levels.


                                                                                                               28
observations and the p-values of the tests decrease. We examine cases of VC expropriation,

and find similar results.

       Lastly, we separately investigate the cases where the VC is the plaintiff. For this sub-

sample, we find that there is a significant difference in the means of pre- and post-litigation

fund size, but not for medians. This finding is not particularly surprising, since in these cases

it is usually the VC that is been expropriated in some form or another by entrepreneurs or

other investors. Consequently, the evidence in Panel A in Table 5 suggests that VCs involved

in litigation suffer reputational consequences. This supports Hypothesis 2. The results in

Panel B are qualitatively similar to Panel A, which affirms that our findings are robust to the

matching methodology.



5.2. Post-litigation deal flow quantity

       Next, we turn our attention to the effect of litigation on the deal flow of VCs in our

sample. Hypothesis 2 asserts that as a consequence of the negative publicity associated with

lawsuits fewer startups will be willing to accept financing from VCs involved in litigation.

Thus, VCs might lose valuable deal flow. To measure changes in pre- and post-litigation deal

flow, we compare the control firm-adjusted number of companies that receive financing from

each VC in our sample before and after the year of litigation. Again, we scale these measures

by the total number of companies financed by the whole universe of VCs during each year in

which a particular VC in our sample raises a fund. As in the previous sub-section, we have

some sample firms without any deals after the lawsuit year. We treat those in the same way –

set the number of deals to zero or exclude the firms without post-litigation deals from the

analysis.




                                                                                                29
       The results of the number of deals analysis are presented in Table 6. Similar to Table

5 we present results from matching based on age and funds under management in Panel A

and age and percent deals going IPO in Panel A. Again, the evidence suggests that VCs

involved in litigation suffer significant decreases in deal flow. For example, in Panel A in

Table 6 the pre-litigation deal flow for the full sample is 0.0903 compared to -0.0024 after

litigation (p-value of the Wilcoxon signed rank test is 0.01). When we focus only on VCs that

are defendants, we also find that these VCs experience a significant decline in deal flow. We

find a similar effect on deal flow for VCs which lose in court or engage in various

expropriation activities. Overall, the results in Panel A of Table 6 suggest that VCs involved

in lawsuits seem to lose deal flow following the litigation. This provides further support for

Hypothesis 2.

       Lastly, we try to determine the changes in fund size and deal flow using a regression

model. In Table 7, we first regress the control firm-adjusted change in funds under

management on a set of control variables (Models 1-3). We include a measure of firm

reputation (VC Age), preferred investment stage (Stage), state of location, industry preference

(Diversified), a dummy variable for tunneling, and a dummy for firms with multiple lawsuits.

We can see that the coefficient on prior firm reputation (as measured by firm age) has a

negative sign. From the other variables, Multi-Lawsuit is negative and significant, suggesting

that firms with multiple lawsuits are viewed more negatively by VC investors.

       Models 4-6 of Table 7 present a regression of the control firm-adjusted change in deal

flow on a set of control variables. The results from the regression estimation suggest that

prior firm reputation has also a negative impact on changes in deal flow. The coefficient on




                                                                                               30
VC Age is negative and significant at conventional levels. So is the coefficient on Multi-

Lawsuits.

5.3. Post-litigation deal flow quality

       Lastly, we test for possible changes in the quality of VC deal flow prior to and after

the year of litigation. Hypothesis 2 predicts that the lawsuits will have a negative effect on

the quality of deals which VCs involved in lawsuits invest in. We measure deal flow quality

by the proportion of portfolio firms that go public or are acquired. Our first measure is the

control firm-adjusted fraction of firms that make it to an IPO, which we calculate prior to and

after the litigation and test for differences. The second measure if the fraction of portfolio

firms that go public or are acquired. We call this measure “successful exits”. Again, we

compare the value of the control firm-adjusted measure before and after the litigation and test

for significant differences. Due to the fact that we need to have investments in order to be

able to calculate these ratios, here we use only the sample VCs and corresponding matching

firms that have pre- and post-litigation investments.

       The results of the quality of deal flow analysis are presented in Table 8. Unlike the

results in previous sub-sections, we find no difference in quality of deal flow prior to and

after the litigation when we match on firm age and funds under management (Panel A). Most

of the control-firm adjusted pre-litigation measures are positive and larger than the post-

litigation ones, but the differences are insignificant. Most of the post-litigation medians are

larger than the pre-litigation ones, but again the differences are not significant. There is some

evidence for a reduction in quality of fund flow in Panel B, where we match by age and

performance, but the results are only means and not medians. Overall, there is no convincing

support for Hypothesis 2.




                                                                                                  31
6. Conclusion

       This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, it presents the first

systematic study of VC-related litigation, based on a large hand-collected set of lawsuits.

Contrary to the popular image of the VC industry as a self-governing community that uses

informal means of dispute resolution and avoids litigation as means of redressing wrongs, we

document that VCs are involved in litigation quite often. Even more surprisingly, VCs

initiate about a quarter of all lawsuits in which they are involved. VC litigation is extensive

and sophisticated. We show that both VC and non-VC litigants engage in forum-shopping,

seeking the most efficient courts available to them by law.

       Second, this is the first study that seeks to document the downside of the current

pattern of VC contracting, where VCs receive very large amount of discretion in exchange

for a mere promise not to misbehave. We cannot measure the extent of VC misbehavior

itself, but we can study the tip of the iceberg – litigation – showing allegations of widespread

VC misbehavior.

       Finally, we are first to investigate the channels through which legal and non-legal

environments interact in reducing incentives for VC misbehavior. We show that while

founders rarely succeed suing VCs in court, their lawsuits have consequences far beyond the

formal damages award. When VCs are sued, other industry participants react – defendant

VCs experience difficulties in raising capital and finding sufficient number of new deals.

       Overall, we present evidence that a VC industry uses a complex web of legal and

non-legal mechanisms to ameliorate the possible abuse of contractual discretion by VCs.

Neither law alone nor reputation alone is enough; it’s the combination of the two that seems




                                                                                                32
to give strength to the system. We cannot tell how well the system deters misbehavior, but

we can tell that at least some misbehavior is punished.

       For future research we intend to analyze the type of portfolio companies that are

involved in the lawsuits. It would be interesting to know what the firm characteristics are and

what happens with these portfolio firms. Are any syndication partners involved? Does the

VC involved in the litigation come in early or late? Does the presence of a serial entrepreneur

reduce or increase the probability of litigation? Answers to questions like these would further

extend our knowledge of why and how VCs get involved in litigation and what is the impact

on portfolio firms as well.




                                                                                             33
Appendix A. Examples of Lawsuits

Examples of alleged VC misbehavior with regard to founders. The facts are as alleged in
complaints, not as proven in court. Many cases include a combination of claims.

Founder Dilution

Goldman v Pogo.com, Inc., 2002 WL 1358760 (Del.Ch., 2002)

Founder was a president and CEO of e-gaming company; owned 29% of voting shares. VCs
pushed founder to resign as a president and CEO. Firm needed money; VCs on the board
chose funky securities, converted, did a reverse stock split; all of this reduced the founder’s
stake from 13% to 0.1%. VCs then refused to redeem founder’s stock in violation of prior
agreement.

Keith v. Black Diamond Advisores, 48 F. Supp. 2d 326 (S.D. NY, 1999)

Founders operated a company doing sub-prime mortgage lending. VCs promised money and
expertise. Founders and VCs formed a new company; half interest went to VCs, half to
founders. VCs planned dilution, enlarged board, took away control; persuaded one founder to
give up his option to buy another founder's interest, so the remaining founder lost even more
control.

Marmon v. Arbinet-Thexchange, 2004 Del. Ch. LEXIS 44

Plaintiff was a consultant for the startup and received stock as compensation. Then, he
became a president and board member. While another man was a chairman, the startup
received five rounds of financing. Founder/consultant wanted to see financial info because he
was told of mismanagement, unauthorized loans to executives, and dilutive financing. CEO
who suggested dilutive financing was an interested party: he was also CEO of firm that owns
5% of proposed VC. Severe dilution followed, without the knowledge of common, along
with additional series of dilutions.


Asset Stripping and Dilution

Albers v. Edelson Technology Partners L.P. , 201 Ariz 47 (2001).

The startup is 42% owned by founders and rest by two venture capitalists. The startup has
exclusive license on use of a patent owned by its parent corporation (where VCs are not
invested). VCs have their representatives on the startup’s board of directors. VCs failed to
develop and use a patent; promised to invest more money and didn't; waited until late and
forced cheap purchase of stock, diluting voting and econ power of founders.

Cooper v. Parsky,140 F.3d 433 (2d Cir., 1998)


                                                                                            34
A founder of a large oil refinery company put his stock in voting trust, to be voted by
company's board; he also had 5-year employment agreement (terminable for cause). The
founder was fired without cause in violation of his employment contract, sued and won.
While the founder was illegally fired, his stock was voted in a way that left company with no
assets; all assets were channeled to another entity controlled by VCs. After series of asset-
stripping transactions with related entities, VCs left the founder with nothing.

Bowers v. Allied Capital Corp.1991 WL 335252 D.Me.,1991

Founders owned a car-recycling operation. VCs conspired to mislead creditors and suppliers
that company is a bad financial state, to put company in bankruptcy, while withholding
funding. The purpose was to avoid paying founders under an "earn-out formula."


Sale of Company on Terms Unfavorable to Founders

Kennedy v. Venrock Associates, 348 F.3d 584 (7th Cir. 2003)

The startup was based in IL, but incorporated in Maryland. VCs received preferred stock;
founders received common. The startup had a 5-member board: 1 VC, the rest were not
affiliated (founders claim that one more director was "aligned with VC"). The board turned
down an acquisition offer; proposed (and shareholders approved) to reincorporate in DE. DE
law gives shareholders less protection than Maryland law, which governed the startup before.
After reincorporation in DE, VCs gained control over the majority of the board. The board
approved bridge loans that gave VCs preference in liquidation; didn't seek other financing.
The board approved the sale of the startup for stock; turned down alternatives. In DE, a
simple majority of shareholder vote is required to approved sale; in Maryland, that would be
two-thirds. The buyer of the startup is now in bankruptcy. Holders of common stock gets
nothing; not enough for creditors and preferred.

Firing of Founder in Violation of Employment Agreement

Olsen v. Seifert, 1998 Mass. Super. LEXIS 592

One of the three founders of the startup alleges that another founder (who holds more senior
position in firm) lured him into relinquishing his board seat, then fired him, took away
unvested stock. When the company received VC funding (preferred), the plaintiff founder
signed a stock purchase agreement, where his stock (purchased at symbolic price) would vest
over several years. The agreement provided that in the event of a merger/acquisition, more of
the plaintiff founder’s stock would vest. Defendant founder agreed to sell company to
Lucent; in two days, fired plaintiff founder and repurchased unvested stock. If plaintiff
founder were fired after the merger, his stock would have vested.

Talton v. Unisource Network Serv., 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14049




                                                                                          35
The company had multiple rounds of VC financing; VCs and the plaintiff founder sit on the
board. The company has various problems with funding and attempts to sell; the founder
alleges plot to terminate her employment. The founder is induced to invest personal money to
keep the company afloat; after that, VCs offered to put in more in exchange for subordination
of the founder's securities. The founder agreed, and then got fired. The founder sues for fraud
and other similar offenses.

Kroutik v. Momentix, 2003 Mass. Super. LEXIS 112

Founder formed a startup; obtained several rounds of financing from three different VCs.
After two rounds, the founder was moved from being a president and CEO to being a
"chairman and founder". Eventually, VCs fired the founder; he sued for breach of contract
and wrongful termination; the startup counterclaimed breach of fiduciary duty. Settled: the
startup is to pay the founder; the founder is to return a key laptop with all contents. The
founder returned a laptop, but erased data; the startup did not pay. The startup is now
defunct; everyone lost money.


Asset Stripping, Dilution, Sale on Terms Unfavorable to Founders.

Erickson v. Horing, 2001 WL 1640142 (D. Minn., 2001)

VC wanted to invest in the startup; misrepresented that they had experience in relevant field,
and promised an IPO. VCs persuaded founders to sell their interests in the startup for
interests in another company and promised exactly the same rights. However, during the
merger, all prior rights disappeared. Founders got diluted and lost control, partly because
VCs falsely claimed that two of 7 board members resigned, which allowed VCs gain control.
Then, VCs stripped assets, sold the startup at very bad price to interested 3d party, and
abandoned IPO promises. Result: VCs took out everything from firm, transferred to
themselves, and common is left with nothing.




                                                                                            36
Appendix B. Data Manipulations
       We start with the lawsuit data from Westlaw and manually match the names in the list

of plaintiffs and defendants to the list of all VC firms in the VentureXpert database. Out of

241 identifiable VC parties in the 186 lawsuit sample, we match 134 VC firm names with the

VentureXpert universe. We then search on Google whether the remaining parties are VCs.

We confirm that parties to seven lawsuits are not VCs. Of the remaining 179 lawsuits, two

lawsuits have missing filing and disposition date and we drop them from further analysis.

This leaves us with the final sample of 177 lawsuits.

       Our analysis requires information on the year when a complaint is filed. Westlaw

provides information on the filing year for 73 cases. The remaining 104 cases have data on

disposition dates only. For these cases we assume that the filing date is two years before the

disposition date. The reason we choose two years is because for the 73 cases where we have

information on both filing and disposition year the average difference is 1.3 years and it is

reasonable to expect that these cases are on average resolved quicker than the rest of the

sample.

       One deficiency of the VentureXpert dataset is that there are no numeric variables

which uniquely identify a VC firm; only string variables containing the name of a VC firm or

fund are available. The VC firm names are not consistent across time. For example

Hambrecht and Quist (H&Q) is acquired by JP Morgan. Following the acquisition some

H&Q funds are mapped to JP Morgan, some are still kept as funds of H&Q. To solve this

problem for the VC firms in our lawsuit sample, we create our own meta-firm names which

map different versions of a firm name to a single string. We then extract the funds which

correspond to each version of a firm name with the meta-firm name and aggregate them. As




                                                                                                37
we will see later, this process makes the firms in our sample on average bigger than the firms

in the VentureXpert universe, because VentureXpert may record funds belonging to the same

VC company as belonging to different VC firms.

       After dealing with VC firm names, we then download date for the founding date of

each VC firm company in the VentureXpert universe. We replace founding date with the date

when first investment is made when founding dates is missing or the founding date is later

than first investment date. We follow the same procedure for fund founding dates. Due to

dubious data quality we drop all funds which are reported as founded earlier than 1960.

       For the 134 VC firms appearing in our lawsuit sample which are also covered in

VentureXpert, ten firms do not have any funds listed before the filing date of the lawsuit and

we drop them from the pre-post lawsuit analysis. We match each of the remaining 124 firms

which appear in 135 lawsuits and result in 174 unique lawsuit-firm combinations to all

remaining firms in the VentureXpert universe in order to find a suitable peer company.

Following Kaplan and Schoar (2005) we find the best matching firm based on the age of the

VC company (defined as year of filing of lawsuit minus year of founding) and the cumulative

size of funds under management from the year of founding of the firm to the year of filing of

the lawsuit. The exact matching procedure is as follows:

        1. Download all funds in VentureXpert database. For each year in the period from

            1960 to 2006, calculate total fund size in a year as the sum of the assets of all

            funds which are founding in this year. This variable substitutes a variable in

            VentureXpert which measures the total dollar commitments to VC funds in a

            year. This variable is of poor quality in the earlier years and there are funds

            which have assets more than ten times larger than the total funds committed to




                                                                                                38
   the industry in a year as measured by this variable. By calculating our own total

   fund size variable we ensure that no fund will have rescaled fund size larger than

   1, where rescaled fund size equals fund dollar assets divided by the sum of the

   assets of all funds founded in the same year.

2. Take each firm-lawsuit observation of our 124 firm/174 firm-lawsuit sample.

   Compute firm age as filing year – founding year.

3. Pull all funds which correspond to the same firm name in VentureXpert and

   calculate the cumulative assets under management of the firm pre-lawsuit as the

   sum of scaled fund sizes for all funds which were founded from the founding of

   the firm till the year of filing the lawsuit. We lose two firms from our sample,

   because all of their funds pre-lawsuit have missing data on fund size and we

   cannot compute firm scaled size.

4. After calculating firm age and firm pre-lawsuit scaled size, we find all firms in

   the VentureXpert universe which are founded within three years of the sample

   firm, where we replace the founding year of all firms founded before 1960 to

   equal 1960

5. Within this narrowed-down peer universe, we look at how many firms have the

   same founding year. If there are more than 10 such firms, we choose the best

   matching company to be the one closest in scaled size. If there are less than 10

   firms founded in the same year, we look at firms founded within one year. If

   there are more than 10 of them, we choose the best matching company as the

   company closest in size. If there are less than 10 we increase sequentially the

   window to within two years and then within three years. Last, if there are less




                                                                                       39
             than 10 companies founded within three years of the sample firm, we just take

             the closest firm in scaled size anyway.

       After finishing the matching procedure, we have 122 companies and 172 unique firm-

lawsuit combinations. The matching procedure matched firm age very well (the average age

of the best matches is within two months of the average age of the sample firms), but because

of our mapping of multiple firm names in VentureXpert to a single meta-firm name for our

sample firms but not for the rest of the universe, the sample firms are on average 30% larger

than the best matches. This difference is larger for the older firms.

       The procedure for matching on age and pre-litigation fund performance is similar.

Here instead of matching on funds under management as a second matching criterion, we use

the performance of the last fund raised prior to the year of litigation. Performance is

measured as the fraction of portfolio firms that go public for that particular fund. Once we

select 10 or more control firms based on age, then we select the closest one in terms of

performance. This procedure also yields relatively precise matching in terms of performance,

with the median difference being 0 and the mean difference equal to -0.019.




                                                                                               40
References
Atanasov, Vladimir, Bernard Black, and Conrad Ciccotello, 2007, Unbundling and
       measuring tunneling, working paper, available at SSRN:
       http://ssrn.com/abstract=1030529
Bachmann, Ralph, and Ibolya Schindele, 2006, Theft and syndication in venture capital
       finance, working paper.
Baker, Malcolm, and Paul Gompers, 2003, The determinants of board structure at the initial
       public offering, Journal of Law and Economics 46, 569-598.
Banerjee, A., and E. Duflo, 2000, Reputation Effects and the Limits of Contracting: A Study
       of the Indian Software Industry", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 989 - 1017.
Bartlett, Joseph M. and Kevin R. Garlitz, 1995, Fiduciary duties in burnout/cramdown
       financings, Journal of Corporation Law 20, 595-626.
Bengtsson, Ola, 2006, Repeated relationships between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs,
       working paper.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and G. Chiesa, 1995, Proprietary information, financial
       intermediation, and research incentives, Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 328-
       357.
Christopher, Alistair, 2001, VC and the law: Potential legal hurdles involved in funding the
       next big thing, Venture Capital Journal.
Crocker, K., and K. Reynolds, 1993, The E±ciency of Incomplete Contracts: An Empirical
       Analysis of Air Force Engine Procurement", RAND Journal of Economics, 24,
       127146.
Cumming, Douglas, and Jefferey Macintosh, 2004, Boom, bust and litigation in venture
       capital finance, Willamette Law Review, 40, 867-906
Dushnitsky, Gary, and Myles Shaver, 2007, Limitations to inter-organizational knowledge
       acquisition: The paradox of corporate venture capital, working paper.
Etzel, Barbara, 2002, VCs, fearing lawsuits, want indemnification: Shareholders whose
       equity fell in down rounds may look to recover financially, Investment Dealers
       Digest.
Fama, E., 1980, Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm", Journal of Political
       Economy, 88, 288-307.


                                                                                           41
Fenn, George, Nellie Liang, and Stephen Prowse, 1998, The private equity market: An
       overview, Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 6(4).
Fellers, Charles, 2002, VCs mired in litigation of their own making, Venture Capital Journal.
Fluck, Zsuzsanna, Kedran Garrison, and Stewart Myers, 2005, Venture capital contracting
       and syndication: An experiment in Computational Corporate Finance, NBER
       Working Paper No. W11624, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=807613
Fried, Jesse, and Mira Ganor, 2005, Agency costs of VC control in startups, UC Berkeley
       Public Law Research Paper No. 784610
Gopalan, R., V. Nanda, and A. Seru, 2007, Reputation and spillovers: Evidence from Indian
       business groups, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Gorman, Michael, and William Sahlman, 1989, What do venture capitalists do?, Journal of
       Business Venturing 4, 231-248
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of
       start-up firms: Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 169-197.
Hsu, David, 2004, What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation, Journal of
       Finance 59, 1805-1844.
Kaplan, Steven, and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns,
       persistence, and capital flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791-1823.
Kaplan, Steven, and Per Stromberg, 2003, Financial contracting meets the real world: an
       empirical analysis of venture capital contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70, 281-
       316.
Kaplan, Steven, and Per Stromberg, 2004, Characteristics, contracts, and actions: evidence
       from venture capitalist analyses, Journal of Finance 59, 2177-2210.
Krishnan, C.N.V., R. Masulis, and A.K. Singh, 2006, Does venture capital reputation affect
       subsequent IPO performance?, working paper.
Landier, Augustin, 2001, Start-up financing: Banks vs. venture capital, working paper.
LeClaire, John, Michael Kendall, and Kingsley Taft, 2005, WatchMark ruling clarifies pay-
       to-play, Venture Capital Journal.
Lerner, Josh, 1994, The syndication of venture capital investments, Financial Management
       23, 16-27.




                                                                                             42
Lerner, Josh, 1995, Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms, Journal of Finance,
       50, 301-318.
Lin, Thimoty, and Richard Smith, 1998, Insider reputation and selling decisions: The
       unwinding of venture capital investments during equity IPOs, Journal of Corporate
       Finance 4, 241-263.
Lindsey, Laura, 2003, The venture capital keiretsu effect: An empirical analysis of strategic
       alliances among portfolio firms, working paper.
Padilla, Jose M., 2001, What’s Wrong with a Washout?: Fiduciary Duties of the Venture
       Capitalist Investor in A Washout Financing, Houston Business and Tax Law Journal
       1, 269-306.
Ueda, Masako, 2004, Banks versus Venture Capital: Project Evaluation, Screening, and
       Expropriation, Journal of Finance 59, 601-621
Wongsunwai, Wan, 2007, Does venture capitalist quality affect corporate governance?,
       working paper.
Yosha, Oved, 1995, Information disclosure costs and the choice of financing source, Journal
       of Financial Intermediation 4, 3-20.




                                                                                            43
                                             Table 1
                           Characteristics of Lawsuits Involving VCs

We collect lawsuits by searches in West Law, business media, and PACER. The total number of lawsuits in our
current sample is 172.

Characteristic                                                                          Number of
                                                                                         lawsuits
Defendant/Plaintiffs Composition:               VCs Among Defendants                       130
                                                Founders Among Defendants                    1
                                                VCs Among Plaintiffs                        42
                                                Founders Among Plaintiffs                   14
Alleged Tunneling Method:                       Freezout                                    4
                                                Dilution                                    8
                                                Acquisition on Unfavorable                  19
                                                Terms
                                                Misappropriation of Business                 10
                                                Opportunity
                                                Asset Transfer                              22
Where Case Brought: (State Name/No.             CA                                         31/19
of Federal Suits):
                                                NY                                         25/21
                                                DE                                          21/2
                                                MA                                         16/7
                                                FL                                         11/10
                                                PA                                          10/5
                                                TX                                          10/6
                                                IL                                          8/7
                                                All federal (no bankruptcy)                 106
                                                All state                                    63
                                                Bankruptcy                                   8
Class Actions                                                                                17
Lawsuit Outcome:                                VC Won at Trial or Pre-Trial              20 (27)
                                                Motion (Partly Won)
                                                VC Lost at Trial or Pre-Trial                27
                                                Motion
                                                Case Dismissed on                            13
                                                Procedural Grounds
                                                Case Dismissed on                            26
                                                Substantive Grounds
                                                Case Ongoing                                 59
Total Cases Appealed                                                                         38
Cases Appealed by VC                                                                         19
Total Number of Cases Substantively                                                         177
Coded
Total Number of Relevant Cases Found                                                        464



                                                                                                        44
                                        Table 2
                       Distribution of Cases by Types of Claims

                             Non-VC Plaintiff                VC Plaintiff
                        Frequency       Percent        Frequency       Percent
Contract                    11            7.28             1              6.25
Corporate                   12            7.95
Employment                  10            6.62
IP                          10            6.62             3            18.75
Securities                  22           14.57             2             12.5
Tort Intentional            58           38.41             6             37.5
Tort Non-Intentional        16            10.6             1             6.25
Bankruptcy                   6            3.97
Other                        6            3.97             3            18.75
Total                      151            100              16            100




                                                                                 45
                                                                    Table 3
                                          Summary statistics for sample VCs and their matching firms

The table presents summary statistics for the VCs in our litigation sample and their matching firms. The sample includes observations in the period 1976-2007.
Information on stage preference and diversified industry preference are taken from VentureXpert. All dollar values are in converted into year 2000 dollars.

 Variables                                         Sample VCs                                                      Matching firms
                                 Mean       Median    Std     Min                Max               Mean        Median    Std      Min               Max
 Age (years)                     18.3        14       18.4     1                 94                17.3         13      14.6       1                84

 Num. of funds pre-                8.6          5        10.2          1          62                 5.3           3         5.3          1          25
 litigation
 Avg. fund size pre-             355.1        87.4      1,037.1      0.01     11,929.2             401.9        104.6      1.360.6      0.13      25,511.1
 litigation (mill.)
 Aggregate fund size            3,059.5      726.7     5,589.2       0.16     32,440.3            2,135.9       569.4      4,039.1      0.52      25,680.9
 pre-litigation (mill.)
 Stage preference (1 if            0.5          0         0.5          0           1                 0.3           0         0.5          0           1
 early; 0 if late)

 Diversified (1 if early;          0.1          0         0.3          0           1                 0.2           0         0.4          0           1
 0 if late)

 Num. obs.                                                172                                                                172




                                                                                                                                                             46
                                                                            Table 4
                                                                  Probit model of VC litigation
The table presents the results of a probit model of VC litigation. The sample includes VC firms involved in lawsuits as well as their matching firms. Models 3
and 4 include only VC firms (and their corresponding matching firms) that are defendants. Models 5 and 6 include only VC firms (and their corresponding
matching firms) that are defendants and engage in expropriation-type activities. The dependent variable is equal to one if the VC firm in involved in a lawsuit,
and zero otherwise. It is measured as of the year of litigation. Stage is a dummy equal to one if the firm focuses on early-stage firms, and zero otherwise. State is
a dummy equal to one if the firm is located in CA or MA, and zero otherwise. Percentage IPOs is the median fraction of portfolio companies that go public for all
the funds the firm has raised before the year of litigation. Prior deal flow is the number of companies the VC firm’s funds invested in prior to the year of
litigation, scaled by the total number of VC backed companies in the year each fund was established. Diversified is a dummy equal to one if the firm invests in
several industries, and zero otherwise. Industry classification from VentureXpert is used. The models are estimated with robust standard errors. Robust t-statistics
is in the parenthesis.

                                                                       Probit model                                                      Ordered probit model
                                                                                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                               No lawsuit                               0
                                                                                                    VC defendant and
 Variables                                   Full sample                VC defendant only                                      Lawsuit, VC plaintiff                    1
                                                                                                       tunneling
                                                                                                                               Lawsuit, VC defendant, no tunneling      2
                                                                                                                               Lawsuit, VC defendant, tunneling         3
                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                          (4)                                    (5)
                                      0.072             0.084                 0.068                       -0.840
 Intercept
                                     [0.51]            [1.18]                [0.06]                       [-0.88]
                                      0.385             0.469                 0.536                        0.656                                  0.433
 Stage
                                     [2.52]            [2.92]                [3.01]                       [1.94]                                 [3.01]
                                      0.026             0.026                -0.064                        0.020                                 -0.005
 State
                                     [0.17]            [0.16]                [-0.35]                      [0.05]                                 [-0.04]
                                     -0.894            -1.167                -1.113                       -0.515                                 -1.146
 Percentage IPOs
                                     [-1.85]           [-2.08]               [-1.72]                      [-0.40]                                [-2.22]
                                                        2.900                 3.059                        4.961                                  1.649
 Prior deal flow
                                                       [4.87]                [4.30]                       [4.20]                                 [4.48]
                                     -0.498            -0.378                -0.364                       -0.125                                 -0.388
 Diversified
                                     [-2.10]           [-1.47]               [-1.20]                      [-0.21]                                [-1.65]
 Industry dummies                      Yes                 Yes                 Yes                         Yes                                    Yes
 Year dummies                           No                 Yes                 Yes                         Yes                                    Yes
 Num. obs.                             344                 344                 280                          90                                    344
 Pseudo R2                             0.06                0.12                0.12                        0.19                                   0.05



                                                                                                                                                                  47
                                             Table 5
                             Changes in fundraising following litigation

The table presents results of univariate tests for changes in pre- and post-litigation funds raised. The sample
includes only lawsuits that commence by the end of year 2004. For each sample VC, the aggregate funds raised
before and after the year of litigation are calculated. The dollar amount of each fund raised (pre- or post-
litigation) is scaled by the total amount of VC commitments in the year of the fund. From the aggregate funds
raised by each sample VC we subtract the aggregate funds raised (pre- or post-litigation, scaled by VC
commitments in the year of the fund) by its corresponding matching firm. Matching firms in Panel A are the
closest firms without a lawsuit to each sample firm by age and funds under management, in Panel B by age and
performance (percent of investments going IPO). Mean and Median is the mean and median of this difference.
The tunneling sample includes lawsuits involving dilution, freeze-out, control transfer, and asset transfer. t-test
for equality of means and Wilcoxon signed rank test for equality of medians are used. p-values are reported in
parenthesis.

Panel A. Matching by Age and Funds under Management

                                                                                Only firms where VC and
                                           Whole Sample                        matching firm have both pre
                                                                                      and post data
                              Num.                                             Num.
                                             Mean              Median                     Mean      Median
                              Obs.                                              Obs.
 Full sample                   158                                               57
    Pre-litigation                          0.0675             0.00004                   0.1202     0.0003
    Post-litigation                         -0.0043              0.00                    -0.0145 -0.0027
 p-value of test                             (0.01)             (0.01)                    (0.01)    (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant                  128                                                54
    Pre-litigation                          0.0656             0.00001                      0.0980       0.0001
    Post-litigation                         -0.0065              0.00                       -0.0136      -0.0027
 p-value of test                             (0.01)             (0.01)                       (0.01)       (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant and               41                                               19
 tunneling
    Pre-litigation                          0.0686             0.00027                      0.1052       0.0003
    Post-litigation                         -0.0058              0.00                       -0.0168      -0.0033
 p-value of test                             (0.01)             (0.01)                       (0.02)       (0.02)
 pre=post




                                                                                                                48
                                   Table 5 (Cont.)
Panel B. Matching by Age and Performance

                                                          Only firms where VC and
                                Whole Sample             matching firm have both pre
                                                                and post data
                      Num.                               Num.
                                 Mean          Median               Mean      Median
                      Obs.                                Obs.
 Full sample           124                                 41
    Pre-litigation               0.1299        0.0071              0.0943     0.0129
    Post-litigation              0.0055        0.00008             0.0047     0.0009
 p-value of test                 (0.01)         (0.01)              (0.01)    (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant          99                                 33
    Pre-litigation               0.1250        0.0072             0.0881     0.0089
    Post-litigation              0.0040        0.00006            -0.0005    0.0004
 p-value of test                 (0.01)         (0.01)             (0.02)    (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant and      41                                 12
 tunneling
    Pre-litigation               0.1271        0.0157             0.0992     0.0168
    Post-litigation              0.0059        0.0004             -0.0001    0.0007
 p-value of test                 (0.01)        (0.01)              (0.02)    (0.02)
 pre=post




                                                                                  49
                                                 Table 6
                                  Post-litigation quantity of deal flow

The table presents results of univariate tests for changes in pre- and post-litigation deal flow. The sample
includes only lawsuits that commence by the end of year 2004. For each sample VC, the aggregate number of
companies financed before and after the year of litigation is calculated. The number of investments made by
each fund raised (pre- or post-litigation) is scaled by the total number of firms financed by VCs during the year
of the fund. From the aggregate number of investments made by each sample VC we subtract the aggregate
number of investments (pre- or post-litigation, scaled by the total number of firms financed by VCs in the year
of the fund) made by its corresponding matching firm. Matching firms in Panel A are the closest firms without
a lawsuit to each sample firm by age and funds under management, in Panel B by age and performance (percent
of investments going IPO). Mean and Median is the mean and median of this difference. The tunneling sample
includes lawsuits involving dilution, freeze-out, control transfer, and asset transfer. t-test for equality of means
and Wilcoxon signed rank test for equality of medians are used. p-values are reported in parenthesis.

Panel A. Matching by Age and Funds under Management

                                                                                Only firms where VC and
                                            Whole Sample                       matching firm have both pre
                                                                                      and post data
                              Num.                                             Num.
                                              Mean             Median                     Mean      Median
                              Obs.                                              Obs.
 Full sample                   158                                               41
    Pre-litigation                          0.0903              0.0068                   0.0943     0.0129
    Post-litigation                         -0.0024              0.00                    0.0047     0.0009
 p-value of test                             (0.01)             (0.01)                    (0.01)    (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant                  128                                                33
    Pre-litigation                          0.0854              0.0067                       0.0881       0.0089
    Post-litigation                         -0.0033              0.00                       -0.0005       0.0004
 p-value of test                             (0.01)             (0.01)                       (0.02)       (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant and               41                                                12
 tunneling
    Pre-litigation                          0.0766              0.0205                       0.0992       0.0168
    Post-litigation                         -0.0008              0.00                       -0.0001       0.0007
 p-value of test                             (0.01)             (0.01)                       (0.02)       (0.02)
 pre=post




                                                                                                                 50
                                  Table 6 (Cont.)

Panel B. Matching by Age and Performance

                                                         Only firms where VC and
                               Whole Sample             matching firm have both pre
                                                               and post data
                      Num.                             Num.
                                 Mean         Median             Mean        Median
                      Obs.                             Obs.
 Full sample           124                              41
    Pre-litigation              0.0786        0.0064             0.1006      0.0204
    Post-litigation             0.0035         0.00              0.0036      0.0005
 p-value of test                (0.01)        (0.01)             (0.01)      (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant          99                               33
    Pre-litigation              0.0812        0.0066            0.1037      0.0265
    Post-litigation             0.0034         0.00             0.0023      0.0005
 p-value of test                (0.01)        (0.01)            (0.01)      (0.01)
 pre=post

 VC defendant and      41                               12
 tunneling
    Pre-litigation              0.0637        0.0241            0.0586      0.0252
    Post-litigation             0.0076        0.0008            0.0011      0.0014
 p-value of test                (0.01)        (0.01)            (0.05)      (0.06)
 pre=post




                                                                                 51
                                            Table 7
                        Determinants of changes in fund size and deal flow
The table presents an OLS regression of control firm-adjusted post-litigation fund size and deal flow. The
sample includes only VC firms that participate in lawsuits. Control firms are selected based on age and fund
under management prior to litigation or on age and performance of the last fund prior to litigation. VC Age is
the log of the age of the VC firm as of the year of litigation. Percentage IPOs is the median (across all funds
prior to litigation) fraction of portfolio firms going public. Stage is a dummy equal to one if the VC firm
focuses on early-stage firms, and zero otherwise. Multi-stage is a dummy variable equal to one if the VC firm
has participated in previous lawsuits. Tunneling is a dummy variable equal to one if the lawsuit alleges that the
VC firm engages in expropriation-type activities. Plaintiff is dummy variable equal to one if the VC firm is a
plaintiff in the lawsuit. Diversified is a dummy equal to one if the VC firm invests in several industries, and
zero otherwise. Industry classification from VentureXpert is used. The models are estimated with robust
standard errors. Robust t-statistics is in the parenthesis.

                                Changes in fund size                             Changes in deal flow
                                                                         Matching:
                  Matching:                        Matching:                                       Matching:
                                                                         Age & funds under
                  Age & funds under mgmt           Age & perf                                      Age & perf
                                                                         mgmt
                                   Sample period                                          Sample
                                                    Sample period                                      Sample period
                                   1976-2003                                            period 1976-
 Variables        Full sample
                                   and VC
                                                    1976-2003 and        Full sample
                                                                                        2003 and VC
                                                                                                       1976-2003 and
                                                    VC defendant                                       VC defendant
                                   defendant                                             defendant
                       (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)
                     -0.113***       -0.107***              -0.017        -0.088***      -0.089***            -0.037
      VC Age
                         [-6.19]         [-4.25]            [-0.64]         [-6.616]         [-4.66]         [-1.44]
   Percentage             0.094           0.168          -0.417**              0.034          0.016         -0.460*
        IPOs              [0.80]          [0.95]            [-2.08]            [0.42]         [0.15]         [-1.77]
                          0.005           0.019             -0.001             0.025          0.034            0.046
         Stage
                          [0.19]          [0.52]            [-0.03]            [0.16]         [1.28]           [0.90]
        Multi-       -0.106***       -0.155***           -0.144**          -0.050**         -0.074*        -0.152**
       lawsuit           [-2.91]         [-2.96]            [-2.15]           [-2.08]        [-1.94]         [-2.21]
                         -0.003           0.022              0.038             0.007          0.043            0.076
   Tunneling
                         [-0.11]          [0.50]             [0.85]            [0.32]         [1.46]           [1.42]
                          0.051                                              0.060*
      Plaintiff
                          [1.10]                                               [1.96]
                     -0.299***       -0.336***          0.195***           -0.075**          -0.054         0.186**
  Diversified
                         [-3.85]         [-2.95]            [2.71]            [-2.30]        [-1.11]           [2.54]
                      0.621***        0.621***             -0.069          0.275***       0.261***            -0.046
     Constant
                          [7.39]          [5.70]           [-1.00]             [7.09]         [5.05]         [-0.48]
      Industry
                            Yes             Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes                 Yes
     dummies
         Year
                            Yes             Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes                 Yes
     dummies

  Num. obs.                 172               99                99               172             99               99
 Adjusted R2               0.60             0.65              0.36              0.49           0.56             0.43




                                                                                                               52
                                             Table 8
                Post-litigation quality of deal flow – fraction of successful exits
The table presents results of univariate tests for changes in pre- and post-litigation performance. Performance is
measured as the fraction of portfolio firms taken public (IPOs). The sample includes only lawsuits that
commence by the end of year 2003 and only sample VCs and corresponding matching firms that raise funds
before and after the litigation. For each sample VC, the fraction of portfolio firms going public or being
acquired are calculated for funds raised before and after the year of litigation. From the fraction of IPOs for
each sample VC we subtract the fraction of IPOs (pre- or post-litigation) for its corresponding matching firm.
Matching firms in Panel A are the closest firms without a lawsuit to each sample firm by age and funds under
management, in Panel B by age and performance (percent of investments going IPO). Mean and Median is the
mean and median of this difference. The tunneling sample includes lawsuits involving dilution, freeze-out,
control transfer, and asset transfer. t-test for equality of means and Wilcoxon signed rank test for equality of
medians are used. p-values are reported in parenthesis.

Panel A. Matching by Age and Funds under Management

 Sample                                         Num. Obs.             Mean                   Median

 Full sample                                         58
    Pre-litigation IPOs                                              0.0170                  0.0043
    Post-litigation IPOs                                            -0.0042                   0.00
 p-value of test pre=post                                            (0.19)                  (0.14)

 VC defendant                                        54
    Pre-litigation IPOs                                              0.0123                  0.0004
    Post-litigation IPOs                                            -0.0039                   0.00
 p-value of test pre=post                                            (0.26)                  (0.27)

 VC defendant and tunneling                          19
    Pre-litigation IPOs                                              0.0283                  0.0047
    Post-litigation IPOs                                             0.0158                  0.0572
 p-value of test pre=post                                            (0.36)                  (0.69)




                                                                                                               53
                                   Table 8 (Cont.)
Panel B. Matching by Age and Performance

 Sample                            Num. Obs.         Mean      Median

 Full sample                           41
    Pre-litigation IPOs                              -0.0086   -0.0064
    Post-litigation IPOs                             -0.0779   -0.0076
 p-value of test pre=post                             (0.07)    (0.48)

 VC defendant                          33
    Pre-litigation IPOs                               0.0214   0.0327
    Post-litigation IPOs                             -0.0708   -0.0107
 p-value of test pre=post                             (0.04)    (0.21)

 VC defendant and tunneling            12
    Pre-litigation IPOs                               0.0128   0.0200
    Post-litigation IPOs                             -0.1006   -0.0054
 p-value of test pre=post                             (0.13)    (0.48)




                                                                         54
