                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM INCIDENCE OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANDATES

                                            Don Fullerton
                                            Garth Heutel

                                        Working Paper 13645
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13645


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We are grateful for funding from the University of Texas, the National Science Foundation (NSF),
and Japan’s Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI). For helpful suggestions, we thank Spencer
Banzhaf, Larry Goulder, Carol McAusland, Hilary Sigman, Kerry Smith, Rob Williams, and many
seminar participants. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the NSF, the ESRI, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Don Fullerton and Garth Heutel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The General Equilibrium Incidence of Environmental Mandates
Don Fullerton and Garth Heutel
NBER Working Paper No. 13645
November 2007
JEL No. H23,L51,Q52

                                               ABSTRACT

Regulations that restrict pollution by firms also affect decisions about use of labor and capital. They
thus affect relative factor prices, total production, and output prices. For non-revenue-raising environmental
mandates, what are the general equilibrium impacts on the wage, the return to capital, and relative
output prices? Perhaps surprisingly, we cannot find any existing analytical literature addressing that
question. This paper starts with the standard two-sector tax incidence model and modifies one sector
to include pollution as a factor of production that can be a complement or substitute for labor or for
capital. We then look not at taxes but at four types of mandates, and for each mandate determine conditions
that place more of the burden on labor or on capital. Stricter regulation does not always place less
burden on the factor that is a better substitute for pollution. Also, a relative restriction on the amount
of pollution per unit of output creates an "output-subsidy effect" on factor prices that can offset and
reverse the traditional output effect and substitution effect. An analogous effect is found for a relative
restriction on pollution per unit of capital.


Don Fullerton
University of Texas and University of Illinois
3406 S. Persimmon Circle
Urbana, IL 61802-7139
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu

Garth Heutel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
heutel@fas.harvard.edu
        Much literature compares the efficiency properties of environmental policies,
generally finding that incentives like taxes or permits are more cost-effective than
mandates – at least in the case where firms are heterogeneous and government cannot
tailor mandates to each firm. In contrast, the literature on the distributional effects of
such policies is limited. Some papers identify demographic characteristics or locations of
households in jurisdictions that are differentially affected by environmental protection,
while others look at the burdens on households that buy products made more expensive
by those regulations. 1 All of these papers ignore effects of environmental policies on the
wage rate and the return to capital – both of which also affect real incomes. Yet,
restrictive command and control (CAC) regulations can simultaneously affect both the
product prices and factor prices.

        Of course, the public economics literature since Harberger (1962) is replete with
analytical general equilibrium studies of the incidence of taxation. A few papers look at
the incidence of environmental taxes, where the question is about how the burden of
collecting the revenue is distributed. 2 Mandates do not have revenue whose burden can
be distributed. Yet CAC mandates clearly interfere with firms' decisions about use of
labor, use of capital, the amount to produce, and the price to charge. We therefore find it
surprising that we cannot find any analytical general equilibrium model of the incidence
of non-revenue-raising environmental regulations, with simultaneous effects on the
sources side of income (relative factor prices) and the uses side (product prices). 3

        To begin such a literature, this paper starts with rudimentary models in the style
of Harberger (1962), with two competitive sectors and constant returns to scale, but we
add the important complication that the "dirty" sector uses three inputs to production:
labor, capital, and pollution. Thus, any two of these inputs can be complements or
substitutes. The "clean" sector uses only labor and capital, which are in fixed supply but

1
  Examples in the first category include Becker (2004) or Sieg et al (2004). Those in the second category
include Gianessi and Peskin (1980), Robison (1985), Metcalf (1999), or West and Williams (2004).
2
 The incidence of a pollution tax is studied by e.g. Yohe (1979), Bovenberg and Goulder (1997), Chua
(2003), and Fullerton and Heutel (2007).
3
  In a trade model with fixed output prices, Das and Das (2007) show the effect on factor prices from one
type of mandate (a pollution quota). Here, we find both factor prices and output prices in a closed economy
for four types of mandate. Yet results would differ in open economy. Computable general equilibrium
(CGE) models calculate effects of regulations on factor prices as well as goods prices, including Hazilla
and Kopp (1990), Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1990), Goulder et al (1997), Burtraw et. al. (2001), and Fischer
and Fox (2004). These CGE studies can provide elaborate simulations with numerical magnitudes. Some
include simple analytical models. But none provide general analytical models with closed form solutions
for any parameter values that show effects of mandates on the wage, return to capital, and output prices.
                                               -2-


perfectly mobile between sectors. We then solve models representing four types of non-
revenue-raising policies: the handout of pollution permits, a restriction on the "absolute"
quantity of pollution, a "relative" standard on pollution per unit of output, and a relative
standard on pollution per unit of an input (such as capital).

        We start with results for permits and quotas, because they are easy to understand.
First, they restrict the amount of pollution, so they create scarcity rents. The incidence of
these scarcity rents may be fairly obvious: gains accrue to whatever entity is handed the
permits or the rights to the restricted quantity of pollution. And the incidence on labor or
capital may be understood using two effects already identified by Mieszkowski (1967).
First, the "substitution effect" raises the return to whichever factor is a better substitute
for pollution (and injures the relative complement to pollution). Second, the "output
effect" reduces the return to whichever factor is used intensively in the regulated sector.

        We then extend the simple model to consider relative standards. Often regulators
limit the ratio of emissions to output, a restriction that firms can meet partly by reducing
emissions in the numerator and partly by increasing output in the denominator. We
derive closed form solutions for each price change, and we identify an additional term we
call the "output-subsidy effect". This effect helps whichever factor is intensively used in
the dirty sector, and it dominates the usual output effect under plausible conditions we
identify. The important point is that government-imposed costs on the dirty sector may
place less burden on the factor intensively used there. Finally, we model a restriction on
the ratio of emissions to capital, where solutions are used to identify another new term we
call the "capital-subsidy effect." Since this restriction can be satisfied partly by increased
use of capital, this effect tends to raise the relative return to capital (or, more generally,
the return to any input in the denominator of the restricted ratio). We also find effects on
the output prices to show burdens on the uses side of income.

        Thus, we see standard principles of tax incidence at play, but we introduce other
effects specific to mandates. And this analysis can be applied beyond environmental
policy to any restriction on use of inputs. For example, our three inputs could be
interpreted as labor, capital, and land. Then agricultural policy may restrict use of land
per unit output, or urban zoning rules may restrict building heights (capital per unit land).

        Section 1 reviews mandates in actual policymaking, and it reviews some of the
literature analyzing them. Section 2 then introduces our model. Section 3 looks at
                                             -3-


permits, while Section 4 looks at absolute quotas. We then turn to the main contributions
of our paper. Section 5 models a restriction on pollution per unit of output, and Section 6
restricts pollution per unit input. Section 7 offers concluding remarks.

1. Review of Environmental Mandates and Modeling

       Since the earlier years of their existence, environmental regulations have most
often been command-and-control (CAC) mandates rather than incentives like pollution
taxes or tradable permits. Those mandates, though, can take many forms for different
industries. Historically, the Water Quality Act of 1965 was the first national policy
requiring that states set water quality standards, determine maximum discharge limits,
and allocate non-tradable quotas. Thus, it is an absolute quantity restriction. Then the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 authorized the EPA to set effluent standards
that are based on technological factors. In this case, each facility faced restrictions based
on the type of facility and perhaps on capital use or output.

       The 1970 Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) set national ambient air quality
standards, and states that do not meet them are forced to create specific implementation
plans. These plans often differ greatly from each other. Modeling the Clean Air Act as a
single limit on emissions is difficult, except perhaps for the national emissions standards
for new facilities under the New Source Performance Standards of the 1970 CAAA. Like
the water standards, these air pollution regulations are technology-based, that is,
determined by the current state of abatement technology.

       Tradable emissions permits are becoming more popular, including the 1990
CAAA national market for sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions, the market in the northeast for
nitrogen oxide (NOX), the South Coast Air Quality Management District permit system
for SO2 and NOX in the Los Angeles area launched in January 1994, and the seven states
that have established emissions credit programs for NOX and volatile organic compounds
(VOC) since 1989 under the EPA’s emissions trading framework. These tradable permits
may achieve the same net level of environmental benefits as technology mandates, and
perhaps more cheaply, but they have important distributional differences.

       While quotas and permits set the absolute quantity of emissions, other mandates
set relative standards such emissions per unit of output or per unit of some input. These
policies may be seen as more reasonable than absolute limits per firm, especially when
applied to firms of various sizes. A regulator would not expect a large firm to reach the
                                                 -4-


same level of emissions as a small firm. By enacting a relative policy, the regulator can
avoid deciding on a specific allocation of allowed emissions levels. Because of the
variety of mandates under different state implementation plans, it is difficult to pinpoint
what policies have this relative form. In a 1982 survey of regulators administered by
Resources for the Future, however, 97% of air pollution regulating agencies and 100% of
water pollution regulating agencies said they use limits on emissions per unit of some
input, and 70% of air and 50% of water agencies said they use limits on emissions per
unit output (Russell et al, 1986, p. 19). Such large proportions suggest modeling some
environmental policies as limits on ratios of pollution to output or to an input.

        Current environmental regulations are quite complex. Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations lists hundreds of rules that apply to various emitters and industries,
and most states have their own regulations. Some requirements are described in terms of
emissions per unit output, such as the VOC standard for automobile refinish coatings that
is stated in grams per liter of coating. For new producers of sulfuric acid, the emissions
standard for SO2 is 2 kg per metric ton of acid produced. 4 The Texas Commission for
Environmental Quality sets standards for hazardous waste generators that are based on
the amount of output produced. 5 The state of New York sets limits on fluoride emissions
per unit output from aluminum reduction plants.6 Other countries also use relative
standards. In the European carbon permit market, some allocation mechanisms that have
been proposed are based on the historical output of firms (Bohringer and Lange 2005).

        Mandates also take the form of emissions per unit of some input. The federal
standard for particulate matter emissions for fossil-fuel-fired steam generators is 43
nanograms per joule of heat input derived from fossil fuel or wood residue. 7 Other
standards are stated in terms of emissions per unit heat input in Texas for electric
generators and solid fossil-fuel fired steam generators. 8 Even for a particular industry,
emissions standards can differ based on the technology. Emissions rates for iron and
steel processes in New York depend on the technology of the plant. 9 Limits on SO2
emissions for oil and gas producers in Texas are 25 tons/year per facility. 10 Standards

4
  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, §60.82.
5
  Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Section 1, §335.69.
6
  New York Environmental Conservation Rules and Regulations §209.2.
7
  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, §60.42.
8
  Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Section 1, §117.105 and §112.8.
9
  New York Environmental Conservation Rules and Regulations, §216.3.
10
   Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Section 1, §106.352.
                                                    -5-


per facility also apply in New York for petroleum refineries. 11 Finally, we note that
agricultural policies often limit the amount of nitrogen per hectare of land.

           We cannot incorporate all of these different types of mandates in a single model
with clear analytical results. We can, however, model a few types of mandates and
compare results, to see their differential impacts. For example, we model technology
mandates and per facility standards as limits on the amount of pollution per unit capital.
Our model can also be applied to other policies such as the limit on fertilizer per hectare,
by reinterpreting our input of "capital" as input of "land".

           The economics literature often uses a tax on pollution to summarize the effects of
all environmental policies. Some papers look at quotas or permits that restrict absolute
amounts of pollution. Yet actual policy rarely employs a pollution tax, and mandates
typically restrict emissions per unit output or per unit of an input. The few studies of
relative standards are focused on economic efficiency, not distributional effects. 12

           The most exhaustive theoretical analysis of different environmental mandates is in
Helfand (1991). Her model contains a single consumption good produced using a "dirty"
input that causes pollution and a "clean" one that abates pollution. The various mandates
considered are: a limit on emissions, a limit on output, an upper limit on the dirty input, a
lower limit on the clean input, and limits on the ratio of emissions to output or the ratio of
emissions to either input. By normalizing all of these standards so that they result in the
same abatement, she can compare their effects on output, each input, and firm profits.
She finds that the output restriction most reduces input and output levels. The restriction
on pollution itself yields the highest firm profits. In most cases, however, the signs of
these changes depend on the form of the production function. Some counterintuitive
results are reached as well. For instance, a standard per unit output may actually increase
total emissions; the same result may occur from a standard limiting total output. 13

11
     New York Environmental Conservation Rules and Regulations §223.3.
12
  Hochman and Zilberman (1978) model standards as limits on emissions per unit output or per unit input.
Harford and Karp (1983) compare the two policies and find that a standard per unit output is more efficient
than a standard per unit input. Similarly, Thomas (1980) compares the welfare costs of different policies.
Fullerton and Metcalf (2001) model a technology restriction as a limit per unit output. Fredriksson et al
(2004) model environmental policy as a limit on the energy-capital ratio, citing the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy Standards. None of these studies investigate distributional impacts.
13
  More recently, Jou (2004) compares quotas with emissions/output standards and finds that the former
leads to less pollution. Also, Goulder et al (1999) compare efficiency effects of environmental policies in
the presence of distortionary taxes. McKitrick (2001) solves for the efficiency costs of ratio standards.
Aidt and Dutta (2004) develop a political economy model and find that the increasing use of incentives
                                                      -6-


        While Helfand provides a number of valuable insights regarding the differences
among various mandates, she does not address incidence.14 In fact, her input supply
curves are horizontal, so no policy can affect factor prices. Furthermore, the two inputs
are a clean and dirty input. Even as these two input prices change, the implications are
unclear for returns to labor and capital. Here, we model production as using capital,
labor, and pollution. These inputs have endogenous prices, so we can capture the
differential effects of environmental standards on their relative returns. Which factors
gain or lose can have a large effect on what policies are chosen (Keohane et al 1998).

2. The Basic Model

        Our model is similar to that in Fullerton and Heutel (2007), where we analyze a
tax on emissions. For ease of exposition, we start here with the simplest version where
emissions, Z, have a price, pZ. This version is directly applicable to the first policy
below (tradable permits). We then explain changes necessary to model each mandate. In
this model, as in Harberger (1962), we assume a closed economy with many identical
firms, perfect competition, fixed factor supplies, perfect mobility, and no uncertainty.
We compare two equilibria rather than the transition period between them. 15

        One sector produces a clean good X, with price pX, in a constant returns to scale
(CRS) production function using labor and capital, X = X (KX, LX). Totally differentiate
this production function and the zero-profits condition, to get:

                                          Xˆ = θ XK Kˆ X + θ XL Lˆ X                                    (1)

                               pˆ X + Xˆ = θ XK ( rˆ + Kˆ X ) + θ XL ( wˆ + Lˆ X )                      (2)

where a hat over any variable represents a proportional change (e.g. Xˆ ≡ dX X ). Also,
w is the wage, r is the rate of return, and θXi is the share of production for factor i in
sector X (e.g., θXK ≡ rKX/XpX ). Then we use the definition of σX, the elasticity of
substitution in production between capital and labor to get:


follows from increasingly high environmental goals. See also Keohane et al (1998) for a similar model of
policy choice. Montero (2002) compares effects on R&D incentives, while Requate and Unold (2003)
compare incentives to adopt abatement technology. Bovenberg et al (2005) see how efficiency costs of
mandates and taxes are affected by a constraint to avoid adverse industry-distributional effects.
14
  Helfand and House (1995) empirically estimate the costs of different environmental policies for lettuce
growers in California’s Salinas Valley. They find that mandates reduce farm profits less than do taxes.
15
 Using a CGE model, Goulder and Summers (1989) analyze transitions due to imperfect factor mobility.
Adding imperfect mobility or adjustment costs can alter the equilibrium outcome, not just the transition.
                                                          -7-



                                            Kˆ X − Lˆ X = σ X ( wˆ − rˆ)                                          (3)

         The other sector produces a dirty good Y, with price pY, in a CRS production
function, Y = Y(KY, LY, Z). Here, we use input demand equations for each of the three
inputs based on all three input prices (r, w, and pZ). Differentiate the three input demand
equations and use the fact that only two of the three are independent to get: 16

                                      Kˆ Y = a KK rˆ + a KL wˆ + a KZ pˆ Z + Yˆ                                   (4)

                                      LˆY = a LK rˆ + a LL wˆ + a LZ pˆ Z + Yˆ                                    (5)

where aij is the elasticity of demand for factor i with respect to the price of factor j.
Allen (1938) shows that aij = θYieij, where eij is the Allen elasticity of substitution
between inputs i and j. For this sector, differentiation of production and of the zero-
profits condition yield:

                                        Yˆ = θ YK Kˆ Y + θ YL LˆY + θ YZ Zˆ .                                     (6)

                         pˆ Y + Yˆ = θ YK ( rˆ + Kˆ Y ) + θ YL ( wˆ + LˆY ) + θ YZ ( pˆ Z + Zˆ )                  (7)

The resource constraint for capital is KY + KY = K , where K is the fixed total capital
stock. Differentiation of that and the analogous labor constraint yields:

                                             Kˆ X λ KX + Kˆ Y λ KY = 0                                            (8)

                                              Lˆ X λ LX + LˆY λ LY = 0                                            (9)

where λij is sector j’s share of input i (e.g. λ KX ≡ K X K ). Finally, preferences are
modeled using the definition of σu, the elasticity of substitution in utility:

                                            Xˆ − Yˆ = σ u ( pˆ Y − pˆ X )                                    (10)

         The clean good is chosen as numeraire, so p̂ X is fixed at zero, and we have ten

equations for eleven unknown changes: Kˆ X , Kˆ Y , Lˆ X , LˆY , wˆ , rˆ, Xˆ , pˆ Y , Yˆ , pˆ Z , Zˆ . For each
policy below, we specify one more equation or exogenous policy change. For example,
an existing restriction on the number of permits implies an initial pZ >0. Then the
authorities can reduce the number of permits by a small amount (e.g., Ẑ = –0.01). The

16
  See Mieszkowski (1972) for an early use of this method. Stability conditions for the input demand
system are satisfied so long as the own price elasticities aii are negative, as assumed here.
                                                         -8-


system (1)-(10) can then be used to solve for the ten remaining unknowns, by successive
substitution. The steps are omitted but may be requested from the authors. Here, we
report only the solutions for r̂ , ŵ , p̂ Z , and p̂Y . The first three of these determine the
sources-side incidence of the policy, and the last determines the uses-side.

          Because X is produced with no excess profit using only labor and capital, and its
output price is fixed by assumption, r and w cannot both move in the same direction.
If r̂ = ŵ = 0 , the implication is not that factors bear no burdens. Rather, since pY may
rise, r̂ = wˆ = 0 means that labor and capital bear real burdens in proportion to their shares
of national income. Hence, a positive value for r̂ just means that capital bears a
burden that is proportionally less than that of labor.

3. Tradable Pollution Permits

          Results for permits illustrate a few properties of our basic model, to set the stage
for our main results regarding the incidence of relative standards. The permit policy
imposes costs by forcing firms to reduce emissions or to buy permits. The mandated
overall limit on pollution creates scarcity rents, however, and the distribution of those
rents must be considered as part of the incidence. 17 If the permits are grandfathered to
the firms, then their owners capture those scarcity rents. In addition to evaluating
changes in returns to capital and labor, our model solves for changes in permit-created
scarcity rents. All three of these price changes contribute to the sources-side incidence.

          The general solutions are presented in Table 1, where we assume the denominator
D is positive. 18 The factor price equations demonstrate effects first identified by
Mieszkowski (1967). The first term in the curly brackets, σu(γK – γL), is his "output
effect": the policy Zˆ < 0 raises the cost of production and thus reduces output in a way
that depends on consumer preferences σu. Then if Y is capital intensive, (γK – γL)>0, the
output effect reduces r and raises w. The other terms represent a "substitution effect"

17
  Parry (2004) uses a partial equilibrium model to calculate incidence, including the distribution of scarcity
rents created by emissions permits for carbon, SOX, and NOX.
18
  The denominator is likely to be positive, except in perverse cases that are not the subject of this paper. In
the case with equal factor intensities (γK = γL = γ), for example, a sufficient condition is that all of the Allen
cross-price elasticities are positive. In fact, that condition is stronger than necessary; D is positive unless
                              −σ X [θYZ σ u + (θ XLγ + θYL )eLZ + (θ XK γ + θYK )eKZ ] − Aθ XLθYK (GeKK + FeLL )
     "Condition 1":   eKL <                                                                                      .
                                                               Aθ XLθYK ( F + G )

The right side of this inequality must be negative, so Condition 1 says that eKL is even more negative.
Thus, D>0 does not require that K and L are substitutes, but only that they not be "too complementary".
                                                              -9-


involving the Allen elasticities. If capital is a better substitute for pollution than is labor
(eKZ > eLZ), then the restriction Zˆ < 0 is more likely to help capital.


                            Table 1: Incidence of Absolute Quantity Restriction

                        θ YZ θ XL
                 rˆ =               {σ u (γ K − γ L ) − e KZ γ K (1 + γ L ) + e LZ γ L (1 + γ K )}Zˆ ,
                             D

                        θ YZ θ XK
                wˆ =                {−σ u (γ K − γ L ) + e KZ γ K (1 + γ L ) − e LZ γ L (1 + γ K )}Zˆ ,
                             D

             1                                     σ                                         γ (1 + γ K ) ˆ
pˆ Z = F −1{( )(Gγ L (1 + γ K ) − Fγ K (1 + γ L ))( X (C + β L ) + θ YLθ XK (e KL − e KK )) − L          }Z
             D                                      A                                            A

                                                                          θ YZ
                        pˆ Y = {[Gγ L (1 + γ K ) − Fγ K (1 + γ L )][             (θ YK θ XL − θ YLθ XK )
                                                                           D
                            σ X (C + β L ) + Aθ YLθ XK (e KL − e KK )            θ YZ γ L (1 + γ K ) ˆ
                        +                                                  ]−                       }Z
                                                AFD                                     FA

                             λ LY LY                           λ KY K Y
        where: γ L ≡             =    > 0,           γK ≡          =    > 0,            β K ≡ θ XK γ K + θ YK > 0 ,
                             λ LX L X                          λ KX K X
             β L ≡ θ XLγ L + θ YL > 0 ,           A ≡ γ LβK +γ K βL > 0,              C ≡ β K θ YL − β Lθ YK ,
                  γ L (1 − θ YK ) − γ K θ YL                              γ K (1 − θ YL ) − γ Lθ YK
        F ≡ σu(                                  ) + e KZ ,     G ≡ σu(                               ) + e LZ , and
                                    A                                                  A
       D ≡ σ u [θ YK θ XL − θ YLθ XK ][G ( A − γ L (1 + γ K )) − F ( A − γ K (1 + γ L ))]
       + σ X [G (C + β L ) + F ( β K − C )] + Aθ XLθ YK [ Fe KL − Ge KK ] − Aθ YLθ XK [ Fe LL − Ge KL ]


        Next, in Table 1, the expression for p̂Z seems quite complicated, but the final
term inside the curly brackets, γL(1+γK )/A, is unambiguously positive and could be
called a "direct effect": it reflects a downward-sloping demand for emissions permits, so
the leftward shift of the vertical supply curve tends to raise the equilibrium permit price.
Then the long first term could be called the "indirect effect," but it need not be positive.
If it is sufficiently negative, then a decrease in the total permit allocation may actually
decrease the permit price. The conditions under which this counterintuitive effect occurs
are quite cumbersome and difficult to interpret, and hence they are not presented here.
                                                        -10-


Yet the effect is analogous to previous findings that an increase in the pollution tax can
lead to an increase in emissions. 19

         Yet, unlike the incidence on labor and capital owners, the incidence on permit
holders is not determined solely by the change in their factor price. Labor and capital are
in fixed total supply and earn net returns determined by w and r, but the supply of
permits has just been restricted by the policy ( Ẑ < 0). The total return to permit holders
is pZ·Z, and the proportional change in this product is pˆ Z + Zˆ . Even if the policy raises
the price pZ, then permit holders are still not necessarily better off.

        Furthermore, even the uses-side incidence result ( p̂Y ) is ambiguous. The final
term in the curly brackets is a "direct effect" on the cost of production, indicating that a
decrease in the number of permits tends to increase the price of the dirty good. However,
the long previous term is an "indirect effect" that cannot be signed. It allows for another
counterintuitive result: reducing the number of emissions permits may hurt consumers of
the clean good more than consumers of the dirty good. To see if these ambiguities can be
resolved, we next look at two special cases: equal factor intensities (to isolate the
substitution effect), and no substitution in the dirty sector (to see the output effect).

3.1 Equal Factor Intensities

        Suppose that γL and γK are equal to each other, and let their common value be
γ. Note that this condition implies LY/LX = KY/KX. The output effect then disappears,
and the substitution effect simplifies. Unfortunately, this special case does little to
simplify the long expressions for p̂Z and p̂Y , but for factor prices we have:

                                          θ YZ θ XL
                                 rˆ = −               γ (1 + γ )(e KZ − e LZ ) Zˆ
                                             D

                                         θ YZ θ XK
                                  wˆ =                γ (1 + γ )(e KZ − e LZ ) Zˆ
                                            D

The denominator in the general solution reduces a bit, but D>0 still requires Condition 1
above. If so, we reach a definitive conclusion about the effect of the regulation on r and


19
  See DeMooij and Bovenberg (1998) or Fullerton and Heutel (2007). This example is comparable to the
"Edgeworth Taxation Paradox" studied in Hotelling (1932), where the imposition of a tax on a good can
reduce its price to consumers and increase their purchases. Though Hotelling's model is not perfectly
analogous to the one here, his inequalities (25) and (26) present conditions when the paradox holds; they
similarly involve cross-price demand elasticities.
                                                  -11-


w. When emissions must be reduced, the dirty sector wants to substitute into both labor
and capital, but if labor is a better substitute for pollution (eLZ > eKZ), then labor is hurt
relatively less (i.e. rˆ < 0 and wˆ > 0 ).

3.2 No Substitution in Dirty Sector

        We now let the factor intensities of the two sectors differ, but we assume the dirty
sector cannot substitute among its inputs (eij = 0 for all i, j). While this assumption is
clearly restrictive, it allows us to isolate the impact of factor intensities. The denominator
D then simplifies to θYZσXσu, and the substitution effects in r̂ and wˆ disappear.
Again p̂Z and p̂Y are not much simplified, but the changes in factor prices become:

                                              θ XL
                                       rˆ =        (γ K − γ L ) Zˆ
                                              σX

                                               θ XK
                                     wˆ = −         (γ K − γ L ) Zˆ
                                               σX

Here, the denominator is always positive. The sources side incidence includes only an
output effect, determined by the sign of γK – γL. If the dirty sector is capital-intensive,
this term is positive. Since Zˆ < 0 , the rental rate falls and the wage rises. The
magnitude of this effect is mediated by σX: if the clean industry can easily substitute
between capital and labor, then these effects on input prices become smaller, since the
clean sector can more easily accommodate the additional labor or capital.

4. Command and Control Restrictions on Firm-Specific Pollution Quantities

        We started with tradable pollution permits above, because the permit market is
easy to comprehend with a vertical supply, a downward-sloping demand, and many
identical firms that each can buy as many permits as desired at the equilibrium market
price pZ. Then all firms in the dirty industry have symmetric demands for the three
inputs (K, L, Z) based on the three input prices (r, w, pZ).

        We next consider briefly the case where each firm faces a restriction on its use of
Z. Pollution has no market clearing price pZ, but each firm with a restriction on Z can
be said to face a shadow price pZ. Each firm gets an allocation of permits that are not
tradable. In our model with many identical firms, however, the firms cannot gain from
trade. With constant returns to scale, each firm’s labor and capital can adjust to its
                                                   -12-


allocation of nontradable permits in a way that is equivalent to the transfer of permits to
some other firm using that same labor and capital. In other words, firm-specific
restrictions on pollution levels in this model yield the same results as we just derived for
tradable permits. Equations above can be used for effects on total dirty-industry use of
labor and capital and for consequent economy-wide returns to labor and capital.

5. “Performance Standard”: Emissions per unit Output

       An alternative form of environmental policy is to limit the ratio of emissions to
output, a policy we call a "performance standard". With heterogeneous firm sizes, at
least some consideration of this ratio seems necessary for a plausible policy. A large
producer cannot reasonably be expected to achieve the same limit on emissions as a small
firm. Considerations like these are also taken into account in other policies, such as a
fixed number of tradable permits that are initially allocated according to market share. If
firm-specific emission limits are tied to the firm’s output level, even implicitly, then the
policy may have no absolute limit on total emissions. Instead, total emissions vary with
total output in a way that affects incentives and prices.

       This model uses the same production functions as the previous model. Behavior
in the clean sector is unchanged, with equations (1), (2), and (3). Total capital and labor
are still fixed by equations (8) and (9), and consumer preferences are unchanged in (10).
The only changes involve incentives facing firms in the dirty sector. Their behavior is:

                             max          pY Y ( KY , LY , Z ) − rKY − wLY
                            KY , LY , Z



subject to the constraint Z Y ≤ δ . The firms pay no explicit price for the input Z.
Instead, their use of that input is limited by their output. The constraint must bind, since
the production function is monotone increasing in all inputs. Solving the firms' first order
                                                      pY YK            p Y
conditions and rearranging terms yields r =                   and w = Y L , where subscripts
                                                     1 − δ YZ        1 − δ YZ
on Y denote marginal products. The firm does not set the marginal value of an input
equal to the input price, as it would without the performance standard, because of the
denominator in these two equations. This denominator is less than one, so the marginal
value of the factor is set lower than its input price. In other words, the firm wants to
proceed further down its factor demand curves, using more labor and capital in order to
increase output and qualify for an increase in valuable emission rights.
                                                       -13-


         Tighter regulation means a decrease in δ. Totally differentiating the production
function yields an equation analogous to (6) in the previous model:

                               Yˆ = θ YK (1 − ν ) Kˆ Y + θ YL (1 − ν ) LˆY + νZˆ ,                       (6')

where ν ≡ δYZ = YZZ/Y. In the prior model with (6), an increase in a factor would raise
output in proportion to its factor share. Now, since the marginal product of each factor is
reduced by (1 – ν), its marginal contribution to output is reduced by (1 – ν). An
increase in emissions Z raises output in proportion to ν = δYZ, to reflect its marginal
product YZ and its factor share δ = Z/Y. Emission rights are valuable, of course, but
firms do not pay for them through an explicit price. Instead, they pay for emission rights
by paying factors more than their marginal products.

         The assumptions of perfect competition and free entry/exit lead to a zero profit
condition in the previous model. This condition remains under the policy specified here,
though it takes a different form. Since costs no longer include the price of emission
permits, the final term in equation (7) is dropped. The zero profit condition thus implies

                                 pˆ Y + Yˆ = θ YK (rˆ + Kˆ Y ) + θ YL ( wˆ + LˆY ) .                     (7')

The constraint may impose a “shadow price” on the factor Z, but since no explicit price
is paid for that input, it is not included in the profits equation. 20

         Finally, we must replace equations (4) and (5) with their counterparts under the
new policy. Input demand equations can no longer be functions of output and three
explicit input prices (r, w, pZ). Instead, we write input demand equations as functions
of r, w, δ, and Y. Then totally differentiate these equations to get:

                                     Kˆ Y = bKK rˆ + bKL wˆ + bKZ δˆ + Yˆ

                                      LˆY = bLK rˆ + bLL wˆ + bLZ δˆ + Yˆ

                                      Zˆ = bZK rˆ + bZL wˆ + bZZ δˆ + Yˆ .

Notice that the bij appear in a form similar to the aij parameters in (4) and (5). They both
represent input demand elasticities. For example, either aKL or bKL is the percent change
in capital for a one percent change in the wage. However, aKL is that response in the

20
  This alters the dynamic of firm entry and exit, but since our concern is general equilibrium effects and
not the transition periods leading up to them, it does not affect our results.
                                                     -14-


first model holding pZ and Y constant (so Z can change), while bKL is that response in
the model holding δ and Y constant (so Z = δY cannot change). 21

         The third equation giving the input demand for Z can be simplified greatly. We
know that the constraint binds, so Z = δY. Then total differentiation yields:

                                                 Zˆ = δˆ + Yˆ ,                                            (5')

which implies that bZK = bZL = 0, and bZZ = 1. Since only two of the three equations are
independent, we subtract the second equation from the first and get

                                       Kˆ Y − LˆY = br rˆ + bw wˆ + bδ δˆ ,                                (4')

where br ≡ bKK – bLK, bw ≡ bKL – bLL, and bδ ≡ bKZ – bLZ. In Appendix A1, we derive
expressions for the bij elasticities in terms of eij and other parameters. Both bKK and
bLL are negative, since increasing the price of a factor decreases its demand, even with
the constraint on δ=Z/Y. The Appendix also shows that the cross-price bij are positive
(i,j = K,L), whether or not capital and labor are substitutes as defined by the sign of the
Allen cross-price elasticity. 22 Thus, in (4'), a higher wage increases the capital/labor ratio
(bw > 0), and higher price of capital reduces it (br < 0). In fact, the Appendix shows that
br = –bw. Finally, it shows that bδ ≡ bKZ – bLZ has the opposite sign of eKZ – eLZ. A
tighter regulation means δ is decreased, and less pollution is allowed per unit output. If
capital is a better substitute for pollution than is labor, that is, if eKZ > eLZ, then more
capital must be used relative to labor (bKZ < bLZ , and hence bδ is negative).

         For this model we now have ten equations: (1), (2), (3), (4'), (5'), (6'), (7'), (8), (9),
and (10). As before, we set pˆ X = 0 and solve for the changes in returns to capital and
labor attributable to a small change in the policy variable (δ). The solutions are presented
in Table 2. Compared to the general solutions in Table 1, these equations are not as
complicated. First, the denominator D is positive-definite. Second, expressions for r̂
and ŵ can be decomposed into three terms, each corresponding to a single effect. The


21
  The bij elasticities (and the cij elasticities from the following section) are conceptually similar to the
direct and indirect substitution effects of Ogaki (1990).
22
  Why is complementarity ruled out in this case? The Allen elasticities are defined for the input demand
functions where all inputs are allowed to vary. Raising the price of labor w may then decrease the demand
for capital, if the two inputs are complements, but the firm would be forced to increase its other input,
pollution. Here, however, the third input demand equation ( Zˆ = δˆ + Yˆ ) indicates that a change in w,
with no change in δ or Y, cannot change Z. Only labor and capital can vary, so they must be substitutes.
                                                           -15-


last term is the "substitution effect", since it involves bδ ≡ bKZ – bLZ (which has the
opposite sign of eKZ – eLZ). A reduction in δ=Z/Y raises r if capital is better than labor
as a substitute for emissions (eKZ > eLZ). The second term is the "output effect" including
σu(γK – γL). This effect hurts capital if Y is capital intensive. Here, however, the first
term is a new effect we call an "output-subsidy effect": since the policy mandates a lower
ratio of pollution to output, it can be satisfied partially by increasing output – which helps
the factor used intensively. 23


                    Table 2: Performance Standard (Restriction on Z/Y)

                                θ XLν                    θ XLνσ u                    θ XLη
                      rˆ = [−           (γ K − γ L ) +              (γ K − γ L ) +           bδ ]δˆ
                                  D                          D                         D

                               θ XKν                     θ XKνσ u                    θ XKη
                      wˆ = [            (γ K − γ L ) −              (γ K − γ L ) −           bδ ]δˆ
                                 D                          D                         D

                           1                                                               ν ˆ
                pˆ Y = {     (θ YK θ XL − θ YLθ XK )(−ν (1 − σ u )(γ K − γ L ) + ηbδ ) −      }δ
                           D                                                             1 −ν

                              where η ≡ (θ YK γ L + θ YLγ K + 1)(1 − ν ) > 0 and

           D ≡ (1 −ν )σ u (θYKθ XL − θYLθ XK )(γ K − γ L ) + η[bw + σ X (θ XLγ L + θ XK γ K )] > 0



         Note that the first two terms have opposite signs and differ only by the appearance
of σu in the output effect. Thus, the usual output effect dominates only when σu >1,
which raises an important question about the likely size of σu. This parameter has never
been estimated for this particular aggregation, where the "dirty good" could represent a
composite of gasoline, heating fuel, electricity, and all goods that make intensive use of
fossil fuels. Yet all of these goods are usually found to have relatively low demand
elasticities, which would imply that σu is less than one. If so, then the new "output
subsidy effect" found here dominates the usual output effect, and tighter environmental
policy places less burden on the factor that is used intensively in the dirty sector.

23
  In fact, the restriction on Z/Y could be modeled as a combination of a tax on emissions plus subsidy to
output, which might be more consistent with the usual studies of incentive policies. We choose to model
mandates directly as quantity constraints, however, for several reasons. First, they are quantity constraints.
Second, these mandates do not raise revenue, so the equivalent incentive policy combination would require
a complicated calculation of the endogenous output subsidy rate necessary to return all revenue from the
emissions tax. Third, we want specifically to see what insights can be obtained by tackling the problem of
quantity constraints in a way that is different from the usual model of incentive policies.
                                                        -16-


           For three reasons, this paper omits a section to assign numerical parameter values.
First, Fullerton and Heutel (2007) already provide plausible parameter values that readers
can insert into formulas here. 24 Second, however, parameter values are unnecessary.
The relative impact of these two effects depends entirely on the size of σu, which is
plausibly less than one. Third, numerical values would sidetrack readers from our main
point, which is purely conceptual. We have identified a new effect that likely reverses
the usual output effect, and it indicates the importance of further research to estimate σu.

           In the equation for p̂Y in Table 2, the last term is a "direct effect" that raises the
price of the dirty good. Again, however, the "indirect effect" is ambiguous. It is
complicated by the fact that producers have incentive to sell more of this good, to qualify
for more pollution rights. In this case, the ambiguity can be resolved in special cases.

5.1 Equal Factor Intensities

           Since the output effect and output-subsidy effect operate through differential
factor intensities, the assumption γK = γL = γ makes them both disappear. Then only the
third term for the substitution effect remains in r̂ and ŵ . The solutions reduce to:

                                                        θ XLγbδ ˆ
                                                rˆ =             δ
                                                       σ X + γbw

                                                       − θ XK γbδ ˆ
                                                wˆ =              δ
                                                       σ X + γbw

                                                           −ν ˆ
                                                 pˆ Y =        δ.
                                                          1 −ν

           In this case, the factor that is a relative substitute for pollution is burdened less by
a strengthening of environmental policy ( δˆ < 0 ). If labor is the better substitute for
pollution (bδ > 0), then the wage rises and the return to capital falls. 25 This case also
provides unambiguous results for incidence on the uses side of income. Only the "direct
effect" remains in the expression for p̂Y . A tightening of environmental policy increases
the price of the dirty good, hurting those who buy more than average amounts of it.


24
  For example, industries that pollute more tend to be capital-intensive (Antweiler et. al. 2001, p. 879).
Also, some estimates of production functions suggest that capital may be a better substitute for pollution
than is labor (DeMooij and Bovenberg 1998, Considine and Larson 2006).
25
     This simple intuition could fail in the permits case, but here the denominator cannot be negative.
                                                           -17-


5.2 No Substitution Effect in Dirty Sector

              As we did with the previous policy, we can isolate the effect of factor intensities
by assuming away differential substitution. Before, we set all aij to zero, but here we set
only bδ to zero. 26 Hence, the substitution effect is eliminated. Then solutions reduce to:

                                                 1
                                        rˆ = −     θ XLν (1 − σ u )(γ K − γ L )δˆ
                                                 D

                                                 1
                                         wˆ =      θ XKν (1 − σ u )(γ K − γ L )δˆ
                                                 D

                                                                                    1   ν ˆ
                         pˆ Y = [−(θ YK θ XL − θ YLθ XK )ν (1 − σ u )(γ K − γ L )     −    ]δ ,
                                                                                    D 1 −ν

where D ≡ (1 − ν )σ u (θ XL θ YK − θ YL θ XK )(γ K − γ K ) + ησ X (θ XL γ L + θ XK γ K ) > 0 .

              In the first two expressions, we combine the "output effect" and the "output-
subsidy effect" from Table 2. If the dirty sector is capital intensive, so that (γK – γL) > 0,
then capital is hurt more than labor only if σu is greater than one. This special case does
not remove the ambiguity in p̂Y however.


               Table 3: The Sign of Each Effect on the Rate of Return to Capital a
          Type of              Substitution             Output        Output-Subsidy       Capital-Subsidy
         Restriction             Effect                 Effect            Effect               Effect
        Quantity Z               eKZ – eLZ             (γL – γK)

         Ratio Z/Y               eKZ – eLZ             (γL – γK)          (γK – γL)

        Ratio Z/KY               eKZ – eLZ             (γL – γK)          (γK – γL)           eKL – eKK
         a
             The effect on the wage rate always has the opposite sign.



              All of the effects in this paper are summarized in Table 3. For the policy in each
row, the sign of the term in each cell indicates the sign of that column's effect on the rate
of return to capital, r. Because all of these policies restrict Z in some fashion, the
substitution effect in the first column always raises r if capital is better than labor as a
substitute for emissions (eKZ > eLZ). The output effect always raises r if the impacted
sector is labor intensive (γL > γK). Those two effects follow Harberger (1962) and

26
     We cannot set all bij elasticities to zero, since Appendix A1 shows that some of them are of definite sign.
                                                   -18-


Mieszkowski (1967), and they still pertain to all mandates here. Yet this section has
analyzed a restriction in emissions per unit of output (Z/Y) and found an "output-subsidy
effect". It raises r if the impacted sector is capital intensive. The next section analyzes
a restriction of emissions per unit of capital (Z/KY), and it identifies another new effect.

6. “Technology Mandate”: Emissions per unit Input

       Whereas the previous section examines a limit on emissions per unit output, we
now examine a regulation that limits emissions per unit of an input. Such limits are
common, as described in our first section above. We have only two clean inputs in our
model, so we capture the nature of a limit on emissions per unit input by modeling a limit
on emissions per unit of capital. We refer to this policy as a "technology mandate", since
forcing the adoption of a particular technology in production may effectively fix the
emissions/capital ratio. Capital and labor are each in fixed supply and mobile between
sectors, so they are perfectly symmetric in this model. Thus, the results for a limit per
unit labor can be obtained directly from results below by interchanging every K and L
(as well as every w and r).

       As with other policies considered earlier, the equations that describe the behavior
of consumers and of producers of the clean good do not change here. Equations (1), (2),
(3), (8), (9), and (10) fall into this category and are applicable to this section. The only
aspect of the model that requires revision is the behavior of producers of the dirty good.
Consider their maximization problem. As in the previous policy considered, firms pay no
explicit price for the pollution input. Instead, they face an exogenous ceiling on their
ratio of emissions to capital. Formally, this problem is

                              max         pY Y ( KY , LY , Z ) − rKY − wLY
                            KY , LY , Z


subject to the constraint Z/KY ≤ ζ. A tightening of environmental policy is defined as a
decrease in ζ. It is clear that the policy constraint binds: since firms pay no price per unit
of pollution, and this input is productive, they will employ as much of it as possible, an
amount Z = ζKY. Thus, we use below the fact that ∂Z/∂KY = ζ. The first order
conditions for the maximization problem are

                                           r = pY(YK + ζYZ)

                                               w = pYYL.
       The second of these equations is identical to the first order condition in the
                                                 -19-


original problem where firms face a price for all three inputs and no other constraint: the
marginal value of labor is equal to the wage. The first equation differs from the standard
condition. For the choice of capital input demanded, the marginal value of capital YK is
lower than the rental rate (since ζYZ is positive). The intuition here is that each unit of
capital employed gives value to the firm in two ways. First, it increases their output
directly (since YK > 0). Second, it allows more pollution, which also increases output.
The second term represents this effect, since YZ is the marginal product of pollution and
ζ = ∂Z/∂KY is the pollution increase made possible by the increased capital. The value of
investing in a marginal unit of capital is composed of these two terms and at the optimum
is set equal to the cost of that investment, the rental rate r.

        Totally differentiate the production function and substitute in these first order
conditions. After dividing through by Y, we have:

                                Yˆ = (θ YK − ν ) Kˆ Y + θ YL LˆY + νZˆ                       (6'')

The constant ν is still equal to YZ·Z/Y, as in the previous section. Also, as before, an
increase in any one input does not generally increase output by a proportion equal to its
factor share. This condition does hold for labor in (6''), since that input choice is not
distorted, but the constraint does distort the choice of capital. Yet, from (6''), we see that
a one percent increase in all three inputs yields a one percent increase in output, from the
assumption of constant returns to scale. The zero profit condition still holds as well, even
though firms do not pay for pollution, because entry and exit are still allowed. Thus
equation (7') from the prior model also applies to this one.

        Finally, the dirty sector’s chosen amount of each input (KY, LY, and Z) depends on
input prices, the policy parameter, and output (r, w, ζ, and Y). We totally differentiate
these input demand equations to get:

                                 Kˆ Y = c KK rˆ + c KL wˆ + c KZ ζˆ + Yˆ

                                 LˆY = c LK rˆ + c LL wˆ + c LZ ζˆ + Yˆ

                                 Zˆ = cZK rˆ + cZL wˆ + cZZ ζˆ + Yˆ .

The elasticity of demand for input i with respect to price j is defined here as cij (but
this response depends on the nature of the constraint, so the cij elasticities are not the
same as the aij or bij elasticities). Only two of these equations are independent of each
                                                    -20-


other, so we subtract each of the bottom two equations from the top one to get two
equations to use in our solution. The first of these equations is

                                      Kˆ Y − LˆY = cr rˆ + cw wˆ + cζ ζˆ ,                              (4'')

where cr ≡ cKK – cLK, cw ≡ cKL – cLL, and cζ ≡ cKZ – cLZ. The second resulting equation
can be simplified using the policy constraint Z/KY = ζ , since total differentiation gives:

                                              Kˆ Y − Zˆ = −ζˆ .                                         (5'')

Substituting this into the equations above implies that cKK – cZK = 0, cKL – cZL = 0, and
cKZ – cZZ = –1. These relationships are verified in Appendix A2.

         Also in that Appendix, we evaluate the elasticities of input demand. An important
condition for their signs relates to the relative complementarity of capital and pollution:

                               "Condition 2":         eKZ > (eKK + eZZ)/2.

The right hand side of this inequality must be negative, since all own-price elasticities are
negative. This condition always holds, then, when capital and pollution are substitutes
(eKZ > 0). It also holds when capital and pollution are not "too complementary". With
this condition, the Appendix shows that cr < 0 and cw > 0. That is, an increase in the
capital rental rate must reduce the ratio KY/LY demanded, and an increase in the wage
must increase it. The ratio of Z to KY is fixed, and so producers really have only two
inputs between which they can substitute; once they choose KY and LY, then Z is given
by the constraint. With only two inputs KY and LY, they must be substitutes. 27

         The system of equations containing (1), (2), (3), (4''), (5''), (6"), (7'), (8), (9), and
(10) are ten equations in ten unknowns. In Table 4, these equations are solved for the
proportional change in each price from an exogenous change in ζ. When Condition 2
holds, the denominator D must be positive.

         These equations are strikingly similar to their counterparts for the previous policy.
As before, the second term in either factor price equation is an "output effect": this policy
impinges on the dirty sector, which tends to raise the output price and discourage

27
   If condition 2 fails, then eKZ < (eKK + eZZ)/2 < 0, so cr > 0 and cw < 0. Counterintuitively, an increase
in r/w then raises the desired KY/LY ratio. Because capital and pollution are highly complementary, the
increase in r makes firms want less K and less Z. Wanting less Z reduces the pressure of the constraint
(Z/KY ≤ ζ), which reduces the shadow price on Z (i.e., the right to emit is not so valuable). The reduced
shadow price on Z by itself would mean more demand for Z and more KY, since they are complements.
If they are sufficiently complementary, then the result is a net increase in capital relative to labor.
                                                         -21-


purchases. By itself, this effect would hurt capital if the sector is capital intensive. Again
the first term is an "output-subsidy effect" with the opposite sign. Again it is larger than
the output effect if σu < 1. In the prior case, however, the output-subsidy effect arises
because the mandate to reduce Z/Y provides an implicit subsidy to output. Why is
output subsidized here? As we show in a moment, this mandate to reduce Z/KY provides
an implicit subsidy to the use of capital KY, but this subsidy itself also reduces the cost
of production, and it therefore also has an output-subsidy effect in the first term.


                   Table 4: Technology Mandate (Restriction on Z/KY)

                              θ XLν                    θ XLνσ u                    θ XLπ
                    rˆ = [−           (γ K − γ L ) +              (γ K − γ L ) +            cζ ]ζˆ
                                D                         D                          D

                             θ XKν                     θ XKνσ u                    θ XK π
                    wˆ = [            (γ K − γ L ) −              (γ K − γ L ) −            cζ ]ζˆ
                               D                          D                          D

                          1
               pˆ Y = {     (θ YK θ XL − θ YLθ XK )(−ν (1 − σ u )(γ K − γ L ) + πcζ ) − ν }ζˆ
                          D

                          where π = γ L (1 + γ K ) + θ YL (γ K − γ L ) > 0 , and

       D ≡ σ u (θYKθ XL − θYLθ XK )(γ K − γ L ) − π (θ XLcr − θ XK cw ) + σ X (θ XK γ K + θ XLγ L + 1)



       The third term in these factor price equations depends on cζ, which Appendix A2
shows can itself be subdivided. In particular, it shows that cζ can be written as:

                                cζ = M + H (e LZ − e KZ ) + H (e KK − e KL )

where M and H are both defined in the Appendix and are both positive under Condition
2. In this expression, the last term is the promised "capital-subsidy effect": it includes
eKK, which is always negative, so the policy ( ζˆ < 0) has a positive effect on the use of
capital and its return r. It also includes –eKL, which operates in the same direction if
labor and capital are substitutes (eKL>0). The extent to which dirty firms can substitute
away from labor and into capital helps drive up demand for K, and thus the return r.
As shown in Table 3, the capital-subsidy effect raises r if (eKK − eKL ) < 0.

       The second term in the cζ expression represents the usual "substitution effect":
the mandate to reduce the ratio ζ can also be satisfied partly by reducing Z in the
                                                       -22-


numerator, which means substituting from Z into other inputs (K or L). If labor is a
better substitute for pollution than is capital (eLZ > eKZ), then this policy induces more
demand for labor than capital from the substitution effect. Then this term is positive, so
multiplication by ζˆ <0 means that it decreases r and increases w.

           In summary, the forced reduction in Z/KY can be satisfied partly by reducing
emissions in the numerator (the substitution effect) but also partly by increasing capital in
the denominator (the capital-subsidy effect). This implicit subsidy itself reduces the cost
of production (the output-subsidy effect), which offsets the usual way in which
regulations raise costs (the output effect). All four effects appear in Table 3.

6.1 Equal Factor Intensities

           The assumption γK = γL = γ eliminates the two output effects in Table 4. The
factor price equations do not need to be repeated here, as they then contain only the third
term with cζ (including both the substitution effect and the capital-subsidy effect).
However, the output price equation reduces to:

                                                    pˆ Y = −νζˆ .

           On the uses side, incidence is unambiguous. A tighter environmental policy must
increase the price of the dirty good relative to the price of the clean good – due to the
direct effect of the policy on the cost of production in the Y sector only.

6.2 No Substitution Effect in Dirty Sector

           Here we assume that cr = cw = cζ = 0, which is not quite as strong as saying that
the dirty sector cannot substitute at all. 28 Instead, this assumption eliminates the capital-
subsidy effect and the substitution effect. The remaining factor price equations are
straight from Table 4, but without the last term (cζ). Thus, they still include the output
effect, and the output-subsidy effect.

           The output price equation also looks much like the one in Table 4, but without the
cζ term. The last term (–ν) is definitely negative, so this "direct effect" raises the cost of
production and thus raises the breakeven price pY. The long first term is an indirect
effect. Since γK – γL has the same sign as (θYKθXL – θYLθXK), this term has the opposite
sign of (1 – σu). When σu is smaller than one, then a tighter mandate must increase the

28
     In fact, all cij cannot be zero, since we showed earlier that cKZ – cZZ = –1.
                                                    -23-


price of good Y. When σu is large, however, the indirect effect can dominate the direct
effect, so that a tighter mandate decreases the price of the dirty good. 29

7. Conclusion

         Just like taxes, regulations that restrict emissions affect producer decisions about
use of labor and capital, and they thus affect relative factor prices, total production, and
output prices. Existing models analyze the distribution of burdens from taxes, but this
paper points out that non-revenue raising restrictions also have burdens on the sources
side of income through changes in factor prices as well as burdens on the uses side
through changes in output prices. Our model is based on the standard two-sector tax
incidence model, but with two important modifications. First, we allow one sector to
include pollution as a factor of production that can be a complement or substitute for
labor or for capital. Second, we look not at taxes but at four types of mandates.

         The model in this paper can be applied beyond environmental policy to analyze
any regulation that restricts use of inputs. Alternatively, the model could be extended in
any of the many ways that the Harberger model has been extended, for example to
consider increasing returns to scale, imperfect competition, international trade, or capital
mobility. Future research could consider capital formation, endogenous technology, and
uncertainty. Also important is the interaction of environmental mandates with other
types of regulation, especially in the highly regulated electric utility sector.

         With any of those extensions, the model would become more complicated, and
the price change equations might have more terms. But the effects we have uncovered
here would still pertain. With no existing research on this topic at all, we believe that this
simple model is the right place to begin. And even in this simple model, we get some
interesting results. First, a mandate may hurt consumers of the clean good more than
consumers of the dirty good. Second, we show how a mandate may burden either the
factor that is a better substitute for pollution or the factor that is a relative complement to
pollution. Third, restrictions on the absolute level of emissions differ from restrictions on
emissions per unit output or per unit of an input. A restriction on pollution per unit of
output has not only an "output effect" that burdens any factor used intensively in

29
  In the p̂Y equation, for a large indirect effect, suppose σu and (γK – γL) are large. The sector is highly
capital intensive. The output effect dominates the output-subsidy effect, so the tighter mandate means less
demand for capital. Thus r falls. As seen in the r̂ equation, large σu and (γK – γL) mean r falls a lot.
The dirty sector is highly capital intensive, so its cost of production and pY fall.
                                             -24-


production, but also an "output-subsidy effect" that encourages output to help satisfy the
mandated ratio. Similarly, a restriction on pollution per unit capital creates a "capital-
subsidy effect" that increases demand for capital and thus raises the rental rate.

       An implication is that researchers need to be careful about the nature of an
environmental restriction before concluding that it injures the factor used intensively or
the factor that is a better substitute for pollution. Those usual effects can be completely
offset by other effects we identify in this paper.
                                          -25-


References

Aidt, Toke Skovsgaard and Jayasri Dutta, “Transitional Politics: Emerging Incentive-
       Based Instruments in Environmental Regulation,” Journal of Environmental
       Economics and Management, Vol. 47, No. 3 (May 2004), 458-479.
Allen, R.G.D., Mathematical Analysis for Economists, St. Martin’s, New York (1938).
Antweiler, Werner, Brian Copeland and M. Scott Taylor, "Is Free Trade Good for the
      Environment?" American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4 (September 2001),
      877-908.
Becker, Randy A., “Pollution Abatement Expenditure by U.S. Manufacturing Plants: Do
       Community Characteristics Matter?”, Contributions to Economic Analysis &
       Policy, Vol. 3, No. 2 (2004).
Bohringer, Christoph and Andreas Lange, "On the Design of Optimal Grandfathering
      Schemes for Emission Allowances," European Economic Review, Vol. 49, No. 8
      (November 2005), 2041-2055.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Lawrence H. Goulder, “Costs of Environmentally Motivated
      Taxes in the Presence of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses,” National
      Tax Journal, Vol. 50, No. 1 (March 1997), 59-87.
________, ________, and Derek Gurney, “Efficiency Costs of Meeting Industry-
      Distributional Constraints under Environmental Permits and Taxes,” RAND
      Journal of Economics, Vol. 34, No. 4 (Winter 2005), 951-971.
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, Ranjit Bharvirkar, and Anthony Paul, "The Effect of
       Allowance Allocation on the Cost of Carbon Emission Trading," Resources for
       the Future Discussion Paper 01-30 (August 2001).
Chua, Swee. “Does Tighter Environmental Policy Lead to a Comparative Advantage in
       Less Polluting Goods?”, Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 55, No. 1 (January 2003),
       25-35.
Code of Federal Regulations, “Title 40: Protection of Environment”, available at
      http://www.epa.gov/epahome/cfr40.htm.
Considine, Timothy and Donald Larson, "The Environment as a Factor of Production,"
       Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 52, No. 3
       (November 2006), 645-662.
Das, Monica and Sandwip K. Das, "Can Stricter Environmental Regulations Increase
      Export of the Polluting Good?," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,
      Vol. 7, No. 1 (Topics), Article 26 (2007).
DeMooij, Ruud A., and A. Lans Bovenberg, “Environmental Taxes, International Capital
     Mobility and Inefficient Tax Systems: Tax Burden vs. Tax Shifting,”
     International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 5, No. 1 (February 1998), 7-39.
Fischer, Carolyn and Alan Fox, "Output-Based Allocations of Emissions Permits:
       Efficiency and Distributional Effects in a General Equilibrium Setting with Taxes
       and Trade," Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 04-37 (December 2004).
                                         -26-


Fredriksson, Per, Herman Vollebergh and Elbert Dijkgraaf, “Corruption and Energy
       Efficiency in OECD Countries: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Environmental
       Economics and Management, Vol. 47, No. 2 (March 2004), 207-231.
Fullerton, Don and Garth Heutel, “The General Equilibrium Incidence of Environmental
        Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 91, No. 3-4 (April 2007), 571-591.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert Metcalf, “Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and Pre-
        existing Distortions,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 80 (2001), 249-267.
Gianessi, Leonard and Henry Peskin, "The Distribution of the Costs of Federal Water
       Pollution Control Policy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 56, No. 1
       (February 1980), 85-102.
Goulder, Lawrence, Ian Parry, and Dallas Burtraw, “Revenue-Raising Versus Other
      Approaches to Environmental Protection: The Critical Significance of Preexisting
      Tax Distortions,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 28, No. 4 (Winter 1997),
      708-731.
Goulder, Lawrence, Ian Parry, Roberton Williams, and Dallas Burtraw, “The Cost-
      Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a
      Second-Best Setting,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 72, No. 3 (June 1999),
      329-360.
Goulder, Lawrence and Lawrence Summers, "Tax Policy, Asset Prices, and Growth: A
      General Equilibrium Analysis," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 38, No. 3
      (April 1989), 265-296.
Harberger, A.C., “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,” Journal of Political
      Economy, Vol. 70, No. 3 (June 1962), 215-240.
Harford, John D. and Gordon Karp, “The Effects and Efficiencies of Different Pollution
       Standards,” Eastern Economics Journal, Vol. 9 (April-June 1983), 79-89.
Hazilla, Michael, and Raymond J. Kopp, "Social Cost of Environmental Quality
       Regulations: A General Equilibrium Analysis," Journal of Political Economy,
       Vol. 98, No. 4 (August 1990), 853-73.
Helfand, Gloria, “Standards vs. Standards: the Effects of Different Pollution
       Restrictions,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 3 (June 1991), 622-634.
________, and Brett W. House, “Regulating Nonpoint Source Pollution Under
      Heterogeneous Conditions,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol.
      77 (November 1995), 1024-1032.
Hochman, Eithan, and David Zilberman, “Examination of Environmental Policies Using
     Production and Pollution Microparameter Distributions,” Econometrica, Vol. 46
     (July 1978), 739-760.
Hotelling, Harold, "Edgeworth's Taxation Paradox and the Nature of Demand and Supply
       Functions," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 40, No. 5 (Oct. 1932), 577-616.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Peter J. Wilcoxen, "Environmental Regulation and U.S.
       Economic Growth," RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 21, No. 2 (Summer 1990),
       314-40.
                                         -27-


Jou, Jyh-Bang, “Environment, Irreversibility, and Optimal Effluent Standards,”
       Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, Vol. 48, No. 1
       (March 2004), 127-158.
Keohane, Nathaniel, Richard Revesz, and Robert Stavins, “The Choice of Regulatory
      Instruments in Environmental Policy,” Harvard Environmental Law Review,
      (1998), 313-367.
McKitrick, Ross, "The Design of Regulations Expressed as Ratios or Percentage Quotas,"
      Journal of Regulatory Economics, Vol. 19, No. 3 (July 2001), 295-305.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., “A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms,” National Tax
       Journal, Vol. 52, No. 4 (December 1999), 655-681.
Mieszkowski, Peter, “On the Theory of Tax Incidence,” Journal of Political Economy,
      Vol. 75 (June 1967), 250-62.
________, “The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or a Profits Tax?” Journal of Public
      Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1 (April 1972), 73-96.
Montero, Juan-Pablo, “Permits, Standards, and Technology Innovation,” Journal of
      Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 44, No. 1 (July 2002), 23-44.
New York Environmental Conservation Rules and Regulations, available online at:
     http://www.dec.state.ny.us/website/regs/index.html.
Ogaki, Masao, "The Indirect and Direct Substitution Effects," American Economic
       Review, Vol. 80, No. 5 (December 1990), 1271-1275.
Parry, Ian W.H., “Are Emissions Permits Regressive?” Journal of Environmental
        Economics and Management, Vol. 47, No. 2 (March 2004), 364-387.
Requate, Till, and Wolfram Unold, “Environmental Policy Incentives to Adopt Advanced
      Abatement Technology: Will the True Ranking Please Stand Up?” European
      Economic Review, Vol. 47, No. 1 (February 2003), 125-146.
Robison, H. David, “Who Pays for Industrial Pollution Abatement?” Review of
      Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67, No. 4 (November 1985), 702-706.
Russell, Clifford S., Winston Harrington, and William J. Vaughan, Enforcing Pollution
       Control Laws, Washington, DC: Resources For the Future, 1986.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh, “Estimating the
       General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public
       Goods”, International Economic Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Nov. 2004), 1047-77.
Texas Administrative Code, available online at:
      http://info.sos.state.tx.us/pls/pub/readtac$ext.ViewTAC.
Thomas, Vinod, “Welfare Cost of Pollution Control,” Journal of Environmental
     Economics and Management, Vol. 7, No. 2 (June 1980), 90-102.
West, Sarah E. and Roberton Williams, “Estimates from a Consumer Demand System:
       Implications for the Incidence of Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Environ-
       mental Economics and Management, Vol. 47, No. 3 (May 2004), 535-58.
Yohe, Gary, "The Backward Incidence of Pollution Control – Some Comparative Statics
      in General Equilibrium," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
      Vol. 6, No. 3 (September 1979), 187-198.
                                              -28-


Appendix A1: Finding the Substitution Elasticities bij

        The bij elasticities are evaluated from the production function in the dirty sector
in a manner analogous to Allen (1938, p. 505-508). We are solving for the derivatives of
input demands with respect to changes in either input prices or δ, the policy parameter.
These input demand equations come from the firm’s cost minimization problem, where
the total quantity to be produced is exogenous. First consider a small change in the price
of capital, dr. If we differentiate the production function with respect to r we get

                                  dK Y      dL      dZ dY
                             YK        + Y L Y + YZ    =    = 0,
                                   dr        dr     dr   dr

where the last equation comes from the fact that total output demanded is exogenous and
not a function of the rental rate.

        The first order condition of the minimization problem with respect to the choice
              pY
of KY is           YK = r . Differentiate this equation with respect to r, multiply through
           1 − δYZ

     1 − δ YZ
by            , and collect terms to get
        pY

     YK dpY                    dK                   dL                     dZ 1 − δYZ
            + [YKK + YK YZK ξ ] Y + [YKL + YK YZLξ ] Y + [YKZ + YK YZK ξ ]    =       ,
     pY dr                      dr                   dr                    dr    pY

                δ
where ξ ≡             . Similarly, differentiate the next first order condition,
             1 − δ YZ

   pY
        YL = w , with respect to r and rearrange to get
1 − δYZ

        YL dpY                    dK                   dL                     dZ
               + [YLK + YL YZK ξ ] Y + [YLL + YL YZLξ ] Y + [YLZ + YL YZK ξ ]    = 0.
        pY dr                      dr                   dr                    dr

Note that the right hand side of this equation is zero, since a change in r has no effect on
w, which is exogenous to this input demand system. Finally, the policy constraint binds,
so Z = δY. Since Y and δ are both exogenous variables in the input demand system, a
change in r has no effect on their values. Hence, differentiating this equation with
                      dZ
respect to r yields      = 0.
                      dr
                                              -29-


       Writing these four equations in matrix form allows use of Cramer’s rule to
evaluate the derivatives. This equation is

                                                                ⎡ 1 dpY ⎤ ⎡ 0 ⎤
         ⎡0          YK              YL              YZ      ⎤ ⎢
         ⎢Y                                                       p dr ⎥ ⎢1 − δYZ ⎥
               YKK + YK YZK ξ YKL + YK YZL ξ YKZ + YK YZZ ξ ⎥⎥ ⎢ Y      ⎥
         ⎢ K                                                  ⋅ ⎢dKY dr ⎥ = ⎢⎢ pY ⎥⎥
         ⎢YL   YLK + YLYZK ξ YLL + YLYZL ξ YLZ + YLYZZ ξ ⎥ ⎢            ⎥      0 ⎥
         ⎢                                                   ⎥ ⎢ dLY dr ⎥ ⎢
         ⎣0          0              0              1         ⎦ dZ dr         ⎢ 0 ⎥⎦
                                                                ⎣       ⎦ ⎣

Follow the notation of Allen (1938) and use F to denote the determinant of the bordered
Hessian of the production function, and use Fij to denote the cofactor of element i,j of
that matrix. The determinant of the matrix of coefficients in the above equation
simplifies to FZZ (the terms with ξ all cancel each other out). With an odd number of
inputs, the assumption of constant returns to scale (linear homogeneity) implies that F <
0 and FZZ > 0. Using Cramer’s rule, we solve for the derivatives of interest:

                 dK Y − (YL ) 2 (1 − δYZ )      dLY YL YK (1 − δYZ )
                     =                     <0 ,     =                > 0.
                  dr        pY FZZ               dr     pY FZZ

These sign indicate that bKK < 0 and bLK > 0, as we now show. The term 1 – δYZ is
strictly positive for the following reason. The policy parameter δ = Z/Y is the inverse of
average output per unit of Z. It is multiplied by YZ, the marginal output per unit of Z.
Since production is constant returns to scale, the average output must exceed the marginal
output, and hence δYZ < 1. Furthermore, both first derivatives of Y are positive, and
FZZ < 0 as mentioned before. Thus bKK < 0 and bLK > 0.

       We take the production function, the first order conditions for the cost
minimization problem, and the binding constraint, and then we differentiate all, this time
with respect to w. Writing these four equations in matrix form yields a similar system of
equations:

                                                                ⎡ 1 dpY ⎤ ⎡ 0 ⎤
        ⎡0          YK             YL             YZ         ⎤ ⎢
        ⎢Y                                                        p dw ⎥ ⎢ 0 ⎥
               YKK + YK YZK ξ YKL + YK YZL ξ YKZ + YK YZZ ξ ⎥⎥ ⎢ Y      ⎥
        ⎢ K                                                   ⋅ ⎢dKY dw⎥ = ⎢⎢1 − δYZ ⎥⎥ .
        ⎢YL    YLK + YLYZK ξ YLL + YLYZL ξ YLZ + YLYZZ ξ ⎥ ⎢            ⎥
        ⎢                                                    ⎥ ⎢ dLY dw ⎥ ⎢ pY ⎥
        ⎣0           0              0              1         ⎦ dZ dw        ⎢ 0 ⎥⎦
                                                                ⎣       ⎦ ⎣

The matrix of coefficients is the same as for dr above; the only difference is in which
element of the vector of constants is nonzero. Here it is the element corresponding to the
                                              -30-


differentiation of the first order condition for labor input, since w is changing. Solving
this system yields

                   dK Y YK YL ( 1 − δYZ )      dLY − (YK ) 2 (1 − δYZ )
                       =                  >0 ,    =                     < 0.
                    dw       pY FZZ            dw        pY FZZ

These solutions can be used to evaluate the input demand elasticities.

                                  r dK Y    r dLY r (1 − δYZ )YL   Y   Y
           br = bKK − bLK =              −       =               (− L − K ) < 0
                                 K Y dr    LY dr       pY FZZ      K Y LY

                                 w dK Y   w dLY w(1 − δYZ )YK YL YK
              bw = bKL − bLL =          −      =             (    + ) > 0.
                                 K Y dw LY dw      pY FZZ      K Y LY

We can substitute in the first order conditions pYYK = r(1 – δYZ) and pYYL = w(1 – δYZ)
to simplify these expressions.

                                YK YL YL YK       Y Y Y     Y
                       br = −        (  + ) , bw = K L ( L + K ) .
                                 FZZ K Y LY        FZZ K Y LY

This substitution demonstrates that br = -bw.

        Lastly, we want to find the derivatives of factor demands with respect to a change
in the policy parameter δ. Again, differentiate the production function and the first order
conditions, here with respect to δ. The policy constraint (Z = δY) differentiated with
respect to δ yields dZ dδ = Y . The matrix form of this system of equations is

                                                                 ⎡ 1 dpY ⎤ ⎡     0    ⎤
        ⎡0           YK             YL             YZ         ⎤ ⎢         ⎥   ⎢ YZ YK ⎥
        ⎢Y                                                         p dδ        −
        ⎢ K     YKK + YK YZK ξ YKL + YK YZL ξ YKZ + YK YZZ ξ ⎥⎥ ⎢ Y       ⎥ ⎢ 1 − δYZ ⎥
                                                               ⋅ ⎢dK Y dδ ⎥ = ⎢ Y Y ⎥ .
        ⎢YL     YLK + YLYZK ξ YLL + YLYZL ξ YLZ + YLYZZ ξ ⎥ ⎢             ⎥ ⎢− Z L ⎥
        ⎢                                                     ⎥ ⎢ dLY dδ ⎥ ⎢ 1 − δYZ ⎥
        ⎣0            0              0              1         ⎦ dZ dδ                 ⎥⎦
                                                                 ⎣        ⎦ ⎢⎣ Y

Again the matrix of coefficients is the same, with determinant FZZ. Solving for the
derivatives of interest yields:

                                  dK Y    F     dLY    F
                                       = Y KZ ,     = Y LZ ,
                                   dδ     FZZ   dδ     FZZ

where again Fij denotes the cofactor of element i,j in the bordered Hessian of the
production function. These cofactors are not immediately interpretable, but they are an
integral part of the definition of the Allen elasticities. They are defined as:
                                                   -31-


         pY Y Fij
eij ≡        ⋅    , where iY is the quantity of input i used. With these definitions we can
        iY jY F
calculate the remaining input demand elasticities:

                                   δ         FKZ    δ    F       δZ F
                bδ = bKZ − bLZ =        (Y       )−    (Y LZ ) =        (e KZ − e LZ ) ,
                                   KY        FZZ    LY   FZZ     pY FZZ

where eij is the Allen elasticity of substitution between inputs i and j. Since F/FZZ <
0, the sign of bδ is opposite the sign of eKZ – eLZ; if capital is a better substitute for
pollution than is labor, then bδ is negative.

Appendix A2: Finding the Substitution Elasticities cij

         We calculate these elasticities using a method similar to the one in Appendix A1.
First, consider the effect of small changes in the capital rental rate. If we differentiate the
production function with respect to r we get, as before:

                                   dK Y      dL      dZ dY
                             YK         + Y L Y + YZ    =    =0
                                    dr        dr     dr   dr

The first order condition from the maximization problem with respect to capital is r =
pY(YK + ζYZ). Differentiate this with respect to r, divide through by pY, and rearrange
terms to get:

         YK + ζYZ dpY                dK                dL                 dZ   1
                      + [YKK + ζYZK ] Y + [YKL + ζYZL ] Y + [YKZ + ζYZK ]    =    .
            pY     dr                 dr                dr                dr   pY

The first order condition for labor is w = pYYL. Differentiating this equation by r and
similarly rearranging yields

                          YL dpY       dK Y      dL       dZ
                                 + YLK      + YLL Y + YLZ    = 0.
                          pY dr         dr        dr      dr

Finally, differentiate the policy constraint Z = ζKY by r to obtain

                                               dZ    dK Y
                                                  =ζ      .
                                               dr     dr

Combining these four equations into matrix form allows us to solve for any of the
derivatives. This matrix equation is
                                                   -32-



                                                                      ⎡ 1 dpY ⎤
           ⎡     0          YK                YL           YZ      ⎤ ⎢        ⎥ ⎡ 0 ⎤
           ⎢Y                                                           p  dr
           ⎢ K   + ζYZ   YKK + ζYZK   YKL + ζYZL       YKZ + ζYZZ ⎥⎥ ⎢ Y      ⎥ ⎢1 p ⎥
                                                                    ⋅ ⎢dKY dr ⎥ = ⎢ Y ⎥ .
           ⎢     YL         YLK          YLL              YLZ      ⎥ ⎢        ⎥ ⎢ 0 ⎥
           ⎢                                                       ⎥ ⎢ dLY dr ⎥ ⎢     ⎥
           ⎣     0           ζ            0                −1 ⎦                   ⎣ 0 ⎦
                                                                      ⎣ dZ dr ⎦

       We solve for these derivatives using Cramer’s Rule, where the denominator is the
determinant of the matrix of coefficients. Call this denominator D. Solving along the
bottom row, and using known properties of determinants, we get:

            D = ζ ( FKZ + ζ (− FKK )) − ( FZZ + ζ (− FKZ )) = −ζ 2 FKK − FZZ + 2ζFKZ ,

where the Fij notation is from Allen (1938), just as in the previous section. We can
solve for this denominator in terms of the Allen elasticities using their definitions:
                                               2
                                FeKK K Y   FeZZ Z 2      FeKZ K Y Z
                         D = −ζ  2
                                         −          + 2ζ            .
                                  pY Y      pY Y           pY Y

And, since ζ = Z/KY¸

                                    FZ 2
                                 D=      (−eKK − eZZ + 2eKZ ) .
                                    pY Y

We can sign the denominator with information about these three Allen elasticities. The
ratio in the front of this expression is negative, since F < 0 and all of the other constants
are positive. The own-price elasticities eKK and eZZ must be negative. Hence, D is
negative if and only if eKZ is not too negative:

                                                          eKK + eZZ
                                 Condition 2: eKZ >                 .
                                                              2

Since the right hand side of this inequality is strictly negative, a sufficient condition for
D to be negative is capital and pollution are substitutes in production (eKZ >0).
However, D is still negative if K and Z are not too complementary.

       We now use Cramer’s Rule to solve for the derivatives.

                                                          1 YL (YK + ζYZ )
                                      2
                         dK Y   1 YL               dLY
                              =           ,            =−                  .
                          dr    D pY                dr    D       pY

When D < 0, then dKY/dr < 0 and dLY/dr > 0. We can also use Cramer’s rule to solve
for dZ/dr, but differentiation of the policy constraint provides it as a function of dKY/dr.
                                                  -33-


        Now, we solve for the elasticities cKK and cLK, and the difference (which is
defined as cr in the text):

                                                    r YL (YK + ζYZ ) rYL YL YK + ζYZ
                                                      2
                         r dK Y    r dLY    r YL
cr ≡ c KK − cLK ≡               −        =        +                 =    (    +      )
                        K Y dr    LY dr    K Y DpY LY      DpY        DpY K Y   LY


The sign of cr is thus equal to the sign of D.

        The same method is used to solve for the derivatives with respect to w and ζ.
Differentiating the four equations with respect to w yields:

                                                                        ⎡ 1 dpY ⎤
            ⎡       0          YK           YL                YZ     ⎤ ⎢              ⎡ 0 ⎤
                                                                           pY dw ⎥ ⎢
            ⎢Y
            ⎢ K   + ζYZ     YKK + ζYZK   YKL + ζYZL                  ⎥
                                                          YKZ + ζYZZ ⎥ ⎢           ⎥
                                                                                      ⎢   0 ⎥⎥
                                                                          dK
                                                                       ⋅⎢ Y     dw ⎥=           .
            ⎢     YL           YLK          YLL              YLZ     ⎥ ⎢           ⎥  ⎢1 / pY ⎥
                                                                          dL   dw
            ⎢                                                        ⎥             ⎥ ⎢⎣ 0 ⎥⎦
                                                                             Y
            ⎣       0           ζ            0                −1 ⎦ ⎢
                                                                        ⎣  dZ  dw  ⎦

The denominator again is D. Solving for the derivatives gives:

                         dK Y    1 YL (YK + ζYZ )            dLY   1 (YK + ζYZ ) 2
                              =−                  ,              =                 .
                          dw     D       pY                  dw D         pY

So if D < 0, then dKY/dw > 0 and dLY/dw < 0. This gives us an expression for cw:

                      w − YL (YK + ζYZ ) w (YK + ζYZ ) 2    w(YK + ζYZ ) YL (YK + ζYZ )
c w ≡ c LK − c LL   =                   −                =−             (    +          )
                      KY      DpY         LY   DpY             DpY        KY    LY


The sign of cw is the opposite of the sign of D.

        Finally, we differentiate the four equations with respect to ζ to generate:

                                                                        ⎡ 1 dpY ⎤
            ⎡       0           YK           YL               YZ     ⎤ ⎢              ⎡ 0 ⎤
                                                                           pY dζ ⎥ ⎢
            ⎢Y      + ζYZ   YKK + ζYZK   YKL + ζYZL                  ⎥
                                                          YKZ + ζYZZ ⎥ ⎢           ⎥
                                                                                      ⎢ − YZ ⎥⎥
            ⎢ K                                                           dK
                                                                       ⋅⎢ Y    d ζ ⎥=           .
            ⎢       YL         YLK          YLL              YLZ     ⎥ ⎢           ⎥  ⎢ 0 ⎥
            ⎢                                                        ⎥ dLY dζ ⎥ ⎢             ⎥
            ⎣       0           ζ            0                −1 ⎦ ⎢                  ⎣− KY ⎦
                                                                        ⎣  dZ d ζ  ⎦

The difference on the right hand side comes from the fact that, when differentiating with
respect to ζ, the term ζ can no longer be treated as a constant. For example, the policy
                                                      -34-


                                                               dZ          dK Y
constraint Z = ζKY when differentiated yields                     = KY + ζ      , the bottom row of
                                                               dζ           dζ
the matrix equation.

       The denominator is the same as in earlier cases. Solving for the derivatives gives:

                                  dK Y  1
                                       = (−YL YZ − K Y ( FKZ − ζFKK )) ,
                                             2

                                   dζ   D

                             dLY  1
                                 = (YL YZ (YK + ζYZ ) − K Y ( FLZ − ζFKL )) .
                             dζ   D

The first derivative above consists of two offsetting terms whenever capital and pollution
are substitutes, since D < 0, FKZ < 0, and FKK > 0. Therefore, when policy is tightened
and ζ falls, then demand for capital may fall or rise. The sign of the derivative of labor
demand with respect to ζ is also ambiguous. It depends on both D and the relative
magnitude of FKZ and FLZ, or eKZ and eLZ.

                                                                 ζ dK Y ζ dLY
       Solving for the elasticity cζ ≡ c ZK − c ZL ≡                    −       , we get:
                                                                 K Y dζ   LY dζ

                ζ − YL YZ − K Y ( FKZ − ζFKK )            ζ YL YZ (YK + ζYZ ) − K Y ( FLZ − ζFKL )
                      2

       cζ =                                           −
               KY                    D                    LY                  D
           ζ               YL YK + ζYZ    FK Y Z
       =       (−YL YZ (      +        )+        (−e KZ + e KK + e LZ − e KL ))
           D               KY    LY        pY Y
       = M + H (e LZ − e KZ ) + H (e KK − e KL )

                             ζ              Y L Y K + ζ YZ            ζFK Y Z
The constants M ≡ −              (YL YZ (      +           )) and H ≡         are both positive
                             D              KY      LY                 DpY Y
when Condition 2 holds (D < 0), because F < 0 and all first derivatives of the production
function YK, YL, and YZ are positive.

       Finally, the text uses three relationships cKK – cZK = 0, cKL – cZL = 0, and cKZ –
cZZ = -1. These can be verified using the derivations of the appropriate elasticities.
