NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPEN-ACCESS LOSSES AND DELAY IN THE ASSIGNMENT OF PROPERTY
RIGHTS
Gary D. Libecap
Working Paper 13642
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13642

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Very helpful comments were provided by Thomas Merrill, David Adelman, Carol Rose, Henry Smith,
Bob Deacon, Katrina Wyman, Kathy Segerson, Roger Sedjo, Marc Miller, Bruce Johnsen, Dean Lueck,
and Kirsten Engel as well as other participants at the conference on Property Rights in Environmental
Assets: Economic and Legal Perspectives, Rogers Law School, University of Arizona, Tucson, October
26, 2007. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Open-Access Losses and Delay in the Assignment of Property Rights
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 13642
November 2007
JEL No. N4,N5,Q2,Q28,Q3,Q38,Q5
ABSTRACT
Even though formal property rights are the theoretical response to open access involving natural and
environmental resources, they typically are adopted late after considerable waste has been endured.
Instead, the usual response in local, national, and international settings is to rely upon uniform rules
and standards as a means of constraining behavior. While providing some relief, these do not close
the externality and excessive exploitation along unregulated margins continues. As external costs and
resource values rise, there finally is a resort to property rights of some type. Transfers and other concessions
to address distributional concerns affect the ability of the rights arrangement to mitigate open-access
losses. This paper outlines the reasons why this pattern exists and presents three empirical examples
of overfishing, over extraction from oil and gas reservoirs, and excessive air pollution to illustrate
the main points.

Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

“More typically, ITQs have been put in place after a fishery has reached a
crisis and other regulations have proven inadequate. Even then the
disputes over initial allocations and other design features of the proposed
system have gone on for years. In the meantime the situation has gotten
worse. This has happened in the United States, in Iceland, and in Chile.”2
“The contrasts between unit operation in southwest Asia and
“unregulated” operation in the United States are unfavorable to the
wasteful system followed in developing American fields…It is difficult to
understand why in the United states, even admitting all obstacles of law
and tradition, not more than a dozen pools are 100 percent unitized (out of
some 3,000) and only 185 have even partial unitization.” 3
“Turning to institutional considerations, the very structure of pollution
problems promised something less than rapid resolution; there were strong
incentives to pollute and weak ones at best to achieve control. Policy, of
course, aggravated these unhappy facts. By its inertia, its allocation of the
burden of uncertainty, its early reliance on volunteerism, its approach of
technological feasibility, it invited delay in many ways.” 4
Introduction.
Despite their attractions for more effectively reducing open-access losses
involving natural and environmental resources, formal property rights typically come late
after considerable waste has been endured. Instead, the first official response, when it
comes, is prescriptive government regulation that calls for uniform rules and standards as
a means of constraining behavior. Only later, when these have proven ineffective to
prevent further external costs and resource values have risen is there a resort to property

2

Rögnvaldur Hannesson, 2004, The Privatization of the Oceans, Cambridge, MIT Press, 171.

3

Joe S. Bain, 1947, The Economics of the Pacific Coast Petroleum Industry, Part III: Public Policy Toward
Competition and Pricing, Berkeley: University of California Press, 29, note 13.

4

James E. Krier and Edmund Ursin Krier, 1977, Pollution and Policy: A Case Essay on California and
Federal Experience with Motor Vehicle Air Pollution, 1940-1975, Berkeley: University of California Press,
296.

2

rights of some type.5 This paper outlines the theoretical reasons why this pattern exists
and presents three empirical examples of overfishing, over extraction from oil and gas
reservoirs, and excessive air pollution to illustrate the main points. The paper is not
advocating the assignment of property rights as the only institutional response to the
wastes of over access, but rather is describing why delay is a common feature in the
assignment property rights.
The key argument is that early, formal property rights involve high resource and
political costs relative to their expected gains. They have formidable information and
input requirements in allocation, measurement, bounding, and enforcement, and they
have substantial distributive effects when there is too much uncertainty as to how these
might impact key constituencies. Hence, there is delay in the assignment of property
rights to address open access. In this context, delay implies an optimal time for shifting
regimes, from open access to uniform regulation to property rights. During this period of
transition asset rents are dissipated, but enduring these losses does not imply inefficiency
when the resource costs of developing the institutional response (regulation, property
rights) are considered. As outlined below, a focus solely on rent dissipation in
determining the optimal timing of response is incomplete without incorporating the

5

There are exceptions when the resource is of very high value, information costs regarding the problem are
low, and rights can be relatively easily assigned. Consider gold and silver and other hard rock minerals. For
Discussion see Gary D. Libecap, 2007, “The Assignment of Property Rights on the Western Frontier:
Lessons for Contemporary Environmental and Resource Policy,” Journal of Economic History, 67(2): 257291, especially 266-271. When these conditions are not met, however, the general processes of delay and
inertia are characteristic. Throughout this discussion I am referring to formal regulation and property rights
rather than informal norms and customs that can be adopted under certain circumstances to address
common pool resources (CPR). More generally, see Elinor Ostrom, 1990, Governing the Commons: The
Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action, New York: Cambridge University Press for discussion of
local responses to open-access losses.

3

transaction costs of collective action within groups, within the political arena, and across
countries.6
When the value of the resource or the cost of the externality is relatively low,
prescriptive regulation to limit exploitation through uniform restrictions can be cost
effective and politically acceptable. Information demands are limited to the setting and
administering general rules and standards; it does not involve obvious redistribution; and
reliance upon standardized regulations reduces uncertainty regarding the impact on
constituencies. The various parties involved can predict how they might be affected and
their current political and wealth standings are unlikely to be importantly altered. At the
same time, however, these policies incompletely address the externality, leaving many
margins for rent dissipation unconstrained.
Over time as the externality becomes more serious, information is generated about
the benefits and costs of property rights in confronting it; information asymmetries are
reduced; and overall uncertainty is diminished. At that point more parties see that they
will be made better off, and it becomes more economically rational and politically
feasible to adopt property rights.
Property rights are relevant because they address the externality directly and link
individual incentives with social objectives for resource use. But they are adopted only
when their costs are offset by the aggregate rents that are saved from over exploitation.
Since these transaction costs can be considerable, the value of the resource and the nature
of uncertainty determine the optimal time for introducing formal property rights. Crises
6

The even greater complications of devising property institutions in response to open access in the third
world when there is contested institutional interactions among laws, norms, and agreements are described
by Daniel Fitzpatrick, 2006, “Evolution and Chaos in Property Rights Systems: The Third World Tragedy
of Contested Areas,” 115 Yale Law Journal 996.

4

that suddenly and sharply raise benefits and lower uncertainty speed this process.7 Crises
are events or spikes that dramatically raise the wastes associated with open access and at
the same time lower the transaction costs of collective action by providing new
information about the benefits of institutional change to combat the problem.
II. The Problem of Open Access.
Too much air pollution, over fishing and depletion of stocks, too rapid withdrawal
from subsurface oil and gas reservoirs or water from aquifers are all examples of “The
Tragedy of the Commons”.8 The tragedy occurs because there are no clear property rights
(informal or formal, group or individual) to the resource and open access prevails. As a
result, individuals do not bear the full costs of their actions so that excess and waste are
the result. Aggregate short-term production or use levels are too high and investment is
too low. The parties inflict harm on one another with costly technological and pecuniary
externalities. In anticipation of these spillovers, there can be competitive rush to exploit
the resource. Because exchange is not possible within large groups in the absence of
property rights, the parties cannot bargain with one another to constrain behavior or to re-

7

Similarly, see Krier and Ursin (1977, 3, 255) and James E. Krier, 1994, “The End of the World News,”
Symposium Twenty-Five Years of Environmental Regulation, Loyola Law Review, 27 (3): 851-66, 856
and Tom Tietenberg, 2007, “Tradable Permits in Principle and Practice,” in Jody Freeman and Charles D.
Kolstad, eds, Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation, New York: Oxford University Press, 63-94,
69. He points to a belated trend in resort to property rights with 9 applications in air pollution control, 75 in
fisheries, 3 in managing water resources, 5 in controlling water pollution and 5 in land use control.
8

Garrett Hardin, 1968, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science 162: 1243-8. Hardin was not the first to
outline the logic and losses in the tragedy of the commons. More than a decade before his article, H. Scott
Gordon, 1954, “The Economic Theory of A Common-property Resource: The Fishery,” Journal of Political
Economy 62(2): 124–142 clearly described a similar process. Gordon=s analysis was extended by Anthony
Scott, 1955, “The Fishery: The Objectives of Sole Ownership,” Journal of Political Economy 63(2): 116-24
and by Steven Cheung, 1970, “The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-Exclusive Resource,”
Journal of Law and Economics 13(1): 49–70, among others.

5

allocate the resource to higher-valued uses currently or across time.9 There are no price
signals to reveal opportunity costs and free riding is rampant. Valuable labor and capital
inputs are diverted from productive use to predation and defense.10 Conflict and violence
are potential outcomes.
These wastes can be large, and the social savings from avoiding them provide the
incentives for collective action to secure more official group or government regulation of
access and resource use or to assign property rights for private restrictions on behavior. In
the following section, a framework is presented to describe the collective action problem
in bargaining within groups and across groups to address the tragedy of the commons.
III. Analytical Framework.
A. Bargaining within Groups.
In collective action negotiations, each party determines whether or not to
participate by comparing their current welfare situation with what is forecast through
group efforts. If individual expected net gains are positive, the parties will chose to take
action with the group. These net gains are a function of the predicted aggregate benefits
and costs of eliminating the externality and their proposed distribution among group
members. The greater the uncertainty associated with cost and benefit calculations, the
lower the anticipated returns. The benefits of group efforts also depend upon monitoring
and enforcement. If monitoring and enforcement costs are so high that free riding is
9

Bargaining of the kind discussed by Ronald Coase, 1960, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law
and Economics 3: 1–44 is not possible.

10

For a classic study in the early California gold rush, see John Umbeck, 1981, “Might Makes Right: A
Theory of the Foundation and Initial Distribution of Property Rights,” Economic Inquiry 19 (1): 38-59.
But also see Richard O. Zerbe Jr. and C. Leigh Anderson, 2001, “Culture and Fairness in the Development
of Institutions in the California Gold Fields,” Journal of Economic History 61 (1), 114–143 and Karen
Clay and Gavin Wright, 2005, “Order without Law? Property Rights During the California Gold Rush,”
Explorations in Economic History 42(2):155-83 for a more nuanced views on the problem.

6

prevalent, then the advantages of collective action are reduced. Indeed, as in cartels,
widespread defection or failure to comply among members can lead to an unraveling of
any arrangement to mitigate the losses of open access.11
Collective action is promoted if the number of parties is small; if they are similar
in the expected net gains of agreement; if there is little uncertainty regarding the size and
distribution of costs and benefits (information, measurement, bounding, and compliance
costs are small); and if the aggregate gains of taking action are large relative to the costs.
These are the conditions that characterize successful efforts among relatively
homogeneous, small groups as described by Elinor Ostrom.12
Important deviations from these criteria, however, hinder group efforts. If
aggregate net gains are limited (the common resource is of low value and/or the
transaction costs of addressing the problem are high), there are few incentives for action
until values increase or costs fall. As group size grows, bargaining and compliance costs
rise. If the aggregate benefit is a public good (high bounding costs) whereas the costs of
taking action are private, free riding and defection are encouraged.
High information costs lead to uncertainty in calculating aggregate net gains and
their distribution, and hence, in estimating how individuals will fare from group action. If

11

See Bjark Fog, 1956, “How Are Cartel Prices Determined?” Journal of Industrial Economics. 3(1): 16-23
and George A. Hay and Daniel Kelly, 1974, “An Empirical Survey of Price Fixing Conspiracies,” Journal
of Law and Economics, 17(1): 13-39 for discussion of cartel behavior.
12

Elinor Ostrom, Elinor, 1998, “Self Governance of Common Poll Resources” The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics and The Law, Peter Newman, ed, London: Macmillan Reference, Volume 3: 42432, 431lists the conditions necessary for self-governance of common pool resources to include clearly
defined boundaries; the distribution of benefits is roughly proportionate to costs and appropriation rules are
consistent with local conditions; affected individuals can participate; monitors are accountable to
appropriators; there are graduated sanctions; appropriators have access to low cost, local arenas for
resolution of conflicts; the right to organize are not challenged by governmental authorities; and there are
nested enterprises for appropriation, provision, monitoring, enforcement, conflict resolution, and
governance.

7

the uncertainty is uniformly distributed across members, agreement on measures to be
taken can still be reached. But asymmetric information and related differences in
publicly-available and privately-held information about costs or benefits result in
divergent views of the overall advantages of addressing the externality and sharing the
resulting net returns.
Collective action, which has not possible early, can become more practical after
delay as transaction costs fall. New information emerges regarding the severity of the
problem, reducing uncertainty and measurement costs and eliminating information
asymmetries; the resource becomes more valuable (perhaps due to greater depletion),
raising the benefits of action; new technology or techniques are developed to lower the
costs of closing the externality; and the number of parties declines as the private returns
to exploitation fall. At this point, distributional concerns become subordinate to the
overall need to respond to open access, and group efforts follow.
B. State Action: Political Bargaining Across Constituencies.
If the open-access problem is larger, spreading across multiple groups or
constituencies, then its resolution requires broader government involvement and the
efforts of politicians. When there are numerous constituencies who are affected
differently by the problem and the costs of its resolution, politicians must balance
constituent interests in a manner described by Sam Peltzman and Gary Becker so as to
maximize political support for taking action.13 In so doing, politicians face the same
problems encountered in the group negotiations outlined above.

13

Sam Peltzman, 1976, “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” Journal of Law and Economics
19(2): 211-240 and Gary S. Becker, 1983, “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political
Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(3): 371-400.

8

When constituencies are heterogeneous in the net gains of collective action,
politicians must devise side payments from high gainers to those who expect to do less
well in order to build a political consensus. They seek transfers that minimize political
opposition and risk, but these can be controversial among general taxpayers if they seem
to be too obvious and unfairly rewarding particular groups. Camouflaging transfers,
linking them to popular public goods, and tying them to broad distributional norms
reduce the political costs of transfers to politicians. Their design, however, may lower the
overall effectiveness of the government regulation of the externality. Uncertainty in
predicting aggregate costs and benefits and their distribution across constituencies
complicates the crafting of side payments by encouraging disputes over the size, nature
and direction of compensation, and these disputes increase political risk and reduce the
expected benefits to politicians of deal making to address the externality.
As a result, politicians select policies that lower uncertainty and raise expected net
gains for key constituents. These include postponing any action; encouraging research in
information about the externality; promoting new technology that lowers costs; investing
in resource stock enhancement, including restricting access by non citizens or other
politically-weak groups; and adopting standardized regulations that reduce the externality
while appearing to be neutral and not changing the existing distribution of wealth and
political power.
The assignment of property rights to address open access entails more hazards to
politicians. They are turned to only if general regulation fails to adequately remedy the
problem and if the benefits of a rights system are clear enough to reward politicians and
to offset political reaction. They entail the most direct and transparent assignment of

9

benefits and costs, as well as require more costly allocation, bounding, and enforcement
policies.14 Any property right that has meaning involves exclusion, potentially raising
distributional conflicts. Further, the resource may rebound if open-access losses are
reduced and become more valuable so that ownership brings new wealth, status, and
political influence to those who secure property rights, changing existing social and
political positions and inciting controversy that can be costly to politicians. Finally,
constituencies that benefited from the previous regulatory arrangement are likely to be
disadvantaged by the new rights system. Inefficiencies generate their own constituencies
for keeping things as they are.15
To build political support, politicians mold the assignment of property rights in a
manner that achieves other distributional objectives or meets the demands of those who
claim to be harmed. These adjustments also weaken the ability of the rights regime to
reduce the losses of open access.
The arguments outlined here regarding the government response to open access
16

are similar to those described by Krier and Ursin. They listed six themes associated
with government environmental policies: 1). Politicians (and agency officials) adopt
regulations that take the path of least resistance; that they are reactive, rather than
precautionary in order to garner political support for regulation and to minimize the
political risk of adopting inappropriate or extremely costly policies. 2). Politicians place
14

As pointed out by Thomas Merrill, the nature of the ex ante allocation rule affects the costs of assigning
property rights. For example, assignment of rights where possible by accession (tying rights to the
ownership of related resources) could be less costly than reliance upon first possession where documenting
past use is required and where there is the potential for dissipation due to a race to document previous use.
For discussion of the costs of first possession, see David Haddock, 1986, “First Possession Versus Optimal
Timing: Limiting the Dissipation of Economic Value,” 64 Washington University Law Quarterly, 775.
15

Hannesson (2004,173).

16

Krier and Ursin (1977, 11-13, 252-304).

10

the burden of uncertainty on those parties seeking policy change. Since new regulations
potentially impose vague costs on other constituencies, politicians insure that proposed
standards and other controls are based on reliable data through additional research. 3).
Political action follows crises that clarify the benefits of new policies through the
generation of additional information and a broader sense of immediacy among citizens.
4). Politicians rely on technological solutions, rather than more fundamental programs to
change citizen behavior, which can be controversial with costs spread unevenly. Since
technology mandates can be applied uniformly, they appear to maintain existing
distributions of wealth and political support and avoid divisive distributional issues,
especially in the design of transfer payment schemes. 5). Politicians take action only
after research and learning reveal what is most likely to work, lowering uncertainty and
the costs imposed on constituents. 6). There is a lag or a seemingly “unwarranted delay in
government resolution of a social problem.”
C. Bargaining Across States.
When environmental and natural resource externality problems cross political
boundaries as in the case of green house gas (GHG) emissions and wild ocean fisheries,
the bargaining to address them occurs among politicians as representatives of various
national constituencies. The same information and uncertainty problems and public
choice considerations described above apply in these negotiations. They are more severe
because of greater information problems, more heterogeneity, and higher monitoring and
enforcement costs among the jurisdictions affected.17

17

For discussion of the transactions costs of cross-country bargaining, see Beth V. Yarborough and Robert
M. Yarborough, 1994, “International Contracting and Territorial Control: The Boundary Question,” Journal
of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 150 (1) 239-264 and James K. Sebenius, 1984, Negotiating the
Law of the Sea, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

11

In international negotiations toward resolution of an open-access resource
problem, the expected benefit that a country derives is the sum of both the net gains
resulting from international actions, plus any transfer payments that it receives (or
provides). No national politician will seek the support of his or her constituents unless the
country’s expected net benefits exceed the cost of no agreement.
If the underlying constituencies in a country are very heterogeneous with respect
to support for international efforts, then the politician representing them has to balance
international demands with differential constituent costs and benefits to maximize
internal political support. As noted above, this requirement poses a formidable publicchoice problem, and it is more complicated if there is important uncertainty about the net
benefits of international efforts. The benefit that any internal group derives from a
particular international effort depends on its outcome. Incomplete and imprecise
information about the effects of international actions, the costs involved, and compliance
generate uncertainty about the potential results of collective action.
If uncertainty is widespread across countries, international efforts are unlikely. If
countries vary in their expected returns, however, there is an opportunity to devise
transfers to gain support. As in national negotiations, devising transfers is complex
because of differing views on the appropriateness, size, form, direction, and timing of
side payments. Additionally, there are greater problems of enforcing compliance by
member states.
For these reasons, just as in the national political arena, politicians have incentives
to delay action until the open-access problem becomes serious enough to generate the

12

information needed to make the distribution of the benefits and costs across countries and
across constituencies within them clearer. At that time politicians are better able to
mobilize political support for international action that entails both costly production
adjustments as well as paying (or receiving) internal and external transfers to garner
collective efforts.
All told, in group, national, and international actions to reduce the losses of open
access, the incentives seem clear. The parties involved are more likely to reach agreement
when uncertainty is reduced, when differences in expected costs and benefits across
constituencies are narrowed, and when the aggregate benefits of collective efforts
(reduced resource rent dissipation from open-access externalities) exceed the transaction
costs involved. These points suggest that there will be widely differing views regarding
the extent of early open-access problems and the importance of confronting them. These
conditions encourage group members and politicians to wait. When action is taken, it will
involve general rules, regulations, and standards that involve the fewest costs and
information demands and raise the least allocation concerns.18 These acts will be
insufficient so that the problem will intensify. Only then, will formal property rights be
implemented, and their success in attacking the externality will depend upon how
distribution demands were overcome in their design and allocation.

18

For instance, consider the very general, non binding emissions targets adopted by Pacific Rim nations
due to a lack of urgency on the issue of climate change. “Pacific Rim Nations Adopt Nonbinding Emissions
Targets,” by Tim Johnson, New York Times, September 10, 2007, A12.

13

IV. Application: Fisheries.
A. Fisheries:
Wild ocean fisheries are a classic open-access resource. With virtually unlimited
entry and growing harvest pressures, the result has been depleted stocks, falling catchper-unit-of-effort, declining incomes, and over capitalization. These conditions follow
from the high and growing value of fish as a source of protein, the fugitive nature of most
species, the great migratory distances involved, overlapping or absent political
jurisdictions, the absence of property rights, and large numbers of heterogeneous,
competing fishers.19
The implications of open access have been understood for a very long time—
certainly by fishers themselves and by pioneering students of the problem, such as Scott
Gordon, Anthony Scott, and Vernon Smith.20 Nevertheless, in 2000, Quinton Grafton,
Dale Squires, and Kevin Fox described the continuing dramatic wastes of over fishing
and inappropriate regulation in the Pacific Northwest halibut fishery; in 2003, Ransom
Myers and Boris Worm warned that the world’s major predatory fish populations were in
a state of serious depletion; and in 2006, Jennifer Devine, Krista Baker, and Richard
Haedrich provided a similar dire assessment for other deep-sea fisheries.21

19

For discussion of the bargaining problem with heterogeneous fishers see Ronald N. Johnson and Gary D.
Libecap, 1982, “Contracting Problems and Regulation: The Case of the Fishery,” American Economic
Review 72(5): 1005-1022 and for general discussion of the emergence of various regulatory/property
regimes, Donald R. Leal, ed, 2005, Evolving Property Rights in Marine Fisheries, Lanham, MD: Rowman
and Littlefield, Tietenberg (2007, 73-75), and Hannesson (2004).
20

Gordon (1954), Scott (1955) and Vernon L. Smith,1969, “On Models of Commercial Fishing,” The
Journal of Political Economy, 77 (2): 181-198.

21

Quentin R. Grafton, Dale Squires, and Kevin J. Fox, 2000, “Private Property and Economic Efficiency: A
Study of a Common-Pool Resource,” Journal of Law and Economics 43(2): 679-713; Ransom A. Myers
and Boris Worm, 2003, “Rapid Worldwide Depletion of Predatory Fish Communities,” Nature 423: 28083; and Jennifer A. Devine, Krista D. Baker, and Richard L. Haedrich, 2006, “Fisheries: Deep-Sea Fishes
Qualify as Endangered,” Nature 439, 29.

14

The first government reaction to open access has been implementation of uniform
restrictions on access and fishing effort, which minimize information requirements and
avoid significant deliberate changes in status quo economic and political rankings among
the parties involved. Uniform regulations, however, are unlikely to be fully effective
because they do not align the incentives of the parties with the objectives of reduced
harvest and conservation of the stock. Accordingly, if the fishery is sufficiently valuable,
at some point there has been a turn to property rights of some type. But these have come
late, only after the stock has collapsed and declining returns have made existing practices
untenable. Even then, conflict of over the nature of the rights to be granted and their
allocation has slowed adoption of a rights regime, constrained the privileges assigned,
and limited the overall benefits obtained.
Rognvaldur Hannesson, Ragnar Arnason, and Ross Shotton, among others,
outline a common process of open-access losses, delayed regulation, and finally, a
limited adoption of individual transferable quotas (ITQ’s) or individual vessel quotas
(IVQ’s).22 Further, Ronald Johnson and Gary Libecap describe the contracting problem
among fishers, who differ in skill and returns under both open access and regulation.

22

ITQ’s are the most widely applied form of property right in fisheries (Hannesson, 2004, 56). See also
Ragnar Arnason, 2002, “A Review of International Experiences with ITQ,” Annex to Future Options for
UK Fishing Management, Report to the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs,
CEMARE, University of Portsmouth, UK and Ross Shotton, 2000, “Current Property Rights Systems in
Fisheries Management,” in Ross Shotton, ed. Use of Property Rights in Fisheries Management,
Proceedings of the FishRights99 Conference, Fremantle Western Australia, Rome: FAO, Fisheries
Technical Paper 404/1, 45-50.

15

These heterogeneities determine the kinds of regulations that can be agreed to and limit
their timely adoption.23
For migratory offshore fisheries, the closing of the commons required the
existence of political jurisdictions and/or international agreements on fishing
restrictions.24 This began with the establishment of 200-mile exclusive economic zones
(EEZ’s) by coastal states, but it did not occur until the 1970s following the Law of the
Sea negotiations. For instance, Iceland staked its claims in 1975; the U.S. Congress did so
in 1974, followed by Presidential Proclamation in 1983; and Canada acted in 1977.25
These national ocean claims, however, were not made part of international law until
1994. There was nothing biologically or environmentally significant with 200-mile zones
in fisheries, beyond which many stocks migrate. Efforts in 1993 to extend them to more
effectively address over-harvest in the open seas under the UN Conference on Straddling
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks failed due to disputes among coastal states over
the size of allotments. An international agreement was reached in 1995, but it did not
extend the exclusive zones, rather it avoided the issue by vesting management in regional
fisheries’ organizations that lacked any real enforcement power.26

23

Johnson and Libecap (1982).

24

Inshore, less mobile fisheries provide more opportunities for addressing the losses of open access. See
examination of lobster fisheries in Maine by James M.Acheson, 1975, “The Lobster Fiefs: Economic and
Ecological Effects of Territoriality in the Maine Lobster Fishery, Human Ecology 3(3): 183-207; for other
shellfish by Bonnie J. McCay, 1998, Oyster Wars and the Public Trust: Property, Law, and Ecology in New
Jersey History, Tucson: University of Arizona Press and for in-shore fisheries by Fikret Berkes, 1986,
“Local-Level Management and the Commons Problem: A Comparative Study of Turkish Coastal
Fisheries,” Marine Policy, July: 215-229.
25

Hannesson (2004, 38, 107, 116).

26

Hannesson (2004, 41, 42).

16

The 200-mile limit, however, made regulation possible within it, and by the 1970s
important, valuable fisheries were already seriously over exploited. Among these were
the British Columbia salmon fishery, the North East Atlantic, Icelandic, and North Sea
Herring fisheries, and the Norwegian cod fishery.27 In response to these conditions, ITQ’s
were suggested by fishery economist Francis Christy in 1973 as a means of raising
fishing incomes and of motivating fishers to conserve stocks.28
The response to over harvest, however, was not the assignment of property rights,
but rather the adoption of generalized season, vessel, and equipment controls. With
diverse interests, ranging from inshore and offshore fishers, large and small boat owners,
fishers from different locales, sports and commercial fishers, processors, equipment
sellers, labor groups, and regulatory officials, there could be agreement only on
standardized rules and not on the more difficult task of assigning and monitoring
individual property rights.29 Indeed, fishers and government officials had incentives to
adopt visible, yield-enhancing restrictions that seemed to benefit all parties as a public
good and to avoid policies that would more directly and transparently allocate fishing
rents to specific individuals or groups. In this process, fishers were uncertain how they
might fare in a property rights allocation, relative to their expected returns under more
certain uniform rules.30

27

Hannesson (2004, 69-71, 103, 116-117).

28

Hannesson (2004, 71).

29

Hannesson (2004, 172) stated: “More typically, ITQs have been put in place after a fishery has reached a
crisis and other regulations have proven inadequate. Even then the disputes over initial allocations and
other design features of the proposed system have gone on for years. In the meantime the situation has
gotten worse. This has happened in the United States, in Iceland, and in Chile.”

30

These arguments are outlined by Johnson and Libecap (1982) and illustrated with regard to the Gulf
Coast Shrimp Fishery.

17

Unfortunately, while attractive for technological and distributive reasons, these
regulations did not successfully address open access. Non-citizens were excluded or
given only very narrow access privileges, and this action alone provided short-term gains
to the countries that implemented controls. But nationals were allowed to expand their
fleets to fill the void, and they did so. Domestic fleets were subject to season constraints
and equipment controls, such as vessel licenses to limit the total number in the fishery
and minimum net sizes to release adolescent fish.31
Nevertheless, boat capitalization increased, stocks plummeted, and fishing
seasons were shortened drastically. For example, in the British Columbia halibut fishery,
when regulation began in 1980, total capacity was set 435 vessels, and new entry to meet
that target was rapid, with the number of vessels rising by 31 percent within 9 years.
Increased fishing pressure, however, brought a fall in the stock, and regulators gradually
reduced the season from 65 days to 6 days by 1990. The shortened season led to further
investment by fishers in larger and more powerful vessels and a competitive fishing
derby to harvest as many fish as possible in the limited time available. Harvests had to be
processed and frozen, and more valuable fresh halibut were not available for market after
the season closed. In response to these conditions, IVQ’s were adopted in 1991.32 After
that, the number of vessels fell as quotas were purchased and consolidated and the season
was expanded to 245 days by 1993 as stocks rebounded. With longer seasons fresh
halibut again could be offered for most of the year.33

31

Hannesson (2004, 61-62).

32

Hannesson (2004, 111), Grafton, Squires, and Fox (2001, 686).

33

Grafton, Squires, and Fox (2001, 685). See Table I for vessel numbers and fishing seasons.

18

Similar problems with uniform regulation occurred in other fisheries. In the 1970s
the Alaska halibut and sablefish season was over 100 days annually, but by 1995 (just
before adoption of the ITQ’s) it had dropped to 2-3 days.34 Additionally, the Canadian
sablefish season shrank from 245 days in1981 to 14 days in 1989; the fishery was closed
in 1995 and reopened with tighter restrictions in 1996.35
Although centralized regulation in fisheries generally has not been successful in
protecting, let alone re-establishing stocks, ITQ’s and IVQ’s have been adopted only after
crises when stocks have crumbled. This pattern is not only found in the halibut fisheries
described above but also in the Canadian West Coast salmon fishery, the Newfoundland
and Iceland cod fisheries, and others.36
Under ITQ’s and IVQ’s, regulators set the total annual allowable catch based on
assembled biological information, anticipated environmental conditions, and expected
harvest impacts. Each authorized fisher or vessel is granted a share in the annual catch
based on the allocation rule, and the quotas generally can be traded, although with
varying restrictions. The most common allocation rule is first-possession or historical
catch. Past investment in vessels and equipment also often is taken into account.37 The

34

Hannesson (2004, 141).

35

Hannesson (2004, 107).

36

Hannesson (2004, 88, 109, 119). For other discussion of Icelandic fisheries, see Arnason (2002, 24-33)
and for Canadian fisheries, see Katrina Miriam Wyman, 2002, “Why Regulators Turn to Tradable Permits:
A Canadian Case Study,” University of Toronto Law Journal. 52: 419-99. For discussion of timing of
regulation and rights, see Ross Shotton (2000, 45-50) and Anthony Scott, 2000, “Moving Through the
Narrows: From Open Access to ITQs and Self-Government,” in Ross Shotton, ed. Use of Property Rights
in Fisheries Management, Proceedings of the FishRights99 Conference, Fremantle Western Australia,
Rome: FAO, Fisheries Technical Paper 404/1, 105-117.

37

For discussion of the prevalence of first possession rules in fisheries, see Gary D. Libecap, 2008,
“Assigning Property Rights in the Common Pool. Implications of the Prevalence of First-Possession Rules
for ITQs in Fisheries” Marine Resource Economics, forthcoming.

19

advantage of ITQ’s is that they better align the harvest practices of fishers with practices
that protect or enhance the stock. The value of their quotas, which often can be major
sources of wealth, depends upon the long-term health of the stock.38 Hence, there are
incentives for self and group monitoring of compliance, and importantly, ITQ’s, as a
property right, are the basis for further contracting among fishers to reduce fishing
pressure.
These advantages depend upon the strength of the property right, and this varies
across countries. ITQ’s in the U.S. and Canada are clearly specified as being use
privileges and not property rights, revocable without compensation. By contrast in
Iceland, New Zealand, and Australia, ITQ’s are considered to be more secure property
rights.39 These differences in the nature of property rights follow from controversies over
allocation and how some parties might fare under an unrestricted market system.
Distribution concerns have resulted in various constraints on ITQ’s, and they are most
severe in countries where fishing is a tiny portion of GNP, such as the U.S.40 In the U.S.
with its relatively few ITQ systems, there has been an effort to preserve the relative
position of regions, communities, fleets, capital, and crew by limiting the assignment and
trading of ITQ’s.41 Some U.S. ITQs are reserved for community development and not
granted to individuals. There also are formal limits on the size of individual quota

38

Arnason (2002, 31, and Figure 5-4) discusses the success of the quota system in Iceland and rising quota
values.

39

Hannesson (2004, 77-78, 90); Arnason (2002, 3-11, 52-7).

40

Hannesson (2004, 124, 135, 167). Indeed, the U.S. has been characterized as a major fishing nation, but
not a major ITQ nation (Arnason, 2002, 51).

41

Hannesson (2004, 135-8). As of 2002, there were only 4 ITQ systems in the U.S. as compared to over 20
in Canada. Arnason (2002, 52-57) summarizes quota systems in the U.S.

20

holdings and their transferability. In the Alaska halibut fishery, for example, only
transfers from larger to smaller vessel classes are permitted, and no individual is allowed
to own more than 0.5 percent of the total quota. There are other controls on share
consolidation to limit holdings and to maintain a targeted number of vessels in the halibut
fleet.42 Further, in 1996 the Magnuson Act placed a four-year moratorium on the
adoption of further ITQ’s in U.S. fisheries.43 .
B. Oil and Gas Extraction.
As with wild ocean fisheries, oil and natural deposits that lie under private lands
in the U.S. are open-access resources. They are lodged in subsurface reservoirs under
great pressure. When any part of the surrounding geologic formation is punctured by a
well bore, a low-pressure area is created. Natural gas and oil migrate rapidly toward the
opening. Migration potentially allows adjacent landowners to extract their neighbor’s oil.
Movement depends upon subsurface pressures, oil viscosity, and the porosity of the
surrounding rock.
Because of the fugitive nature of subterranean oil and gas, in situ property rights
are not assigned to surface land owners, as is done with fixed subsurface mineral
resources, but instead are granted only upon extraction or capture, as is done with wild
animals (minerals ferae naturae).44 This ownership rule creates conditions for

42

Matthew Doyle, Rajesh Singh, and Quinn Weninger, 2005, “Fisheries Management with Stock Growth
Uncertainty and Costly Capital Adjustment: Extended Appendix,” Department of Economics Working
Paper, Iowa State University.

43

Hannesson (2004, 151, 161). For summary of allocation issues in fisheries, see Libecap (2008).

44

The problems of open access in oil production are discussed by Gary D. Libecap and James L. Smith,
2002, “The Economic Evolution of Petroleum Property Rights in the United States,” Journal of Legal
Studies, 31 (2, Pt. 2): S589-S608. For additional discussion of the common-law rule of capture, unitization,
and other regulations to address it see generally Jacqueline Lang Weaver, 1986, Unitization of Oil and Gas
Fields in Texas: A Study of Legislative, Administrative, and Judicial Policies Baltimore: Resources for the

21

competitive withdrawal. Owners lease exploration and production rights to oil and gas
firms, and these firms have incentives to drill and drain to increase their shares of oil field
rents, even though these individual actions lead to aggregate open-access losses.
Rents are dissipated as capital costs are driven up with the drilling of excessive
numbers of wells (more than geologic conditions require or price and interest rate
projections warrant) and with the construction of surface storage, where the oil can be
held safe from drainage by other firms. Unfortunately, once in surface storage, oil is
vulnerable to fire, evaporation, and spoiling. Rapid extraction also increases production
costs as subsurface pressures are vented prematurely, forcing the early adoption of pumps
and injection wells. Total oil recovery falls as pressures decline because oil becomes
trapped in surrounding formations, retrievable only at very high extraction costs. Finally,
rents are dissipated as production patterns diverge from those that would maximize the
value of output over time.
The problem of competitive withdrawal was recognized when oil was first
discovered in the United States in 1859. The nature and extent of the externalities
involved, however, were not well enough understood to attempt coordinated strategies to
constrain them.45 By the early twentieth century, however, the economic value of oil was
high enough to raise concern about waste. For example, in 1910, it was estimated that up
to 11 percent of California's (a major producing state) annual oil output was lost owing to
fire while in surface storage. In 1914, the director of the Bureau of Mines estimated that

Future. The problems of first-possession rules assigning ownership to flows rather than to the resource
stock are discussed by Dean Lueck, 1995, "The Rule of first Possession and the Design of the Law,"
Journal of Law and Economics 38(2): 393-436.
45

See Libecap and Smith (2002, S591-S592).

22

the costs of excessive wells equaled about a quarter of the value of total annual U.S. oil
production.46 Oil recovery was estimated at only 10-20 percent of the total resource in
place, but in many cases, it would have been much less than this overall average.47
These losses stimulated scientific research on subsurface reservoir mechanics and
on how production practices could affect over all recovery.48With this knowledge, there
was a basis for negotiations among private parties to reduce the losses of open-access.
Buyouts of all, but one party on a reservoir to place it under single ownership or
unitization for cooperative production were the most complete solutions. Neither was
widespread. As a result, as with fisheries, initial formal efforts to address open-access
turned to state regulation, but this too did not arrive until comparatively late, in the 1920s
and 1930s.49
State regulation focused on limiting the drilling of wells and the extraction of oil
and gas from them. The Texas Railroad Commission and other state regulatory agencies
set monthly statewide production levels and allocated the total among regulated wells as
quotas under a system termed prorationing. These production rules were applied
uniformly to all oil fields, even though each field had a unique physical configuration and
optimum production potential.
Regulation was controversial, especially among the very numerous small firms
(independents) that had adapted to open access and produced more than their share of
46

See Gary D. Libecap and Steven N. Wiggins, 1984, “Contractual Responses to the Common Pool:
Prorationing of Crude Oil Production,” American Economic Review, 74 (1): 87-98, 88-89 for estimates of
the rental losses involved.
47

Libecap and Smith (2002, S 593, footnote 14.

48

See Libecap and Smith (2002, S593).

49

Libecap and Smith (2002, S 594).

23

field deposits would warrant. Large firms (majors) tended to be the proponents of state
intervention because they bore more of the field-wide losses of competitive extraction.
To elicit the political support of small firm owners and oil-field equipment suppliers for
regulation, they were granted preferential treatment. These privileges were a (costly)
form of transfer payment, but were less transparent and more politically feasible than
were outright cash payments.50
For example, individual well quotas, or allowables, were based on acreage and
depth, but the Commission gave more weight to depth, encouraging oil firms with limited
leased acreage to drill deeper. Minimum spacing rules were adopted to limit overall
drilling, but the Commission also routinely granted exemptions to small firms. Further, in
Texas, the large numbers of very high-cost wells (stripper wells) were exempted from
any production controls. The costs of these uniform prorationing regulations and
exemptions were criticized. By the early 1960s, energy economist M.A. Adelman
estimated that they were substantial, probably exceeding $2 billion per year.51 State
regulation of well spacing and well production rates was able to reduce some of the
losses of open-access.
Nevertheless, dissatisfaction with state regulation led larger oil and natural gas
firms to consider either private collective action through buyouts or unitization of fields.
Unitization was the preferred solution for many firms because it maintained their lease
ownership in the field at a time of considerable uncertainty about long-term lease values

50

Libecap and Smith (2002, S 595).

51

M.A. Adelman, 1964, “Efficiency of Resource Use in Crude Petroleum,” Southern Economic Journal, 31
(2): 101-122, 105.

24

that prevented agreement on sales prices. But lease valuation problems also hindered unit
agreements.52
With unitization production rights are delegated through negotiation to a single
firm, the unit operator, with net revenues apportioned among all parties on the field
(including those that would otherwise be producing). As the only producer on the field
and a residual profit claimant, the unit operator has incentive to maximize field rents.
Accordingly, unitization results in important economic gains: a time stream of output that
more closely approximates the rent-maximizing pattern, increased oil recovery, and
reduced wells and other capital costs.
Unit agreements, especially during primary production when natural subsurface
pressures could force oil to the surface, however, were very difficult to complete.
Unitization during secondary recovery was easier because of existing coordination among
producers for injecting water, gas, or other fluids to push oil out of the ground. Otherwise
field output would plummet. Accordingly, secondary recovery and unit agreements could
be written jointly, but the losses of competitive production during primary recovery
remained.
The key issue of contention in these collective efforts is the allocation of shares of
the net proceeds of unit production.53 These shares are property rights to the unit rents

52

For discussion of unitization see James L. Smith,, 1987, “The Common Pool, Bargaining, and the Rule of
Capture,” Economic Inquiry, 25 (4): 631-644; Gary D. Libecap, Gary D. 1998, “Unitization,” in Peter
Newman, ed., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law Vol 3: 641-44; and Gary D.
Libecap and James L. Smith, 1999, “The Self-Enforcing Provisions of Oil and Gas Unit Operating
Agreements: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15(2): 526-548.

53

For discussion, see Gary D. Libecap, 1989, Contracting for Property Rights, New York: Cambridge
University Press, 93-114. Steven N. Wiggins and Gary D. Libecap, 1985, “Oil Field Unitization:
Contractual Failure in the Presence of Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review 75 (3): 368-

25

and are based on estimated pre-unit lease values. Contingent updates are not possible
because once the unit is formed individual leases lose their meaning and reservoir
production dynamics change.54 The bargaining problem arises due to disagreement on
lease values.
Lease values are based on current and cumulative oil and gas production, the
estimated size of the deposit below them, predicted oil migration and viscosity, the
porosity of the surrounding medium, and other environmental factors. Assessing these
and calculating lease value involves subjective guesswork, and the process is contentious.
Firms have private information that may be difficult to credibly convey to other parties.
Public information, such as past production and surface acreage, can be poor indicators of
lease value. The problems are greatest for small, strategically-located leases with most
production potential, longest expected life, and hence, greatest long-term uncertainty. As
fields age and primary production wanes, many leases become unproductive and others
have short futures unless secondary injection begins. Accordingly, at those times, private
and public information about lease characteristics converge and unit agreement is more
feasible.
As a result of conflicts over allocation, unit agreements can take a very long time
to negotiate or they breakdown and result in incomplete units that cover only part of a
field. In their detailed analysis of seven units in Texas and New Mexico, Steven Wiggins
and Gary Libecap found that they required from four to nine years from the time

385 examined the bargaining problem underlying unit formation, and Libecap and James Smith (1999)
described the nature of a complete unit contract.
54

Updates are possible during certain pre-agreed-to events such as the shift from primary to secondary
recovery. See Libecap and Smith (1999, 535-37).

26

negotiations began until agreements could be reached. Moreover, in five of the seven
cases the acreage in the final unit was less than that involved in the early negotiations.
With incomplete units, part of the reservoir remained open-access or was organized into
competitive subunits with significant losses.55
The problems of negotiation are more difficult for reservoirs that involve mixtures
of oil and natural gas. Differences in price volatility for the two substances make it
difficult to agree upon conversion factors. Such reservoirs are frequent since 63 percent
of the largest U.S. oil fields contained significant volumes of natural gas along with oil.56
Oil lease owners prefer to re-inject gas into the formation to expel the oil, whereas gas
lease owners prefer to sell their gas.
The huge Prudhoe Bay field is a case in point.57 It was discovered in 1968, and
unit negotiations took over eight years. Even then, the field was not effectively unitized,
but rather was partitioned into two (competing) units or participating areas, one for oil,
led by British Petroleum (BP) and one for gas, led by Atlantic Richfield (ARCO).
Conflicts between the firms continued because of their differential production incentives.
The original unit agreement was significantly amended on at least seven occasions during
the 1980s and 1990s as disputes were settled on a piecemeal basis. By 1988, Prudhoe Bay
production began to decline, not because of physical depletion of the underlying oil
deposit but because of disagreement about which parties would pay for the facilities
required to handle the rising volume of gas that was produced along with oil as the field

55

Wiggins and Libecap (1985, 377-383).

56

Libecap and Smith (2002, S597).

57

For discussion of Prudhoe Bay, see Libecap and Smith (1999, 543-545).

27

matured. Finally in 1999, BP purchased ARCO and effectively unitized the field, 31
years after discovery.
To promote unitization, states have intervened with compulsory or forced
unitization statutes.58 These statutes relaxed the unanimity voting rule on share
allocations. In Oklahoma, compulsory unitization legislation was enacted in 1945. It
stated that once 85 percent of the leases approved unitization, the remainder could be
forced to join.59 Small firms resisted the new law, challenged it in court, and attempted
repeal in 1947. By 1951, however, opposition to compulsory unitization in Oklahoma
was largely spent, and the original law was amended with little controversy to lower the
required majority from 85 to 63 percent.60 In Texas, however, small firms resisted the
loss of the regulatory advantages afforded them through the state's prorationing
regulation, and because of their large number and political influence, Texas was never
able to adopt a compulsory unitization law.61 Between the late 1940s and the 1960s, all
other oil-producing states adopted some form of forced unitization law to facilitate unit
formation. Not surprisingly, Texas has had a lower share of production from fullyunitized fields than does other states. It also has had more high-cost producers than other
states. For instance, Libecap and Wiggins reported that as late as 1975 only 38 percent of

58

See Libecap and Smith (2002, S596, S606).

59

1945 Okla. Sess. Laws 162.

60

1951 Okla. Sess. Laws 136.

61

Gary D. Libecap and Steven N. Wiggins, 1985, “The Influence of Private Contractual Failure on
Regulation: The Case of Oil Field Unitization,” Journal of Political Economy, 93(4): 690-714, 706-12.

28

Oklahoma production and 20 percent of Texas production came from complete, fieldwide units.62
Accordingly, the pattern of responding to open access in oil and gas reservoirs is
similar to that which occurred in fisheries. Tolerance of open access until the costs
became large compared to expected benefits of minimally addressing it; adoption of
uniform production rules, molded by political factors; finally, resort to property rights, in
this case through buyout or field unitization. Uncertainty in estimates of how the parties
would fare under new regulations or property rights regimes, relative to the status quo,
delayed action. Even then, the extent and form of the side payments necessary to meet
distributional and political demands, limited the effectiveness of the regulations and
unitization (rights) arrangements that were possible.
C. Air Pollution.
Excessive air pollution also is an open-access problem. Emissions arise from
manufacturing plants, utilities, vehicle exhaust, as well as a myriad of other sources that
are part of a modern economy. The opportunity to dispose of wastes in the air has been
viewed as an entitlement, or a form of property right.63 At the same time, there are no
property rights to the atmosphere, which is fugitive and virtually impossible to bound. All
of this provides the potential for too many emissions. If the emitted particles are
relatively large or they interact with local sunlight and geographical factors, as with urban
smog, air pollution has localized effects. Where the emissions travel larger distances, as

62

Libecap and Wiggins (1985, 702).
For discussion of the property rights aspects of emissions and regulatory response, see Jason Scott
Johnston, 2007,“Tradable Pollution Permits and the Regulatory Game” in Jody Freeman and Charles D.
Kolstad, eds, Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation, New York: Oxford University Press, 353385.
63

29

with SO2, the external effects are more broadly cast, and if they migrate to the upper
atmosphere, global externalities result, as with chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s) and CO2. So
long as releases are limited and the airborne stock is small relative to the atmosphere
affected, there is little adverse impact. As emissions grow and the stock of pollutants
increases, however, air pollution becomes a more serious problem. As concerns about air
pollution have risen, the regulatory response has been slow and the adoption of property
rights to mitigate the problem, when it has occurred, generally has come even later.
Indeed, the notion of tradable emission permits to address air pollution was put forward
by Thomas Crocker in 1966 and by J.H. Dales in 1968, but their adoption took another 30
years.64
Consider the problem of urban smog. James Krier and Edmund Ursin (1977) and
Krier (1994) describe the sluggish pace of government response to air pollution in
Southern California. As they point out, although there had been growing persistence of
smog in the Los Angeles Basin by the early 1940s, it took approximately 35 years before
regulations were enacted to directly attack the major source of the problem—auto
exhaust. Early state and local regulations ignored vehicle emissions.65 In 1950 research
revealed that there was a photochemical reaction that converted pollutants from refineries
and motor vehicles into smog, but the focus of government action was on further research
on air quality standards and the extent and nature of vehicle pollution.66 All the while as

64

Thomas D. Crocker, 1966, “The Structuring of Atmospheric Pollution Control Systems,” The Economics
of Air Pollution, H. Wolozin, ed, New York: W.W. Norton, 61-68; J.H. Dales, 1968, Property and Prices,
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
65

Krier and Ursin (1977, 6).

66

Krier and Ursin (1977, 8).

30

more research confirmed the link between exhaust and smog, the problem intensified,
eventually involving air quality alerts by the 1960s.
Even when the California Pure Air Act of 1968 authorized air pollution control
districts, their authority was restricted.67 The primary regulatory response was on
technological adjustments to reduce emissions as a condition for licensing new vehicles
and some used cars, and the establishment of uniform emissions standards for stationary
sources, rather than on behavioral changes, such as restrictions on driving.68 Most mobile
pollution sources remained relatively unregulated by the state.
The Federal Clean Air Act of 1963 set the stage for more involvement by the
federal government in regulating air pollution, including federal auto emissions standards
that followed from the Motor Vehicle Control Act of 1965. The Federal Air Quality Act
of 1967 required states to set air quality standards consistent with the Clean Air Act.
California’s Pure Air Act of 1968 set higher emissions standards and created the Air
Resources Board with regulatory jurisdiction over mobile and stationary sources.69 The
Federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1970 established uniform air quality standards
across the country and identified non-attainment areas where more restrictive controls
were to be implemented.70 Market-based, pricing approaches, such as emissions taxes
were not adopted.71 Although pollution levels were reduced in some areas, states

67

Krier and Ursin (1977, 252-58, 263-65).

68

Krier and Ursin (1977, 8, 277-79).

69

Krier and Ursin (1977, 9-10).

70

Krier and Ursin (1977, 2-3).

71

Donald N. Dewees, 1998, “Tradable Pollution Permits,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and
the Law, MacMillan, London, Peter Newman Ed., Vol. 3, 596-601, 597. Emission taxes then and now
have been viewed both as being too costly to administer relative to uniform standards and politically

31

consistently failed to meet targeted standards during 1970-90, and in many areas air
quality actually worsened.72
Finally, in 1994, some 50 years after the first concerns about smog, California
implemented a property rights approach to reduce NOx and SO2, the major sources of
smog, in the Los Angeles Basin with the Regional Clean Air Incentives Market,
RECLAIM. Los Angeles was the only area in the country to fall into extreme nonattainment of ozone level targets, despite previous regulatory efforts. Unfortunately,
RECLAIM applied only to certain stationary facilities—utilities, refineries, and
manufacturing plants and not motor vehicles.
These facilities were granted emissions quotas, based on historical releases and
annual reduction rates. The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
set total annual allowable releases, with each facility’s quota a share of the aggregate.
The quotas were a property right to emit pollutants, and they could be traded to
encourage those organizations that could reduce pollution at lower cost to do so while
selling the residual to sources with higher abatement costs.
There is a similar pattern of delay, reliance upon technology and uniform
standards, and finally on property rights in national efforts to lower S02 pollution. In the
1960s there was growing awareness of the damage caused to lakes and forests from acid
rain downwind from power plants that released S02 into the atmosphere. The 1970 and
1977 Clean Air Act Amendments set national maximum concentrations of S02 and the
states were charged with meeting those standards.
unacceptable, particularly by the interests that would be most affected. For discussion, see Krier and Ursin
(1977, 304), Dewees (1998, 600), Johnston (2007, 357).
72

Krier and Ursin (1977, 258, 296-307), Johnston (2007, 358).

32

To reduce emissions, the laws employed technology-based regulations. These
included specifying the equipment to be used, such as types of scrubbers, even if the
utility used low-sulfur coal, and setting new source performance standards that applied to
new plants. Older plants were not regulated so that controls moved at the pace of the
slowest or least able source to comply.73 These rules benefited high-sulfur coal producers,
mining unions, and Midwestern and Northeastern utilities with older facilities that burned
high-sulfur coal. The losers were utilities with new equipment and that used low-sulfur
coal, as well as coal producers in the West, a major source of low-sulfur coal. Subsequent
dissatisfaction with the costs of these regulations led to the adoption of limited trading
programs, including bubbles, allowing exchanges among different sources in a single
plant; netting, allowing plant expansion if overall pollution did not increase; banking,
allowing firms to carry forward unused credits; and offsets, allowing new plants to be
brought on line if existing ones reduced pollution.74 Despite the costs, total emissions of
S02 peaked in the 1970s and declined through the 1980s.75
Nevertheless, acid rain continued to be a problem, and much more significant
reductions in S02 releases were determined to be necessary, particularly new ones aimed
at controlling emissions from the dirtiest units.76The political and economic costs,

73

Dewees (1998, 597-8); Paul L. Joskow and Richard Schmalensee, 1998, “The Political Economy of
Market-Based Environmental Policy: The U.S. Acid Raid Program,” Journal of Law and Economics, 41(1):
37-83, 43-44.

74

These limited trades are estimated to have resulted in savings of $1-$12 billion in pollution control costs,
(Dewees, 1998, 600).
75

Joskow and Schmalensee (1998, 45).

76

Joskow and Schmalensee (1998, 46-50); Nathaniel O. Keohane, 2007, “Cost Savings from Allowance
Trading in the 1990 Clean Air Act: Estimates from a Choice Based Model,” in Jody Freeman and Charles
D. Kolstad, eds, Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation, New York: Oxford University Press,
194-229, 198.

33

however, were viewed as being prohibitive unless policies were changed to allow for
more cost-based approaches.
During the previous 20 years, pollution abatement costs had continually increased
as stricter standards were adopted. By 1990 U.S. pollution control costs had reached $125
billion annually, nearly a 300 percent increase in real terms from 1972 levels.77Existing
uniform rules generally did not recognize that the costs of controlling emissions varied
across and within firms. Since traditional regulation gave advantages to old plants and
technology, there were few incentives for those organizations to develop new
technologies to reduce emissions at lower cost. Newer units were forced to adopt the
technology specified by the regulator, rather than that which might have been more cost
effective.78 Further, central regulation and its reliance on uniform standards could be used
politically to disadvantage certain firms and regions (those that used and produced lowsulfur coal) at the behest of entrenched interests (those that used and produced highsulfur coal) with little environmental benefit.79
In response, Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments finally authorized
electric utilities to trade allowances to emit S02 while reducing total allowed emissions by
approximately 50 percent. This was the first large-scale, long-term U.S. environmental

77

Stavins, Robert N., 2007, “Market-Based Environmental Policies: What Can We Learn from U.S.
Experience (and Related Research)? in Jody Freeman and Charles D. Kolstad, eds, Moving to Markets in
Environmental Regulation, New York: Oxford University Press, 19-47, 34.

78

Jody Freeman and Charles D. Kolstad, 2007, “Prescriptive Environmental Regulations versus MarketBased Incentives,” in Jody Freeman and Charles D. Kolstad, eds, Moving to Markets in Environmental
Regulation: Lessons from Twenty Years of Experience, New York: Oxford University Press, 3-16, 5.

79

See generally, Peter B. Pashigian, 1985, “Environmental Regulation: Whose Self-Interests are Being
Protected?” Economic Inquiry 23 (4): 551-584.

34

program to rely on tradable emission permits.80 The objective was to reduce SO2 and NOx
emissions by 10 million and 2 million tons respectively from their 1980 levels. The
flexibility underlying the tradable emission permit system overcame political opposition
to the ambitious air pollution reduction objectives.
Under the permit system, an annual targeted level of emissions was set and
prorated across permit holders, who were allowed to discharge a specified amount of the
gasses. Emission permits were allocated to utilities through first-possession rules, based
on past electricity production, heat generation, fuel use or emissions, free of charge, and
hence grandfathered in existing utilities. Utilities in certain states such as Illinois,
Indiana, and Ohio were allocated an additional 200,000 allowances annually during the
first phase of regulation. Those states had important coal interests and all had ranking
members or chairs of key Congressional subcommittees.81
These preferential quotas, as with those granted in oil and gas prorationing, were
adopted, in part, to make the new property rights program politically viable for
incumbent firms, and to encourage investment in new and renewable energy technology
by newer utilities that had more limited quotas.
As in the RECLAIM program, the permits were a tradable property right to
discharge a specified amount of S02 and NOx. Rather than equating pollution levels
across firms as in past regulation, by trading these instruments marginal abatement costs
could be equalized across firms. Those firms that could reduce emissions at lower cost
could do so and sell the residual emission rights, apply them to offset excess emissions in
80

Joskow and Schmalensee, (1998, 38), 1990 CAAA, Public Law 101-549, Stavins (2007, 23).

81

A. Denny Ellerman, 2000, Markets for Clean Air, New York: Cambridge University Press, 40-3; Joskow
and Schmalensee (1998, 42).

35

other parts of their operations, or to bank them. An active market in emission permits
developed. Adoption of tradable emission permits has been viewed as a successful means
of lowering overall air pollution with a cost savings of over $1 billion relative to what
might have been possible under previous regulation.82 But as with similarly successful
ITQ’s in fisheries and unitization in oil and gas reservoirs, tradable emission permits
were not adopted until existing regulation proved both to be too costly and too ineffective
in mitigating the losses of open-access. Moreover, by that time the benefits and costs of
adopting property rights were sufficiently clear to allow side payments in the allocation
property rights to address distributional demands.
In efforts to address global air pollution externalities, the problems of uncertainty
in estimating the aggregate costs and benefits of regulation and their distribution across
countries have been even more severe in hindering timely action. The very nature of
global environmental externalities presents incentive problems. Abatement by any
country benefits others as a public good, but if abatement is costly to a country’s citizens,
its politicians have incentive to invest less in reduction efforts than would be globally
optimal and free ride on cutbacks taken elsewhere.
Consider first, the most successful effort to address international air pollution, the
Montreal Protocol of September 1987 on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.83
Concern about the build up of chlorofluorocarbons in the upper atmosphere surfaced in
1974 when two studies hypothesized that chlorine released from the breakdown of CFC’s

82

Tietenberg (2007, 71), Stavins (2007, 23).

83

Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer Treaty Doc No. 10, 100th Congress, 1st
Sess., 1987.

36

had destructive effects on stratospheric ozone.84 CFC’s were inexpensive chemicals used
since 1931 in refrigerants, solvents, propellants, and more recently in the production and
cleaning of computer components and other electronics. The U.S. accounted for from 25
to 30 percent of the world production of CFC’s between 1974 and 1986, and hence had a
vital interest in any international agreement to regulate or eliminate their production.85
Congressional hearings were conducted on the extent of ozone depletion and possible
remedies, but no unilateral action was taken. In 1977 the EPA proposed uniform
regulations to prohibit manufacture, processing, and interstate distribution of CFC’s. The
main advocates were environmental organizations and certain groups of scientists, but the
U.S. chemical industry successfully opposed regulation.86
In the 1970s the imperative of taking unilateral action that could involve
substantial economic costs in the U.S. was not compelling for key constituencies. The
actual atmospheric mechanisms involved were incompletely understood, and the extent
of ozone depletion and its consequences were unclear. Indeed, in 1983, under the Reagan
Administration, the EPA advised Congress that no action should be taken until the
relationship between CFC’s and ozone depletion was more clearly determined.87

84

Richard S. Stolarski and Ralph J. Cicerone, 1974, Stratospheric Chlorine: A Possible Sink for Ozone,
Canadian Journal of Chemistry, 52: 1610 and Mario J. Molina and F. Sherwood Rowland, 1974,
“Stratospheric Sink for Chlorofluoromethanes: Chlorine AtomicCatalyzed Destruction of Ozone,” Nature
249: 810-2.

85

Orval E. Nagle, 1989, “Stratospheric Ozone: United States Regulation of Chlorofluorocarbons,” 16
Boston College Environmental Affairs Legal Review, 531, 577.
86

See Richard Elliot Benedict,1991, Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 29, 102, for discussion of the role of environmental groups,
scientists, and NGOs as treaty advocates.

87

Nangle (1989, 543); A.L. Hollick and Richard N. Cooper, 1997, “Global Commons: Can They Be
Managed?” in Partha Dasgupta, Karl-Göran Mäler, and Alessandro Vercelli, eds. The Economics of
Transnational Commons, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 141-171, 157.

37

In March 1988, the NASA Ozone Trends Panel released additional scientific
information suggesting that the ozone “holes” were larger than previously believed and
that there were tighter links between ozone layer deterioration and CFC emissions. This
new information helped to shift the U.S. position on international collective action. It also
changed because domestic political opposition to regulation had diminished. The
chemical industry, with new technologies for CFC substitutes, no longer resisted
domestic CFC controls, and it lobbied for international restrictions to phase out CFC
production and trade.88 A mandated switch to new CFC substitutes had potential to
provide American firms with a competitive advantage relative to European producers of
CFC’s. Retrofitting by refrigeration and air-conditioning industries was costly, and U.S.
CFC-substitute producers needed guarantees that their customers could not shift to
alternative foreign sources of CFC’s. An international agreement to regulate CFC trade
would serve that purpose. Naturally European firms were more skeptical of the need to
restrict CFC’s, and the support of European governments for regulatory action generally
came later than the U.S. Even then there were disagreements between U.S. and European
representatives on timing and identification of the chemicals slated to be phased
out.89The more serious opposition, however, came from representatives of undeveloped
countries who saw restrictions on CFC’s as being particularly costly.
The first international action was launched 11 years after the ozone “holes” were
first detected. The Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer was
88

Irving M. Mintzer and Alan S. Miller, 1987, “The Ozone Layer: Its Protection Depends on International
Cooperation,” 21 Environmental Science Technology 1167; Gary L. Scott, Geoffrey M. Reynolds, and
Anthony D. Lott, 1995, “Success and Failure Components of Global Environmental Cooperation: The
Making of International Environmental Law,” 2 ILSA Journal of International and Comparative Law 23.

89

Benedict (1991, 144).

38

completed in 1985 and ratified by the U.S. one year later, in 1986.90 As with early smog
regulations in California, the convention offered no binding restrictions, but rather
emphasized research. It established broad international objectives to protect human health
and to promote study of the impact of CFC’s on the ozone layer. Disagreements,
especially between representatives of developed and developing countries, blocked any
actual CFC control measures.91 For developing countries CFC’s were a source of lowcost refrigerants, and the global externality resulted from a build up of emissions from
developed countries. Accordingly, representatives of developing countries, notably China
and India, demanded side payments to as a condition for coordinated action to protect the
ozone layer.
In response, representatives from the U.S., Canada, Japan, and Europe offered
countries with low per capita consumption of CFC’s various exemptions from
international regulations. This concession led to the agreement on the 1987 Montreal
Protocol. Under the Protocol, developed countries were to cut production and
consumption of CFC’s by 20 percent of their 1986 levels by 1993 and by 50 percent by
1998. CFC trade with countries not adopting the restrictions was to be stopped. With the
notion of “common but differentiated responsibilities” developing countries were allowed
an extra 10-year’s delay to reach reduced production targets and were authorized to
exceed their 1986 levels of production by up to 10 percent to satisfy “basic domestic
needs.”92

90

Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, May 2, 1985, Treaty Doc. No. 9, 99th
Congress 1st Sess., 1985.
91

Benedict (1991, 188, 232).

92

Benedict, 1991, 241).

39

Even so additional concessions had to be granted in order to get developing
countries to ratify the protocol. A Second Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol
was held in 1990 to devise additional side payments. A Multilateral Fund was established
to provide developing countries with financial assistance and CFC replacement
technology was to be transferred if they agreed to the protocol.93 Creation of a
multilateral fund, however, raised new distributional concerns among donor and recipient
countries. These included the size of individual contributions, the nature of penalties if
donors defaulted on their assessments, the amount of money to be granted recipients, and
their documentation requirements.94 Not all of the issues could be resolved at the second
meeting. Only very general language stating that the parties must take “every practicable
step” to control CFC emissions could be agreed to. The World Bank was to be the
administrator, and $160 million was to be made available to developing countries for
complying with the CFC accord. Further, the fund was to be increased by $80 million
when India and China ratified the Montreal Protocol.95
It took 16 years to reach general international agreement on controlling the
production and dissemination of CFC’s. Regulation has been based on production bans
and technological substitution. There also has been use of tradable emission permits for
achieving compliance with the Montreal Protocol, and a tax on CFCs was introduced
later to accelerate the phase out. CFC emissions have declined, and taxpayers in

93

Benedict (1991, 252); Bing Ling, 1992, Developing Countries and Ozone Layer Protection: Issues,
Principles, and Implications, 6 Tulane Environmental Law Journal 91.
94

Benedict (1991, 254-57, 294).

95

Ling (1992, 113).

40

developed countries have born most of the costs of the regulations.96 In the aggregate
these payments likely have been relatively small, given the benefits involved of
protecting the Ozone layer. Further, the chemical industry and environmental groups
have been formidable constituencies within developed countries for the protocol.
Despite all of this, the thickness of the South Pole ozone layer continues to
decline during the peak ozone-depleting season, and there are calls for even stricter
emissions controls. But the concessions made to developing countries to gain their
participation pose barriers for further reductions. China, which has become a large
producer of CFC’s and related refrigerants, is likely to resist loss of a profitable new
industry.97 .
The second example of international air pollution control efforts to limit green
house gas (GHG) emissions, however, faces even more difficult problems. There have
been delays, differential responses among countries to calls to address the externality, and
no success in reducing overall emissions. It seems unlikely that any effective, coordinated
response will take place until crises increase perceived benefits and mitigate international
distributional concerns. The issues are quite similar to those that have arisen regarding
CFC control.

96

For brief discussion of trading permits in CFCs for compliance with the Montreal Protocol, see Robert N.
Stavins, 1998, “Economic Incentives for Environmental Regulation,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics and The Law, Peter Newman, ed, London: Macmillan Reference, Volume 2: 6-13, 9. For
discussion of resistance to further reduction of CFCs in China, see “U.S. Plots New Climate Tactic:
Speedier Chemicals Ban Sought by White House, But China May Resist,” John J. Fialka, Wall Street
Journal, September 7, 2007, A8 on decline in ozone depleting gasses.
97

“U.S. Plots New Climate Tactic: Speedier Chemicals Ban Sought by White House, But China May
Resist,” John J. Fialka, Wall Street Journal, September 7, 2007, A8 on China’s likely resistance.

41

Global warming has been a concern in many quarters at least since the 1990s and
perhaps earlier.98 It is an open-access problem. With unrestricted access to the
atmosphere, gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2), Nitrous Oxide (N2O),
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s) and methane (CH4) are released as by-products of human
activities and other natural sources across countries. Regardless of their origin the gases
are spread around the globe with potential external effects. The gases retard the reradiation of the sun’s energy from the earth’s surface back into space. Under debate are
whether and how much the further accumulation of these gases will generate a damaging
rise in global temperatures and what to do about it.99
There are many sources of uncertainty regarding aggregate effects of global
warming, their distribution among countries, and the costs of reducing GHG emissions.
The magnitude of global warming and associated climate change remains generally
undetermined, although there is more of a consensus on the issue than even a few years
ago.100 The scientific uncertainty comes in estimating the rate at which greenhouse gas
concentrations will increase, the corresponding impact of rising GHG concentrations on
temperatures, the patterns of climate change across the globe, and their impact on the
regions affected.101 The research evidence on key aspects of these issues remains
98

Krier (1994, 857-59).

99

Hollick and Cooper (1997, 159), and John Weyant, John, 1993, “Costs of Reducing Global Carbon
Emissions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(4): 27-46, 27-30.

100

See “New Forecast for Climate Debate: Consensus on Emissions cuts Takes Shape, but Debate Turns to
Who Will Pay,” Jeffrey Ball, Wall Street Journal, September 4, 2007, A2.

101

See Matthew Paterson,1996, Global Warming and Global Politics, London and New York: Routledge,
9-15 and Hollick and Cooper (1997, 159-163). For evidence of continuing uncertainty on projections, see
Economist, online edition, August 16, 2007, “Modeling the Earth's climate mathematically is hard already.
Now a new difficulty is emerging,”
http://www.economist.com/science/displayStory.cfm?story_id=9645336&fsrc=nwlgafree.

42

incomplete and inconclusive. The resulting scientific uncertainty regarding global
warming allows politicians to chose among conflicting evidence for justifying positions
desired by critical constituencies with more certainty than actual understanding may
merit.102
The necessary emission reductions in response to possible climate change and the
associated economic costs involved are similarly unclear. The magnitude of the costs
depends upon the amount of the reduction required for each country and its pace. There is
the politically important issue of the global distribution of abatement costs. The costs are
the greatest for the countries that produce the most CO2 and other green house gasses.
The U.S. and China are currently the largest producers of CO2. Within countries
abatement efforts will have differential impacts, with the transportation, manufacturing,
and utility sectors incurring higher costs. There are many estimates of the costs of
emissions controls in the U.S. with the results dependent on the assumptions made
regarding timing, magnitude, and the instruments used.103 Those countries and interests
that anticipate bearing more of the costs of regulation understandably resist action until
compensating arrangements are implemented, but agreement on them is subject to the
same side-payment disputes noted above over who should pay and receive, the amounts
involved and the forms and timing of compensation. These negotiations also are
102

Paterson (1996, 14). See also Ronald N. Johnson and Gary D. Libecap, 2001, “Information Distortion
and Competitive Remedies in Government Transfer Programs: The Case of Ethanol,” Economics of
Governance 2(2): 1001-34 for discussion of the control of information in the political arena.
103

Weyant (1993), Hollick and Cooper (1997, 165); National Academy of Sciences, 1991, Policy
Implications of Greenhouse Warming, Washington D.C.: NAS Press; and Alan S. Manne and Richard G.
Richels , 1990, “CO2 Emission Limits: An Economic Costs Analysis for the USA,” The Energy Journal,
11(2): 51-85.

43

undermined by uncertainty regarding the magnitude and distribution of the costs and
benefits of international efforts.
Additionally as with the Montreal Protocol, there is no underlying enforcement
mechanism within the Kyoto Protocol of 1997, which was the first formal international
treaty to reduce GHG emissions.104 Under the protocol monitoring depends on annual self
reports by countries using comparable methodologies. Expert review teams are
authorized with voluntary country visits. No consequences of noncompliance could be
agreed upon, and the compliance provisions that are included apply only to Annex 1 or
industrialized countries. Absent effective enforcement, there are incentives for countries
to defect whenever the political costs become too high.
Given the unclear and uneven distribution of the costs and benefits of
international action and a general lack of immediacy in taking it, it is understandable that
progress has been slow regarding global warming. As of December 2006, 169 countries
had ratified the Protocol, but the U.S. and Australia had not, and China and India, as well
as other developing countries which have ratified it, are not required to take direct
action.105 Indeed, representatives of developing countries continue to demand that most
restrictions be implemented in developed countries. The Kyoto Protocol expires in 2012,
and GHG emissions have continued to increase.106

104

Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/kpeng.html.

105

http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/kyoto_protocol/application/pdf/kpstats.pdf. China also is
likely to resist restrictions on its profitable CFC and HCFC industries. One by-product, HFC-23 is 11,700
times more powerful as a global warming gas as CO2 See, “U.S. Plots New Climate Tactic: Speedier
Chemicals Ban Sought by White House, But China May Resist,” John J. Fialka, Wall Street Journal,
September 7, 2007, A8 on China’s production.

106

http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/ggccebro/chapter1.html

44

To lower the costs of GHG abatement, the Kyoto Protocol incorporated tradable
emissions permits based on their success in SO2 regulation in the U.S.107 In response, the
European Union, which ratified the protocol, created a multi-national GHG emissions
trading scheme, the largest in the world. Emissions were capped, and permits were
allocated for virtually all stationary industrial and electricity-generating units in the E.U.
A market developed with two trading periods, 2005-2007 and 2008-2012. The program
generally has been viewed as a success.108 This is the unusual case where property rights
have been established relatively early in the process of responding to an open-access
externality. One reason for this occurrence is general industry support due to lower
information costs about the use of emission rights as compared to reliance upon uniform
standards. Based on the lower costs and accomplishments of the U.S. SO2 trading
program, relative to alternative centralized regulation, industry representatives may have
preferred a cap-and-trade scheme over a more costly and uncertain multi-national
regulatory arrangement. If so, this institutional response is consistent with the overall
thesis of the paper.

107

Tietenberg (2007, 70).

108

For discussion and evaluation of the European Union trading scheme, see Frank J. Convery and Luke
Redmond, 2007, “Market and Price Developments in the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme,”
The Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(1): 88-111; A. Denny A. Ellerman and Barbara K.
Buchner, 2007, “The European Union Emissions Trading Scheme: Origins, Allocation, and Early Results,”
The Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1 (1): 66-87; and Joseph Kruger, Wallace E. Oates,
and William A. Pizer, 2007, “Decentralization in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme and Lessons for
Global Policy,” The Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1 (1): 112-133. There are issues of
allocation and the amount of allowances that have been provided. See “Emissions Trading: Lightly
Carbonated,” Economist, August 4, 2007, 53-4.

45

IV. Concluding Remarks: Delay in Response to Open Access and the Adoption of
Property Rights.
Theory and research regarding collective action in addressing open-access
resource problems indicates that success in controlling externalities comes when there is
a consensus on the aggregate benefits to be gained, that the parties perceive positive net
gains from agreement, and that they are homogeneous with respect to bargaining
objectives and in the distribution of the costs and benefits to be incurred. Agreements
reached under these conditions tend to be self-enforcing because it is in the interest of all
parties to insure success. Collective action may also achieve its objectives if the parties
are heterogeneous with respect to the net gains from cooperation, if the spread is not too
great and there are agreed-to bases for constructing side payments to compensate those
parties that may bear more costs or receive fewer gains. The resulting arrangement must
be secure enough so that the side payments are long term and predictable.
Uncertainty in predictions regarding aggregate benefits and costs of collective
action and their distribution among constituencies complicates this process by raising
transaction costs. Uncertainty makes it more difficult for parties to determine how they
will fare with formal arrangements to mitigate open-access externalities. Accordingly, the
incentives are for delay and for subsequent adoption of policies that involve the least cost
and minimize distributive effects. Property rights which are the fundamental solution to
open access, however, are more costly and they can result in a major redistribution of
wealth and political influence. In this case, it is efficient to wait as we have seen in
fisheries, common oil pools, and air pollution control. Accordingly, for individuals, as
well as, risk-adverse politicians and agency officials, property rights often are the
solution of last resort, rather than the front line of attack on the tragedy of the commons.

46

