                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY AND FIRST-TIME ENTRY BY MULTINATIONAL
                               FIRMS

                                         Katheryn Niles Russ

                                        Working Paper 13659
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13659


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




The author is grateful to Paul Bergin, Andrew Bernard, Nick Bloom, Holger Breinlich, Claudia Buch,
Terrence Chong, Carolyn Evans, Robert Feenstra, Fabio Ghironi, Linda Goldberg, Galina Hale, Heinz
Herrmann, Oscar Jorda, Jorn Kleinert, Hongbin Li, Alexander Lipponer, Robert Lipsey, Jose Lopez,
Thomas Lubik, Louis Maccini, Doug Miller, Marc Muendler, John Rogers, Kang Shi, and Jenny Xu
for helpful discussions at various phases of this project, as well as seminar participants the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Deutsche Bundesbank, Indiana University, University of California at Santa
Cruz, University of Tuebingen, the 2007 Midwest International Trade and Theory Meetings, the 2007
Midwest Macroeconomics Meetings, and the 2007 Western Economics Association. All errors are
very much her own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Katheryn Niles Russ. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Exchange Rate Volatility and First-Time Entry by Multinational Firms
Katheryn Niles Russ
NBER Working Paper No. 13659
November 2007
JEL No. F1,F2,F4

                                               ABSTRACT

Using a model with upfront sunk costs, heterogeneous firms, and endogenous exchange rates, this
paper demonstrates theoretically that volatility in fundamental variables such as the nominal interest
rate that drive exchange rate volatility can simultaneously impact the entry behavior of multinational
firms through a relative price channel unrelated to exchange rate risk. It then provides an empirical
illustration of the bias this endogeneity can cause when regressing measures of foreign direct investment
on exchange rate volatility. It is the first paper to provide empirical evidence that interest rate volatility
may influence the behavior of multinational firms.


Katheryn Niles Russ
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
knruss@ucdavis.edu
1    Introduction
Foreign direct investment (FDI) is the single largest source of capital inflows for
developing countries. In industrialized countries, the size of FDI inflows ranges
from zero to almost half the size of gross fixed capital formation. Surprisingly,
the impact of exchange rate variability on foreign direct investment rarely enters
debates over exchange rate management or monetary policy. One reason for this
omission could be the lack of conclusive evidence regarding the impact of exchange
rate variability on the investment behavior of multinational firms. A long list of
studies provide patches of evidence that multinational firms are likely to consider the
level and volatility of exchange rates before investing in overseas branches, but yield
conflicting theoretical predictions and empirical results. This study takes a fresh
look at the issue using a model with upfront sunk costs and endogenous exchange
rates. Though it does not resolve the puzzle, the model and subsequent empirical
examination provide one explanation for why exchange rate volatility has been seen
to both increase and decrease observed levels of foreign direct investment by showing
that underlying interest rate volatility is often positively correlated with exchange
rate volatility, but can have quite diﬀerent eﬀects on entry by foreign firms. The
findings also show for the first time using data on entry by individual firms that
one-time sunk costs are a likely engine through which interest rate volatility impacts
the investment behavior of multinational firms.
    The intuition underlying the model rests on four principal assumptions. First, an
unrecoverable upfront entry cost— here, the costs associated with conducting mergers
and acquisitions (M&As)— eﬀectively creates an option value in the tradition of Dixit
and Pindyck (1994). In a world with no upfront costs, a firm could simply take over
a new plant without regard to future conditions in any period when demand was
strong enough to yield positive profits. In contrast, the sunk nature of the initial
investment in this model forces the firm to weigh the present discounted value of all
potential future profits against the anticipated upfront cost of starting to produce in
a foreign country for the first time. The one-time entry cost is in essence an exercise
price—a fee paid to exercise the option of taking over a plant abroad.


                                          1
    Second, price stickiness causes an inverse relationship between the interest rate
and demand for goods produced by any firm, whether domestic or foreign-owned.
Any uncertainty in underlying macroeconomic variables may either encourage or
deter firms from entering the market, depending on the net impact it has on the
present discounted value of future profits via the resulting covariance of the expected
exchange rate with demand and production costs. Further, uncertainty has the
eﬀect of increasing the expected discounted value of marginal costs for firms setting
prices in advance, causing them to set higher prices and pushing up the equilibrium
aggregate price level. In this model, a higher price level translates into higher entry
costs. Thus, sticky prices aﬀect both the option value and the exercise price of
investing abroad in the presence of uncertainty.
    Third, for simplicity exchange rate behavior follows an uncovered interest rate
parity condition derived from the consumers’ choice between domestic and foreign
bonds. This means that exchange rate fluctuations are driven by interest rate
shocks in the host and source countries. In particular, an increase in interest rate
volatility in either country increases exchange rate volatility. The impact of exchange
rate fluctuations on the expected discounted value of variable profits is neutralized
for foreign firms by the risk-sharing properties of trading home and foreign bonds.
However, by influencing the price level, the underlying interest rate volatility has
a direct eﬀect on the eﬀective cost of upfront investment expenditures. I argue
and show empirically that the impact of interest rate volatility on the magnitude of
the sunk costs involved in investment aﬀects first-time foreign investors in the home
country diﬀerently than firms that already possess a functional facility in the home
country, whether they are home-owned or “veteran” foreign-owned firms that have
already invested there through mergers and acquisitions in prior periods.
    Boosting foreign (source-country) interest rate volatility, for instance, pushes up
the foreign price level, which increases the one-time upfront coordination costs of
transferring technological and management know-how to a new country for the first
time. That is, it increases the exercise price described above for first-time foreign
investors. This is not the case for domestically owned home firms or for “veteran”
foreign firms undertaking repeated investments in the home country, who do not

                                          2
bear this upfront coordination cost because they either are operating in their native
land or already paid it when they entered the country for the first time. Home
(host-country) interest rate volatility has a quite diﬀerent impact. By increasing
the price level, it pushes up the price of target firms on the home merger market.
This increases the opportunity cost of refusing to cash out for firms that already
possess a viable facility. It increases their willingness to sell faster than it dampens
the willingness of first-time foreign investors to buy, which ends up increasing first-
time FDI while decreasing domestic and veteran foreign entry. I quantify this wedge
between the two groups’ behavior as a function of their fixed costs of entry (and the
opportunity cost of deciding not to cash out). Thus, depending on whether home
or foreign interest rate volatility is driving exchange rate risk, one can expect quite
diﬀerent impacts on entry by new and veteran foreign firms. The combination of
sticky prices and endogenous exchange rates motivates a well known endogeneity
problem first uncovered in aggregate data on bilateral flows of FDI between the US,
Canada, and the UK by Linda Goldberg and Charles Kolstad (1995).
    Finally, the assumption that firms have heterogeneous productivity levels allows
the model to predict how many firms will invest abroad. Russ (2007) discusses the
diﬃculties that arise when addressing the question of how exchange rate risk aﬀects
FDI in a representative firm framework, where either all firms invest abroad or none
do. In this case, one can proxy changes in FDI by observing whether production by
the representative MNE increases or decreases in a particular period, but it is diﬃcult
to address questions about firms’ willingness to enter a market or, more broadly, why
they would invest abroad in an environment with zero profits. The heterogeneous
framework below allows one to predict that a larger or smaller number of firms will
invest abroad given a particular set of macroeconomic conditions. It also embraces
positive profits as an incentive to invest at home or abroad and corresponds with
stylized facts regarding the size and value-added per worker of MNEs compared to
firms that operate only in their native country discussed in Helpman, Melitz, and
Yeaple (2003) and documented in Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2005). Though this
model is considerably more stripped down insofar as it eliminates interesting features
such as persistence in exchange rate behavior, Ghironi and Melitz (2005) blazed a

                                           3
trail for introducing cross-border asset trade into a model of heterogeneous firms
with one-time sunk costs and endogenous exchange rates.
    Previous empirical studies, listed in Table 1, have used a variety of data sources,
measures of FDI (i.e., as a percentage of GDP, as a proportion of domestic invest-
ment, or in absolute levels), definitions of volatility, regression methods, and country
breakdowns.2 Table 2 shows that whether investigators focus on real or nominal
exchange rate fluctuations, the relationship between FDI and exchange rate volatility
varies depending on the sample period, country sample, and method of measuring
volatility. An important theoretical result in this study is that mergers and ac-
quisitions by veteran foreign investors3 respond quite diﬀerently to the interest rate
volatility that generates exchange rate volatility in the model. The empirical analy-
sis below supports the predictions of the model for first-time and veteran cross-border
mergers and acquisitions between OECD countries. This may be one more reason
that past studies have found conflicting estimates of the relationship between aggre-
gate FDI flows and exchange rate risk—the obseved relationship may vary depending
on the proportion of parent firms that are investing in a particular country for the
first time.


2       The Model
The representative consumer maximizes lifetime utility
                                         ∞
                                         X         µ                 ¶
                                                                Mt
                                   max         U       Ct , Lt,          ,
                                         t=0
                                                                Pt

with                 µ            ¶                 µ ¶
                               Mt      1   1−ρ       Mt
                    U Ct , Lt,      =     Ct + ln χ     − κLt ,
                               Pt     1−ρ            Pt
    2
     Please see Russ (2007) for a detailed survey of the theoretical and empirical literature on
exchange rate volatility and FDI.
   3
     Veteran foreign investors are firms who have already acquired one firm in a particular country
outside their native market and are making additional acquisitions there.



                                                   4
Ct representing the aggregate consumption bundle in the home country, Lt the total
amount of labor supplied, and M  Pt
                                   t
                                     the demand for real money balances.
     The consumer has the option to invest at time t in assets denominated in home
or foreign currency (Bt and Bt∗ ) which will pay a known, fixed gross return of it and
i∗t at the beginning of period t + 1. She also receives profits from the portfolio of
home-owned firms operating at home or abroad in the form of a dividend, Πt , which
includes net revenues from firms’ merger market activities at home and abroad, so
that the budget constraint is of the form

   Bt + St Bt∗ + Pt Ct + Mt+1 = Wt Lt + Πt + it−1 Bt−1 + St i∗t−1 Bt−1
                                                                   ∗
                                                                       + Mt−1 + Tt .

All seignorage revenue is transferred to consumers in the form of the lump-sum tax,
Tt . Preferences exhibit constant elasticity of substitution (CES) across goods so
that demand relations are downward sloping in the price of each good and expressed
as a fraction of aggregate consumption,
                                            µ              ¶−θ
                                                ph,t (i)
                               ch,t (i) =
                                                  Pt
                                            µ              ¶−θ
                                                pf,t (i)
                               cf,t (i) =                        ,
                                                  Pt

where cj,t (i) is the consumption by home consumers of a good produced by a firm

owned by residents of country j (j ∈ (f, h)) operating in the home country. The
CES preferences yield an aggregate home price index, Pt , of the usual form,

                        ⎛ nh,t             1+n                 ⎞ 1−θ
                                                                  1
                          Z                 Z f,t
                   Pt = ⎝ ph,t (i)1−θ di +       pf,t (i)1−θ di⎠     .
                           0                     1


Analogous equations apply for the representative foreign consumer, with an asterisk
used to denote variables involving levels of consumption, labor, assets, dividends,
money, and prices pertaining to activity in the foreign country.


                                            5
2.1       Consumption and the exchange rate
There is a very simple interest rate rule in each country,

                                            it = ı̄eεt
                                                               ∗
                                            i∗t = ı̄∗ eεt

                            σ2                            σ2
with shocks εt v N(− 2i , σ 2i ) and ε∗t v N (− 2i , σ 2i∗ ). It is assumed that the money
supply is inversely related to the interest rate,

                                                      μ
                                        Mt =
                                                   it − 1
                                                      μ
                                        Mt∗      = ∗      ,
                                                   it − 1

where μ is a constant. Taking first-order conditions with respect to Bt , Bt∗ , Ct , Lt
and Mt and rearranging yields an expression for consumption,4
                                                µ        ¶µ         ¶
                                                    1          μ
                                      Ctρ   =                           ,             (1)
                                                    Pt        χit

the wage rate,
                                                         κμ
                                                Wt =                                  (2)
                                                         χit
and St , the (spot) exchange rate, which is governed uncovered interest rate parity
(UIP)
                                   Et [St+1 ]   it
                                              = ∗.
                                      St        it
    The UIP relation implies that a high home interest rate in period t will bring
about a lower value of St , meaning that— holding expectations of the future exchange
rate constant— there is an immediate appreciation in the home currency when the
interest rate on home bonds improves relative to foreign bonds. Thus, the covariance
between consumption and the exchange rate diﬀers depending on whether fluctua-
tions in the host or source country interest rate are the main drivers of exchange rate
  4
      See Appendix for derivations.


                                                     6
                   end        begin                                  end        begin
                   t-1          t                                     t          t+1


             -Firms engage    -it-1Bt-1         -Production    - Firms engage   -itBt
             in merger        - it revealed     occurs         in merger        - it+1
             market                             -Consumers     market           revealed
             -All firms set                     make bond      -All firms set
             prices for                         and goods      prices for
             period t                           purchases      period t
                                                -S t emerges




                                          Figure 1: Timeline

volatility, which here is equal to σ 2i + σ 2i∗ − 2cov(it , i∗t ).


2.2     Firms and entry
Firms are permanently endowed with a labor productivity level, ϕ. The timeline in
Figure 1 displays the order of events in the economy. At the end of period t − 1,
all firms set prices and firms that operate only in their native market decide if they
will purchase a local marketing and distribution network in the market for mergers
and acquisitions. Firms with an eﬃcient technology but no viable marketing and
distribution network in their own native market also must decide whether to purchase
a facility. At the beginning of period t, consumers receive (gross) interest payments
on government bonds purchased in the previous period and it is revealed. Then,
several things happen simultaneously: new firms pay entry costs, all production
takes place, consumers purchase bonds and goods, and the period-t exchange rate
materializes amidst the bond trading. The exchange rate is endogenous to bond
trading, but is not impacted by foreign direct investment activities.5
   5
    See Lubik and Russ (2006) for a model where the exchange rate is endogenous to multinational
activity.


                                                   7
   The output of any firm operating in the home country owned by agents in country
j operating in the home market is given by

                                       cj,t (ϕ) = ϕlj,t (ϕ).

They earn profits in each period

                             π j,t (ϕ) = pj,t (ϕ)cj,t (ϕ) − Wt lj,t (ϕ).

Firms set prices in advance, so that period t prices are set given information available
at the end of period t − 1. They each choose a price for their goods by maximizing
profits subject to the consumer demand relations above, which turns out to be a
markup over the expected discounted value of marginal costs
                                          µ             ¶
                                               θ
                                              Et−1 [dt Wt Ct ]
                           ph,t (ϕ) =
                                              θ−1
                                               Et−1 [dt Ct ]
                                                   h          i
                                       µ     ¶E     d ∗ Wt Ct
                                          θ    t−1    t St
                            pf,t (ϕ) =              h        i ,
                                         θ−1   Et−1 d∗t CStt

where the stochastic discount factor for home firm managers, derived from the con-
                                          βP C ρ              βP ∗ Ct∗ρ
sumer’s first-order conditions,6 is dt = Pt−1tC ρt and d∗t = P ∗ t C ∗ρ for foreign firm
                                               t−1            t−1 t−1
          7
managers. Using the consumption equation and the reduced-form expression for
the wage (equations (1) and (2)), the pricing rules simplify to
                                                               ∙          ¸
                                                                    −1
                                          µ         ¶ κμEt−1       it ρ
                                               θ
                             pj,t (ϕ) =                       ∙ ρ−1 ¸ .
                                              θ−1
                                                        χϕEt−1 it ρ


       In the home market, Vt−1 (0) represents the the endogenously determined price of
   6
    See Appendix. Results are qualitatively the same even if a constant discount factor is used.
   7
    From the first-order conditions derived in the Appendix, it can be seen that these are equal to
the inverse of the nominal interest rate on Bt in each country.



                                                    8
a network denominated in units of the home consumption bundle. The eﬃciency of
the parent firm is transferred to the target firm, so a target firm’s labor productivity
parameter has no impact at all on its takeover price. The takeover cost is paid at the
end of period t − 1. Firms observed in the data purchasing more than one network
in the merger market are treated in this model as though they are beginning to
market a brand new product line, with no economies of scope. Multinational firms
investing for the first time in a particular country must also devote some resources
at their headquarters to transfer their technology to the new country and integrate
the overseas branch (in a way that conforms to both countries’ cultural and legal
systems) into their management structure. The cost is denominated in units of the
composite consumption good in the source country. For foreign firms investing for
                                                                    ∗
the first time in the home country, this cost is represented by Pt−1   f.
   Equilibrium is governed by an entry condition which stipulates that the expected
present discounted value of all future profits accrued by the least productive firm
entering the overseas market equals the cost of entry. If it were more than the entry
cost, more firms would desire to invest. If it were less, firms would exit by liquidating
their overseas assets. I abstract from the purchase and sale of fixed assets, assuming
here for simplicity that local firm assets are perfectly liquid within the local market
and eﬃciently priced, so that there are no expected capital gains on fixed assets in
the steady state. The condition governing the behavior of foreign firms deciding
at time t − 1 whether to invest in the home market for the first time (F T ) and
begin prodution in period t is expressed in terms of the value of potential overseas
operations,
                          "∞ Ã k               !                    #
                           X Y                     π f,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )     Pt−1 Vt−1 (0)
   FT
 Vf,t−1 (ϕ̂f,t ) = Et−1                d∗t+m                          −                   ∗
                                                                                      − Pt−1 f ≡ 0, (3)
                          k=1    m=0
                                                        St+k               St−1

                           Q
                           k
where the expression             dt+m represents the compounding of the inverted gross
                           m=0
discount rate as the firm considers profits that would be reaped further and further
into the future, making the present discounted value of total expected profits finite.



                                                      9
Similarly, the entry condition for home-owned firms is
                             "∞ Ã k                   !                #
                              X Y
         Vh,t−1 (ϕ) = Et−1                       dt+m π h,t+k (ϕ̂h,t ) − Pt−1 Vt−1 (0) ≡ 0.   (4)
                              k=1          m=0


Further, for any home firm with ϕ < ϕ̂h,t , the cash payment for its marketing and
distribution network on the merger market will exceed its expected discounted future
profits from active production. That is, home firms drawing ϕ less than the threshold
value will have
                              "∞ Ã k        !               #
                               X Y
            Vh,t−1 (ϕ) = Et−1           dt+m πh,t+k (ϕ̂h,t ) < Pt−1 Vt−1 (0)
                                     k=1    m=0


and will immediately sell their facilities on the merger market for the amount Pt−1 Vt−1 (0)
rather than engaging in production.
     Substituting the pricing rules for each good into the formula for the aggregate
price level, one obtains an expression in terms of the endogenous variables ϕ̂f,t and
ϕ̂f,t :                                               ∙ ¸
                                                                  −1
                                       µ       ¶ κμEt−1 it ρ
                                            θ
                             Pt =                        ∙ ρ−1 ¸ ,
                                           θ−1
                                                χϕ̄t Et−1 it ρ

where ϕ̄t represents the aggregate productivity level in the home economy, defined
by
                          ⎛                                ⎞ θ−1
                                                              1
                            Z∞              Z∞
                          ⎜                                ⎟
                    ϕ̄t = ⎝ ϕθ−1 dG(ϕ) +       ϕθ−1 dG(ϕ)⎠ .
                             ϕ̂h,t                        ϕ̂f,t

Supposing that firms draw their labor productivity endowment from a cumulative
distribution with Pareto form, G(ϕ) = 1−ϕ−k , then the number of firms operating in
the home country owned by residents of country j will equal nj,t = 1−G(ϕ̂j,t ) = ϕ̂−k
                                                                                   j,t ,
where k is an exogenous shape parameter restricted to values greater than θ + 1.
    Substituting expressions for wages, consumption, prices, the discount rate, the


                                                     10
exchange rate (using the UIP equation), and expected interest rates and normalizing
St−1 ≡ 1, one obtains a pseudo-reduced form in the steady state for equation (3),8
                               µ            ¶ ρ1
                                             µ     ¶               µ       ¶
                        1
                          −θ        θ−1          θ    κμ ρ1 σ2i
                                                       ρ−1
                                                              σ 2i       θ     κμ ρ1 σ2i∗
VfF T (ϕ̂f )
          =      ϕ̂θ−1
                   f ϕ̄
                        ρ          e       −             e V (0)−
                                                       2ρ2                        fe      ≡ 0.
                                     θκ        θ − 1 χϕ̄               θ − 1 χϕ̄∗
                                                                                   (5)
One might surmise that “veteran” foreign firms making repeated takeovers in the
home country might also incur a headquarters coordination cost, but that it would
be much smaller than f , so that foreign interest rate volatility would have much less
or even zero deterrent eﬀect in comparison with first-time foreign investors. Suppose,
for simplicity, that there is no additional headquarters coordination cost for veteran
foreign investors. Then, once we use the risk-sharing result from frictionless nominal
bond trading, dt = St d∗t , their entry condition is identical to that of home firms
investing in their native market. Using equation (4), the analogous equation for
home firms is
                                                        µ                 ¶ 1ρ                       µ         ¶
                                                 1
                                                   −θ        θ−1        κμ ρ1 σ2i     ρ−1
                                                                                             σ2i            θ
Vh (ϕ̂h ) =    VfV eteran (ϕ̂Vf )   =   ϕ̂θ−1
                                          h   ϕ̄ ρ                          e V (0) ≡ 0
                                                                                  e   2ρ2          −
                                                              θκ        χϕ̄                                θ−1
                                                                                       (6)
Using the implicit function rule, one can determine that ceteris paribus, a small
increase in interest rate volatility arising in the source country will cause fewer firms
to invest, while a small increase in host country interest rate volatility will entice
more entry. That is, given a specific price, V (0)9

                                                                          ∂Vf
                                                   ∂ ϕ̂f      ∂σ2i∗
                                                          = −       ≥0
                                                   ∂σ 2i∗     ∂Vf
                                                                          ∂ ϕ̂f


and
                                                                      ∂Vf
                                                   ∂ ϕ̂f     ∂σ 2i∗
                                                         = −        < 0.
                                                   ∂σ 2i     ∂Vf
                                                                      ∂ ϕ̂f

   8
       See Appendix for derivation.
   9
       See Appendix for proof.



                                                                     11
    Moving fixed costs to the right and dividing equations (5) and (6), one can also
see the relationship between the home and first-time foreign entry behavior:

                               µ         ¶θ−1       Ã          !θ−1
                                   ϕ̂f                  ϕ̂f                  P ∗f
                                                =                     =1+           .           (7)
                                   ϕ̂h                  ϕ̂Vf                P V (0)

Numerical exercises below will show that the wedge between the total fixed cost
of entry for first time foreign investors versus domestic or veteran foreign investors,
        ∗f
1+ PPV (0)  , falls as σ 2i increases and rises as σ 2i∗ increases. That is, increases in σ 2i drive
up the total fixed cost of entry at a faster rate for domestic and veteran entrants
than for first-time foreign entrants, for whom the headquarters coordination cost,
P ∗ f , is relatively unaﬀected by home interest rate volatility.10
     Solving the full model numerically requires six equations: two entry conditions
for first-time multinational entrants, two for native entrants, and a merger-market
clearing condition in each country. Merger-market clearing conditions in steady
state require that the number of active firms equal the number of existing marketing
and distribution networks. If a proportion η of all potential native entrepreneurs in
each country draw a viable network, then the steady-state merger market clearing
conditions are given by nh + nf = η in the home country and n∗h + n∗f = η ∗ in the
foreign country. One can also include two additional equations for veteran multina-
tional investors in each country, but (assuming that the headquarters coordination
cost is zero for repeated overseas takeovers) these turn out to be identical to the two
equations for native entrants, so they are left out of the numerical solution below
with the understanding that domestic and veteran foreign firms will have the same
response to changes in volatility. Thus, the numerical solutions mapped below cap-
ture a succession of steady states which vary only according to the level of home or
foreign interest rate volatility treating all foreign entrants into the home country as
though they are undertaking their first overseas acquisition. The exact calibration
is written in the Appendix, but the basic result, that home volatility has little (zero
or a small positive) eﬀect whereas foreign interest rate volatility has an unequivo-
  10
       P ∗ is aﬀected indirectly, through changes in ϕ̂∗h .


                                                               12
                                                                                                                             FT Foreign entry as home volatility increases
                                                                                                                             FT Foreign entry as foreign volatility increases



           Fraction of Foreign Firms Acquiring Home Facility for First Time



                                                                               0.3




                                                                              0.25




                                                                               0.2
                                                                                     0   0.1   0.2   0.3        0.4       0.5       0.6     0.7         0.8       0.9           1
                                                                                                           Variance of Interest Rate Shocks




Figure 2: Impact of Home i-rate volatility on First-Time Foreign entry into the Home
market

cally negative eﬀect on first-time entry by foreign firms is robust to a wide range of
parameter values, as long as consumers are suﬃciently risk averse (ρ ≥ 1).
    It is not possible to obtain an analytical solution for ϕ̂f (and thus nf = ϕ̂−γ
                                                                                  f ) given
the calibration used here (ρ > 1, θ > 2), but the relationship between home interest
rate volatility, foreign interest rate volatility, and the number of first-time foreign
entrants from numerical solution is shown in Figure 2. No linearization is necessary
to obtain the solutions. The model predicts that volatility in the host country
lowers the threshold productivity level for first-time foreign investors, meaning that
for ρ > 1, is easier for foreign firms to enter when σ 2i is higher. In contrast, volatility
originating in the source (foreign) country reduces entry by first-time foreign entrants,
with little eﬀect on entry by native or veteran foreign investors except insofar as it
loosens up the merger market (lowering V (0)). Note from the reduced form of the


                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                           First−time Foreign entry
                                                                                                                                           Domestic entry



            Fraction of Home or Foreign Firms Acquiring Home Facility



                                                                         0.3




                                                                        0.25




                                                                         0.2
                                                                               0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4      0.5        0.6      0.7      0.8       0.9           1
                                                                                                 Variance of Home Interest Rate Shocks




  Figure 3: Impact of Home Interest Rate volatility on First-Time Foreign Entry

value function for the threshold firm that this impact grows with the size of the sunk
cost (f ). Thus, the model predicts that while exchange rate volatility is positively
correlated with both home and foreign interest rate volatility, these two sources of
uncertainty have a very diﬀerent impact on foreign direct investment in the home
country. Home interest rate volatility has either a positive or zero impact on foreign
direct investment, while the relationship between foreign interest rate volatility and
entry is negative.
    Figure 3 contrasts entry by first-time foreign investors and domestically owned
home firms as home interest rate volatility increases.11 As home interest rate volatil-
ity increases, P also increases, the total cost of entry increases faster for home
(and similarly, veteran foreign) firms than for first-time foreign entrants. Figure
  11
   For the case of logarithmic preferences, where ρ = 1, both lines in this graph would be flat and
home interest rate volatility would have no eﬀect on either variable.



                                                                                                             14
                                                                                    1.8
                                                                                                                                                            nf/nh




            Ratio of New Foreign to Domestic Firms, Relative Price Effect (Wedge)
                                                                                                                                                            wedge = 1+(P*f/PV(0))

                                                                                    1.6




                                                                                    1.4




                                                                                    1.2




                                                                                     1




                                                                                    0.8




                                                                                    0.6




                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                          0     0.1     0.2    0.3      0.4       0.5        0.6      0.7     0.8      0.9          1
                                                                                                                Variance of Foreign Interest Rate Shocks




                                  Figure 4: Relative Entry Rates and the Relative Price Eﬀect

4 illustrates the relative price eﬀect—the relationship between the ratio of entry rates
( nnhf ) and the wedge between total fixed costs of entry depicted in equation (7),
          ∗f
1 + PPV (0)  as foreign interest rate volatility increases.12


3      Empirical Analysis
Given the model above, I estimate the reduced-form equations

                                                                                              ln nf,t = α + β 1 t + β 2 t2 + γDt + δ 1 σ 2i,t + δ 2 σ 2i∗ ,t ,                          (8)
  12
    An analogous graph with home volatility on the x-axis would show the lines growing closer
together on the right side at higher, rather than lower values of volatility.




                                                                                                                              15
and                µ      ¶
                   nf,t
                ln            = α + β 1 t + β 2 t2 + γDt + δ 1 σ 2i,t + δ 2 σ 2i∗ ,t ,   (9)
                   nh,t
where t is a time trend and Dt is a vector of fixed eﬀects. I assume that although
volatility might change from year to year, prospective investors consider information
accumulated over several years prior to investing and expect volatility to remain
roughly the same as the level they observe in the period when they decide to invest.
Thus, each year t would represent a particular steady state from the perspective of
the investor. For both equations, the theory and numerical steady states above
imply that δ 1 ≥ 0 and δ 2 < 0 for first-time cross-border investment. The empirical
analysis takes place in four parts. First, regressions are run based on (8) for the
log number of firms investing in a country for the first time. Second, to show the
importance of the sunk cost, the same regressions are run for all incidences of veteran
cross-border investment in the panel— investments by foreign firms that have already
invested in the host country— with quite diﬀerent results. Third, to neutralize
the impact of any time-varying, unobserved variables that may be impacting both
the volatility of interest rates and the general investment environment within each
country, which could cause an endogeneity problem similar to that described in Russ
(2007), all regressions are also run using the log ratio of foreign to domestic first-
time acquirors, based on (9). Finally, to avoid the bias that taking logs and ignoring
zero-observations can generate in the standard linear regressions, described in detail
by Silva and Tenreyro (2006), a count-data regression is run based on equation
(8) using Poisson quasi-maximum-likelihood estimation. Results are robust to all
specifications.
    Many factors can influence exchange rate volatility. Ideally, one would want to
be regressing the entry variables on the portion of exchange rate volatility gener-
ated by interest rate volatility. A structural vector autoregression (SVAR) is often
used for this type of variance decomposition. The panel specification here is chosen
over an SVAR for several reasons. The most practical reason is that most SVAR
specifications assume a constant variance over the sample period. Using a multi-
variate GARCH framework can address this problem, but even for a two-country


                                                 16
analysis, there is a large dimensionality obstacle. The panel also allows one to con-
sider information from a wider array of countries at once and the technique used
to measure volatility here meshes with the approaches used in most prior studies of
FDI. Nonetheless, nesting the entry behavior of multinational firms in a rigorous
time series model remains interesting ground for future research.


3.1    Data
Data on mergers and acquisitions is taken from Thomsons SDC Platinum database.
The dataset begins in 1980 and the sample used below starts with firms reporting
investment in a new country in 1986, based on dates the deals were executed (the
”eﬀective date”). Firms are assumed not to have conducted overseas mergers and
acquisitions prior to 1980. The number of firms native to one OECD country and
investing for the first time in a diﬀerent OECD country are totalled by year, from
1986 through 2005. To clarify, a German firm conducting an M&A in the US in
1989 would be categorized as a first-time entrant if it had no recorded acquisitions
in the US between 1980 and 1988, but a veteran entrant if it had already made an
acquisition in the US during that time. Interest rate variables are from the monthly
series corresponding to the US Fed Funds Rate in the IMF International Financial
Statistics. Where that was not available, the IFS series most closely corresponding
to an overnight rate was used. Volatility is measured in three diﬀerent ways, all of
which yield similar results: (1) the standard deviation of the demeaned change in the
monthly short-term interest rate, (2) the standard deviation of departures from the
mean short-term interest rate, and (3) the standard deviation of errors from a simple
AR-1 process (it = φit−1 + ut ). All three methods are computed using 24-month
rolling windows, then taking an average of the changing monthly volatility measures
for each year. The first method is a rigorous construction of σ 2i and σ 2i∗ as they
are rather simplistically modeled above, so results reported here are based on this
measurement approach, but the results are robust to each method. Fixed eﬀects are
included for host-source country pairs, flows between EMU members, being about to
join the EMU, and the East Asian crisis years (1997, 1998, and 1999). I also include


                                         17
a linear and quadratic time trend to account for the fact that cross-border mergers
and acquistions are generally increasing across all countries during the sample period.


3.2    Results for first-time investment
Table 3 displays results from regressions of the (log) number of cross-border merg-
ers and acquisitions from each country to each country in each year on interest
rate volatilility in the source and host countries, which in this model represent the
reduced-form components of exchange rate volatility. A simple OLS regression re-
veals coeﬃcients on volatility of the expected sign, though only the negative eﬀect of
volatility originating in the source country is significant. One might be concerned
that if monetary policy is coordinated in any degree across industrialized countries,
source and host interest rate volatility may be correlated. To address this prob-
lem, the regression is also run on the diﬀerence between source and host volatility
(σ 2i∗ − σ 2i ), for which the coeﬃcient should negative, given the predictions for δ 1 and
δ 2 . The coeﬃcient in this case is negative and still significant. Using cluster-robust
errors in the OLS equation, as in columns (3) and (4), the coeﬃcients are all still
of the same sign but again only source-country interest rate volatility (column (3))
and the diﬀerence between source and host volatility (column (4)) have a significant
impact. Clustering in this case is done by country pair, taking into account the
direction of flows, so flows from the US to Canada and from Canada to the US count
as two separate country pairs.
      The levels of M&As between the country pairs are highly persistent: the Arrellano-
Bond test statistic reveals residuals with autocorrelation of degree one. I address
this problem using two diﬀerent methods. First, I use feasible generalized least
squares (FGLS), imposing a common level of autocorrelation in the errors across the
entire panel, but allowing for heteroskedasticity between country pairs, displayed in
column (5) of Table 3. The results are still of the same sign and both variables of
interest are now significant at the 1% level, as is the volatility diﬀerential in column
(6). Second, I use an Arellano-Bond specification. The GMM results in columns
(7) and (8) reveal that previous growth in entry is by far the best predictor of fu-


                                            18
ture growth in entry by foreigners. Again, the variables of interest, though small
in magnitude, are all of the predicted sign and with the exception of growth in host
volatility, are significant at the 1% or 5% level. All results are robust to whether
the entire OECD sample is used or just a subset of outflows to all OECD countries
from G-7 countries. Thus, it is not likely that source-country interest rate volatility
simply indicates institutional instability that drives investment overseas.


3.3    Other determinants of FDI
Previous studies have linked numerous other variables to the propensity of foreigners
to invest in a particular country, including distance, host-country GDP and GDP
growth, and capital controls in the host country. The host-source country pair fixed
eﬀects included in specifications (1)-(8) of Table 3 are interpreted as controlling for
distance. To control for changes in the host country’s macroeconomic environment
that are not captured in the simple model above, such as GDP growth, I run all of the
above specifications using the ratio of foreign to domestic mergers and acquisitions
as the dependent variable. Table 4 contains the results for this exercise, showing
that the sign of all coeﬃcients estimated on the variables of interest are again of
the predicted sign— negative for the level of interest rate volatility in the source
country and positive for the level of volatility in the host country for columns (1)-
(6), where the dependent variable is the log ratio of foreign to domestic M&As.
The coeﬃcients are also of predicted sign for the GMM estimations in columns (7)
and (8), where the dependent variable is the change in the log ratio of foreign to
domestic M&As. However, it is likely that autocorrelation is more of a concern in
all of these specifications, as the estimated autocorrelation coeﬃcients for the errors
across the panel in the FGLS regressions are twice as large as in Table 3 (0.18 vs
0.9). Host country volatility yields a significant impact on the investment ratio only
for the GMM specifications, where it is positive and significant at the 5% level. The
negative impact of source volatility is significant for the OLS estimates, as is the
source-host volatility diﬀerential in the FGLS specification, but there is no evidence
of a significant negative link under the GMM specification, as columns (7) and (8)


                                          19
demonstrate that the coeﬃcient is of about the same magnitude whether source and
host volatilities are considered separately or combined into the source-host volatility
diﬀerential.


3.4    Repeat investors
All of these regressions are now conducted for veteran foreign investors—firms con-
ducting M&As in countries where they have already made at least one investment.
Table 5 shows no evidence that contemporaneous levels of source-country interest
rate volatility impact the decisions of veteran firms. In addition, column (7) in Ta-
ble 5 reveals a negative relationship between veteran FDI and host-country interest
rate volatility. In Table 6, noting the GMM specifications in columns (7) and (8),
there is again no clear evidence that veteran foreign investors respond any diﬀer-
ently to host- or source-country interest rate volatility than domestic investors. The
FGLS specifications show that veteran foreign investors might be more deterred by
any kind of interest rate volatility than domestic veteran investors, but the sign for
host country volatility and the volatility diﬀerential is diﬀerent than in any of the
clustered OLS or GMM specifications, calling into question its robustness. This re-
sult is important because it clarifies the nature of sunk costs—that one-time, upfront
sunk costs of the sort modeled above make firms more sensitive to volatility in the
fundamental variables, whether it arises from host- or source-country interest rates.
In contrast, repeated costs such as overhead, taxes, maintenance of distribution net-
works, and certain types of contracted labor that also may be sunk insofar as they
are paid or promised before the firm makes its sales and repatriates the profits at a
future exchange rate, are not likely to have this eﬀect.


3.5    The Poisson specification
Regressions above refer only to country pairs between which cross-border M&As
are actually taking place. Zero-observation pairs may also contain important in-
formation, insofar as omitting them can generate selection bias in the estimated
coeﬃcients. Further, Silva and Tenreyro (2006) demonstrate that bias can also arise

                                          20
when using logarithmic transformations of variables in the presence of heteroskedas-
ticity. To address both of these issues, Table 7 presents estimates from a Poisson
quasi-maximum-likelihood specification with robust standard errors using a count of
the number of M&As,

                    nf,t = α + β 1 t + β 2 t2 + γDt + δ 1 σ 2i,t + δ 2 σ 2i∗ ,t .

Source-country interest rate volatility has a strongly significant negative impact on
first-time cross-border M&As, while host-country interest rate volatility has no sig-
nificant impact. Joining the EMU increases the incidence rate for first-time FDI
by about 21 percent and veteran FDI by 15 percent. In terms of size, joining the
Euro Area boosts first-time FDI by about 10 times more than a one unit increase
in source-country volatility would dampen it. A one unit increase in volatility is an
increase of about 2.2 standard deviations for the US (which has a minimum volatil-
ity measure of 0.14 and a maximum of 1.8) and Switzerland, 3 standard deviations
for the Netherlands, 2 for the UK, 1.2 for Australia, 0.5 for South Korea, 0.26 for
Sweden, and 0.04 for Turkey. The standard deviation for the sample as a whole is
5.3. These patterns for hold for first-timers even when EMU members are excluded,
when the US is excluded, and when only inflows to the US and UK are used. They
hold whether interest rate volatility is defined as the variance of departures in the
monthy interest rate from the mean interest rate over two-year rolling windows (re-
ported here) or as the variance of demeaned changes in the interest rate over two-year
rolling windows. They do not hold for intra-EMU member flows, where interest rate
volatility has no significant impact on first-time FDI. It is not clear whether this is
due to the common currency or due to the dramatically reduced sample size.
    The situation is exactly the reverse for veteran cross-border investment. For
veteran cross-border investors, it is again host-country interest rate volatility that
acts as a deterrent, while source volatility has no significant impact. This is true
when excluding EMU members, when excluding the US, and when using only flows
into the UK and US. It also holds for both definitions of interest rate volatility
(variance of departures from the mean or of demeaned changes). Interest rate


                                                21
volatility has no significant measurable impact on intra-EMU flows. Again, a one
unit increase in host volatility has an impact about one-tenth the size of joining the
EMU.
    The UIP condition used here to govern the behavior of expected exchange rates
is quite simplistic. One might conjecture that the measure of interest rate volatility
in the empirical analysis could be acting as a proxy for overall macroeconomic or
institutional uncertainty in the host and source countries. If this were the case, then
one would expect volatility to induce capital flight— increased flows of outward FDI.
However, it is seen in Tables 3, 4, and 7 that source country volatility consistently
either reduces or has no eﬀect on (outward) FDI, rather than increasing it. Hausman
and Fernandez-Arias (2001) provide convincing evidence that in emerging markets,
a high proportion of FDI relative to other types of investment may be the result of
investors trying to cope with institutional or other types of systemic instability in the
host country. This study complements those findings insofar as it finds a positive
link between host-country volatility and cross-border acquisitions. However, the
sample considered here consists of OECD countries and the results hold even for
inflows into the US and UK, where investors are not likely to have had such concerns
in recent years.


3.6    Actual exchange rate volatility
This model captures only a small part of the relationship between the exchange rate
and FDI, so it does not entirely resolve the puzzle by any means. To illustrate, I
take the case of flows involving US firms as targets or acquirors. I draw montly
data on the bilateral exchange rate against the dollar from the St. Louis Federal
Reserve Bank’s FRED database for each country except the US and use FRED’s
broad trade-weighted (US dollar) exchange rate for the US. To illustrate, column
(1) in Table 8 shows the coeﬃcients from an OLS regression on the equation

                      σ 2s = α + β 1 t + β 2 t2 + λ1 σ 2i,t + λ2 σ 2i∗ ,t + εt




                                                22
for the two definitions of volatility, in the spirit of Engel, Mark, and West (2007),
who find that monetary variables are useful to predict exchange rate volatility, if not
always exchange rate levels. Within the sample here, bilateral exchange rate volatil-
ity against the US dollar is positively correlated with both host- and source-country
interest rate volatility, though only the coeﬃcient for host interest rate volatility
is significant. In support of the modelabove, there is no statistically significant
relationship between first-time cross-border entry and the predicted volatility from
this equation (σ̂ 2s = α + β 1 t + β 2 t2 + λ1 σ 2i,t + λ2 σ 2i∗ ,t ), regardless of how volatility is
defined.
      However, the definition of volatility does matter, both for the sign of the coeﬃ-
cient estimated for exchange rate volatility and for the impact of trying to clean out
the endogeneity problem discussed above. For volatility defined as the variance of
departures from the mean (exchange rate or interest rate), we observe a negative and
weakly statistically significant relationship between FDI and exchange rate volatility
in Column 3,13 which persists and gets somewhat larger when regressing nf,t on εt
instead of σ 2s , shown in Column 4. Column 5 and 6 show the same regressions run for
volatility defined as demeaned changes in the exchange rate. Whereas exchange rate
volatility initially has no statistically significant relationship with first-time foreign
entry, the portion of exchange rate volatility not attributable to interest rate volatil-
ity (“cleaned” of the source of endogeneity discussed in this paper) has a positive
coeﬃcient that is weakly statistically significant and three times larger than that for
σ 2s . For first-time foreign investment, the definition of volatility is important—it is
not clear why one definition has a positive relationship with first-time entry and the
other a negative one—but endogeneity, clearly at work in Columns 5 and 6, is also
important. For veteran investors (not shown here), neither the raw (σ 2s ) nor the
cleaned (εt ) measures of exchange rate volatility have a significant relationship with
the number of cross-border M&As. The fact that the two raw measures of exchange
rate volatility have statistically significant correlations with first-time FDI but not
with repeat foreign investment oﬀers another explanation for conflicting estimates
  13
    Columns 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Table 8 all refer to Poisson quasi-MLE regressions with robust
standard errors, as in Table 7.


                                                 23
across studies.


4     Conclusions
In summary, though interest rate volatility in this study’s panel is positively corre-
lated with the volatility of its exchange rate, host and source interest rate volatility
have quite diﬀerent eﬀects on first-time and veteran foreign direct investment. In-
terest rate volatility in the host country encourages or has no eﬀect on first-time
acquisitions by foreign firms, but soundly disourages veteran investors. In contrast,
interest rate volatility in the source country has little eﬀect on veteran cross-border
investors, but deters firms considering investing in a particular country for the first
time. At the same time, both sources of volatility have (on average) a positive
correlation with exchange rate volatility in the sample studied here. Thus, the
empirical findings combined with the theoretical model above provide a clue to the
puzzle in existing literature trying to pindown the relationship between foreign direct
investment and exchange rate volatility.
    The findings also demonstrate that the size of estimated coeﬃcients on exchange
rate volatility can be dampened by this endogeneity, but do not explain exactly why
the direction of the correlation between FDI and exchange rate volatility is positive
in some studies and negative in others. Further, common measures of exchange rate
volatility have significant correlations with first-time foreign investment, but not with
veteran investment for US bilateral flows, which can not be accounted for in the model
here. Two possible reasons for these lingering pieces of the exchange rate-FDI puzzle
are (1) that financial flows involved in overseas investment and repatriated profits
themselves influence the exchange rate, as suggested by the literature on valuation
eﬀects and modeled in Lubik and Russ (2006) and (2) that firms’ sensitivity to
risk in exchange rates and any fundamental variables that may drive them depends
on whether they are investing to sell goods locally or for export, as suggested by
Burstein, Kurtz, and Tesar (2007). Both directions provide plentiful ground for
future research.



                                           24
References
 [1] Alaba, O.B., 2003. Exchange Rate Uncertainty and Foreign Direct Investment
     in Nigeria. Presented at the WIDER Conference on Sharing Global Prosper-
     ity, Helsinki, Finland (September 6-7). on Sharing Global Prosperity, Helsinki,
     Finland (September 6-7).

 [2] Aizenman, J., 1992. Exchange Rate Flexibility, Volatility, and Domestic and
     Foreign Direct Investment. IMF Staﬀ Papers 39, 890—922.

 [3] Aizenman, J., Marion, N., 2004. The Merits of Horizontal versus Vertical FDI
     in the Presence of Uncertainty. Journal of International Economics 62, 125—148.

 [4] Amuedo-Dorantes, C., Pozo, S., 2001. Foreign Exchange Rates and Foreign
     Direct Investment in the United States. International Trade Journal 15, 323-
     343.

 [5] Bacchetta, P., van Wincoop, E., 2000. Does Exchange-Rate Stability Increase
     Trade and Welfare? American Economic Review 90, 1093—1109.

 [6] Barkoulas, J., Baum, C.F., Caglayan, M., 2002 Exchange Rate Eﬀects on the
     Volume and Variability of Trade Flows. Journal of International Money and
     Finance 21, 481—496.

 [7] Bayoumi, T., 1994. A Formal Model of Optimum Currency Areas. IMF Staﬀ
     Papers 41, 537-554.

 [8] Bergin, P.R., 2003. Putting the “New Open Economy Macroeconomics” to a
     Test. Journal of International Economics 60, 3—34.

 [9] Bernard, A.B., Jensen, J.B., Schott, P.K., 2006. Trade Costs, Heterogeneous
     Firms, and Productivity. Forthcoming, Journal of Monetary Economics.

[10] Blonigen, B.A., 1997. Firm-Specific Assets and the Link between Exchange
     Rates and Foreign Direct Investment. American Economic Review 87, 447-465.


                                        25
[11] Brainard, S.L. 1997. An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration
     Trade-oﬀ Between Multinational Sales and Trade. American Economic Review
     87, 520-544.

[12] Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). 2002. Survey of Current Business.

[13] Burstein, A., C. Kurtz, L. Tesar. 2007 (July). Trade, Production Sharing, and
     the International Transmission of Business Cycles. Manuscript, University of
     Michigan.

[14] Campa, J.M., 1993. Entry by Foreign Firms in the United States under Ex-
     change Rate Uncertainty. The Review of Economics and Statistics 75, 614-622.

[15] Caves, R.E., 1988. Exchange-Rate Movements and Foreign Direct Investment
     in the United States. Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper
     No. 1383.

[16] Chakrabarti, R., Scholnick, B., 2002. Exchange Rate Regimes and Foreign
     Direct Investment Flows. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 138, 1—21.

[17] Chari, V.V., Kehoe, P.J., McGrattan, E.R., 2002. Can Sticky Price Models
     Generate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates? Review of Economic
     Studies 69, 533—563.

[18] Cochrane, J.H., 2001. Asset Pricing. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
     Press.

[19] Cote, A., 1994. Exchange Rate Volatility and Trade:      A Survey. Bank of
     Canada Working Paper No. 94-5.

[20] Cushman, D.O., 1988. Exchange-Rate Uncertainty and Foreign Direct Invest-
     ment in the United States. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 124, 322—335.

[21] –—, 1985. Real Exchange Rate Risk, Expectations, and the Level of Direct
     Investment. Review of Economics and Statistics 67, 297—308.


                                       26
[22] –—, 1983. The Eﬀects of Exchange Rate Risk on International Trade. Journal
     of International Economics 15, 45—63.

[23] Deaton, A., 1992. Understanding Consumption. New York: Oxford University
     Press.

[24] Dell’Ariccia, G., 1999. Exchange Rate Fluctuations and Trade Flows: Evidence
     from the European Union. IMF Staﬀ Papers. 46: 315—334.

[25] Devereux, M.B., Engel, C., 1999, 2001. The Optimal Choice of Exchange Rate
     Regime: Price-Setting Rules and Internationalized Production, in Topics in
     Blomstrom, M. and Goldberg, L. (Eds.), Empirical International Research: A
     Festschrift in Honor of Robert E. Lipsey, University of Chicago Press, Chicago
     (also NBER Working Paper No. 6992).

[26] Devereux, M.B., Lane, P., Xu, J., 2005. Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy
     in Emerging Market Economies. Forthcoming, Economic Journal.

[27] Dixit, A., Pindyck, R.S., 1994. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton Uni-
     versity Press, Princeton.

[28] Dunning, J.H., 1973. The Determinants of International Production. Oxford
     Economic Papers 25, 289—336.

[29] Froot, K.A., Stein, J.C., 1991. Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment:
     An Imperfect Capital Markets Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106,
     1191—1217.

[30] Engel, C., Mark, N.C., West, K. 2007. Exchange Rate Models Are Not as Bad
     as You Think. NBER Working Paper No. 13318.

[31] Galgau, O., Sekkat, K., 2004. The Impact of the Single Market on Foreign Direct
     Investment in the European Union. Exchange Rates, Economic Integration
     and the International Economy. Edited by Leo Michelis and Mark Lovewell.
     Toronto: APF Press.

                                        27
[32] Ghironi, F., Melitz, M.J., 2005. International Trade and Macroeconomic Dy-
     namics with Heterogeneous Firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 865—915
     (also NBER Working Paper, No.10540).

[33] Goldberg, L.S., Kolstad, C.D., 1995. Foreign Direct Investment, Exchange Rate
     Variability, and Demand Uncertainty. International Economic Review 36, 855—
     873.

[34] Hausmann, R., Fernandez-Arias, E., 2000. Inter-American Development Bank
     Working Paper, No. 417.

[35] Helpman, E., Melitz, M.J., Yeaple, S.R., 2004. Exports versus FDI. American
     Economic Review 94, 300-316.

[36] Horstmann, I.J., Markusen, J.R., 1992. Endogenous Market Structures in Inter-
     national Trade (Natura Facit Saltum). Journal of International Economics 32,
     109—129.

[37] Ihrig, J., 2001. Exchange Rate Exposure of Multinationals: Focusing on
     Exchange-Rate Issues. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System In-
     ternational Finance Discussion Paper No. 709 (August).

[38] International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2002. World Development Outlook, Trade
     and Finance (September). International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

[39] –—, 2003. Balance of Payments Statistics Country Tables. Washington, D.C.:
     International Monetary Fund.

[40] –—, 2004. International Financial Statistics CD-ROM. Washington, D.C: In-
     ternational Monetary Fund (August).

[41] Itagaki, T., 1981. The Theory of the Multinational Firm under Exchange Rate
     Uncertainty. Canadian Journal of Economics 14, 276—297.

[42] Krugman, P., 1998. Fire-Sale FDI. Presented at the NBER Conference on
     Capital Flows to Emerging Markets, Feb. 20—21.

                                       28
[43] Lehmann, A., 1999. Country Risks and the Investment Activity of U.S. Multi-
     nationals in Developing Countries. IMF Working Paper No. 133.

[44] Lipsey, R.E., 1998. Internationalized Production in Developed and Developing
     Countries and in Industry Sectors. NBER Working Paper No. 6405.

[45] Markusen, J.R., Venables, A. 2000. The Theory of Endowment, Intra-Industry
     and Multinational Trade. Journal of International Economics 52, 209—234.

[46] Melitz, M.J., 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
     Aggregate Industry Productivity. Econometrica 71, 1695—1725.

[47] Mundell, R.A., 1957. International Trade and Factor Mobility. American Eco-
     nomic Review 47, 321—355.

[48] Obstfeld, M., Rogoﬀ, K. 1998. Risk and Exchange Rates. NBER Working
     Paper No. 6694.

[49] Pindyck, R.S., 1998. Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice, and the Value
     of the Firm. American Economic Review 78, 969—985.

[50] Rivoli, P., Salorio, E., 1996. Foreign Direct Investment under Uncertainty.
     Journal of Business Studies (Second Quarter), 335—357.

[51] Russ, K.N., 2006. The Endogeneity of the Exchange Rate as a Determinant
     of FDI: A model of entry and multinational firms. Forthcoming, Journal of
     International Economics.

[52] Russ, K.N., 2004a. Exchange Rate Regimes and Foreign Direct Investment.
     Exchange Rates, Economic Integration and the International Economy. Edited
     by Leo Michelis and Mark Lovewell. APF Press, Toronto.

[53] Russ, K.N., 2004b. Exchange Rate Variability and Foreign Direct Investment.
     Doctoral Thesis, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.




                                       29
[54] Silva, K.M.C., Tenreyro, S. 2006. The Log of Gravity. Review of Economics
     and Statistics 88(4), 641-658.

[55] Stevens, G.V.G., 1998. Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment: A Note.
     Journal of Policy Modeling 20, 393—301.

[56] Sung, H. and Lapan, H.E., 2000. Strategic Foreign Direct Investment and
     Exchange-Rate Uncertainty. International Economic Review 41, 411—423.

[57] Tenreyro, S., 2006. On the Trade Impact of Nominal Exchange Rate Volatility.
     Forthcoming, Journal of Development Economics.

[58] Tomlin, K.M., 2000. The Eﬀects of Model Specification on Foreign Direct In-
     vestment Models: An Application of Count Data Models. Southern Economic
     Journal 67, 460—468.

[59] Wang, K.L., Barrett, C.B., 2002. A New Look at the Trade Volume Eﬀects of
     Real Exchange Rate Risk. Cornell University Department of Applied Economics
     and Management Working Paper, No. WP 2002-41 (November).

[60] World Bank, 2003. Global Development Finance. Washington, D.C.: World
     Bank.

[61] Zhang, L.H., 2004. European Integration and Foreign Direct Investment, in
     Tsoukis, C., Agiomirgianakis, G.M., Biswas, T. (Eds.), Aspects of Globalization:
     Macroeconomic and capital market linkages in the integrated world economy,
     Chapter 8.


A     Derivation of the aggregate price level
The pseudo-reduced form equation for the aggregate price level is calculated in three
steps: First, I define aggregate consumption as a function of the aggregate price index
and the exogenous interest rate, which lets me define the wage rate as a function of
the exogenous interest rate and underlying preference parameters. Second, I find

                                          30
the firm’s pricing rule in terms of expected aggregate consumption and the wage
rate. These pricing rules now reduce to a function of the (exogenous) expected
interest rate and underlying parameters. Third, I substitute these firm pricing
rules into the definition of the aggregate price index to redefine the index only in
terms of the expected interest rate, underlying parameters, and the endogenous cutoﬀ
productivity levels for home- and foreign-owned firms operating in the home economy.


A.1     Consumption and wages
Money demand and consumption. Based on the maximization problem described in
the text, standard first-order conditions for the consumer’s problem (with λt repre-
senting the Lagrange multiplier for the budget constraint) are as follows:

                          ∂$               1
                                  : λt =                                     (A1.a)
                         ∂Ct             Pt Ctρ
                                            ∙           ¸
                          ∂$        1           βPt Ctρ
                                  :    = Et          ρ    ≡ dt               (A1.b)
                         ∂Bt        it        Pt+1 Ct+1
                         ∂$
                                  : St λt = βi∗t Et [λt+1 St+1 ]             (A1.c)
                         ∂Bt∗
                         ∂$         χ
                                  :    = λt − βEt [λt+1 ]                    (A1.d)
                         ∂Mt        Mt
                          ∂$             κ
                                  : Wt =    = κPt Ctρ                        (A1.e)
                         ∂Lt             λt

 Dividing A1.c by λt , then substituting in A1.a and A1.b, A1.c yields the UIP
equation in the text. Similarly, dividing A1.d by λt yields
                                                ∙      ¸
                                  χ               λt+1
                                      = 1 − βEt          ,
                                λt Mt              λt

then substituting in A1.a
                                              ∙           ¸
                            Pt Ctρ χ             βPt Ctρ
                                     = 1 − Et         ρ     ,
                             Mt                 Pt+1 Ct+1



                                            31
and substituting A1.b then gives an equation for the demand for real money balances
as a function of aggregate consumption and the interest rate,

                                   Pt Ctρ χ        1
                                            = 1−
                                    Mt             it
                                         D       ρ
                                      Mt      Ct χit
                                            =         .                              (A2)
                                       Pt     it − 1

In the text, I assume that the interest rate is exogenous and that the money supply is
an inverse function of the interest rate, MtS = itμ−1 , so that an increase in the interest
rate reduces the money supply and vice versa. To get the consumption equation
(equation (1) in the main text), I set MtD ≡ MtS , or

                                   MtS     Ctρ χit
                                         =
                                   Pt      it − 1
                                                µ        ¶
                                  μ          ρ       it
                                         = Ct χ
                             Pt (it − 1)           i −1
                                           µ ¶ t
                                              1     μ
                                     Ctρ =             .                             (A3)
                                             Pt χit

   Wages. To calculate the aggregate price level, I use the wage rate derived from
the consumer’s first order condition A1.e, combined with the consumption equation,
labeled equation (A3) here. This generates a formula for the wage (equation (2) in
the main text) as a function of the interest rate,

                                     Wt = κPt Ctρ
                                          κμ
                                        =     .                                      (A4)
                                          χit

A.2     The firms’ pricing rules
After substituting in the consumption and wage equations above, pricing rules for
individual firms selling in the home market are derived as a function of the expected




                                            32
home interest rate,
                                                                   ∙          ¸
                                                                        −1
                                              µ         ¶ κμEt−1       it ρ
                                                   θ
                      ph,t (ϕ) = pf,t (ϕ) =                    ∙ ρ−1 ¸            (A5)
                                                  θ−1
                                                         χϕEt−1 it ρ


A.3     The aggregate price level
Minimizing the expenditure necessary to consume one unit of the aggregate con-
sumption bundle gives the aggregate price index in this CES framework shown in
the main text,

                        ⎛ nh,t             1+n                 ⎞ 1−θ
                                                                  1
                          Z                 Z f,t
                   Pt = ⎝ ph,t (i)1−θ di +       pf,t (i)1−θ di⎠     .
                            0                      1


It is useful now to identify firms by their productivity parameter, ϕ, rather than the
firm subscript, i. Every firm draws its productivity parameter independently from
an identical distribution, G(ϕ), allowing me to use the law of large numbers to assert
that the distribution of productivity levels for the economy as a whole will be the
same as the firm-specific distribution. Then, substituting in the pricing rules, we
have
        ⎛    ⎡                  ∙ 1 ¸ ⎤1−θ              ⎡              ∙ 1 ¸ ⎤1−θ       ⎞ 1−θ
                                                                                           1
                                    −ρ                                     −ρ
       ⎜ Z∞ ⎢µ θ ¶ κμEt−1 it            ⎥
                                                    Z∞ µ
                                                        ⎢  θ
                                                              ¶ κμEt−1 it
                                                                                 ⎥      ⎟
       ⎜ ⎢                      ∙ ρ−1 ¸ ⎥               ⎢              ∙       ¸ ⎥ dG(ϕ)⎟
Pt   = ⎜ ⎣                              ⎦  dG(ϕ) +      ⎣ θ−1                    ⎦      ⎟
       ⎝       θ−1                   ρ
                                                                           ρ−1
                                                                            ρ           ⎠
        ϕ̂h,t          χϕE  t−1   it              ϕ̂f,t         χϕEt−1   it
                        ∙ 1¸
                          −
       µ      ¶ κμEt−1 it ρ
            θ
     =                  ∙ ρ−1 ¸ ,
         θ−1
               χϕ̄t Et−1 it ρ




                                              33
where                      ⎛                                          ⎞ θ−1
                                                                         1
                               Z∞                     Z∞
                          ⎜                                            ⎟
                    ϕ̄t = ⎝          ϕθ−1 dG(ϕ) +            ϕθ−1 dG(ϕ)⎠      .
                             ϕ̂h,t                   ϕ̂f,t


A.4     Determinacy
As long as there is a unique solution for ϕ̂h,t and ϕ̂f,t , there is a unique solution for
the price level. In a model where these two variables enter the zero-profit conditions
with no other endogenous variables, one can show analytically that the zero-profit
conditions are monotonically increasing in these cutoﬀ productivity levels. In this
model, an analytical proof is not possible due to the presence of the takeover price
V (0), so I show a graphical proof below that Vh (ϕ), or equation (6) from the main
text, is monotonically increasing in ϕ, implying the existence of a unique solution
for ϕ̂h,t . Specifically, I calibrate the model as described in Appendix D, setting
interest rate volatility in both countries to 0.1 (the particular value for volatility
does not aﬀect the monotonicity). Then, I specify values of ϕ such that 1 < ϕ < ∞
and solve the system described in the text omitting the equation for Vh (ϕ) (that
is, Vh (ϕ̂h,t )) so that all other endogenous values are solved for given the level of ϕ
specified. Finally, I numerically compute Vh (ϕ) given the solution values of all other
endogenous variables corresponding to various values of ϕ.


B       First-order conditions for the firm’s problem
To set prices for the following period, firms maximize the expected value of profits
with respect to the prices they will set subject to the demand equations in the text
(derived explicitly in the technical appendix for Russ (2006),
                                               ¡                        ¢
                            max∗       Et−1 [dt π h,t (ϕ) + St π∗h,t (ϕ) ]
                       ph,t (ϕ),ph,t (ϕ)




                                                34
                                                                 9
                                                             x 10
                                                        20
Value of entry or refusal to sell by home firm: Eq. 6




                                                        15




                                                        10




                                                         5




                                                         0




                                                        −5
                                                             0       10         20         30          40          50           60
                                                                                           phi




                                                         Figure 5: The monotonicity of the value function (equation (6)) in ϕ




                                                                                         35
for home-owned firms and
                                            µ                           ¶
                                                              π f,t (ϕ)
                            max Et−1 [d∗t       π∗f,t (ϕ)   +            ]
                      pf,t (ϕ),p∗f,t (ϕ)                         St

for foreign firms. The first-order conditions for firms operating in the home market
are then
                                  µ                                             ¶
              ∂$h                                      ∂ch,t (ϕ) Wt ∂ch,t (ϕ)
                     : Et−1 [dt ch,t (ϕ) + ph,t (ϕ)               −              ]
           ∂ph,t (ϕ)                                   ∂ph,t (ϕ)    ϕ ∂ph,t (ϕ)
                                  µ                                             ¶
              ∂$f             d∗t                       ∂cf,t (ϕ) Wt ∂cf,t (ϕ)
                     : Et−1 [       cf,t (ϕ) + pf,t (ϕ)           −               ].
           ∂pf,t (ϕ)          St                        ∂pf,t (ϕ)   ϕ ∂pf,t (ϕ)

Assuming that firms take all competitors’ prices (and the aggregate price level) as
given, substituting the equations for goods demand, and the derivatives of the goods
demand equations, the first-order conditions reduce to
                                      µ          ¶
                                           θ
                                         Et−1 [dt Wt Ct ]
                       ph,t (ϕ) =
                                          θ−1
                                          Et−1 [dt Ct ]
                                              h          i
                                  µ     ¶E     d ∗ Wt Ct
                                     θ    t−1    t St
                       pf,t (ϕ) =              h        i ,
                                    θ−1   Et−1 d∗t CStt

as in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000). Reduced forms can be obtained by
substituting equation (A1.b) and equations (1) and (2) in the main text:
                                                              ∙          ¸
                                                                   −1
                                      µ         ¶ κμEt−1          it ρ
                                           θ
                         pj,t (ϕ) =                     ∙ ρ−1 ¸ ,
                                          θ−1
                                                  χEt−1 it ρ


for j ∈ (h, j).




                                            36
C       Deriving the impact of home and foreign volatil-
        ity on MNE entry
Starting with the entry condition for foreign firms considering entry into the home
market,
                             "∞ Ã k              !                    #
                              X Y                    π f,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )     Pt−1 Vt−1 (0)
    Vf,t−1 (ϕ̂f,t ) = Et−1               d∗t+m                          −                   ∗
                                                                                        − Pt−1 f ≡ 0,
                             k=0   m=0
                                                          St+k               St−1

one can substitute in equation A1.b iterated over future periods and the UIP equation
for period t + k to obtain14
                           "∞ Ã k                !                                     #
                            X Y βPt+m−1
                                    ∗        ∗ρ
                                          Ct+m−1          it+k
Vf,t−1 (ϕ̂f,t ) ≡ 0 = Et−1             ∗    ∗ρ      ∗
                                                                       πf,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )
                            k=0 m=0
                                    P t+m Ct+m     it+k Et+k [St+k+1 ]
                        Pt−1 Vt−1 (0)     ∗
                    −                 − Pt−1  f
                           St−1
                           "∞ µ                                                            ¶                            #
                            X βPt−1    ∗    ∗ρ
                                         Ct−1          βP ∗ Ct∗ρ            ∗
                                                                         βPt+k−1   ∗ρ
                                                                                 Ct+k−1         it+k π f,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )
               = Et−1                                ∗ ∗ t ∗ρ    ∗ ... ∗
                             k=0
                                     Pt∗ Ct∗ρ         Pt+1 Ct+1               ∗
                                                                           Pt+k   ∗ρ
                                                                                Ct+k           i∗t+k Et+k [St+k+1 ]
                        Pt−1 Vt−1 (0)     ∗
                    −                 − Pt−1 f
                           St−1
                           "∞ Ã                 !                                      #
                            X β k Pt−1  ∗   ∗ρ
                                           Ct−1   it+k
               = Et−1          ∗     ∗ρ    ∗
                                                               π f,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )
                            P t+k C  t+k i t+k E t+k [St+k+1 ]
                   µ k=0¶                  µ         ¶
                       θ   κμ 1ρ σ2i            θ       κμ ρ1 σ2i∗
                 −             e V (0) −                   fe        .
                     θ − 1 χϕ̄               θ − 1 χϕ̄∗
  14
    To illustrate the mechanics of the algebra in the proof, the second line below is presented as
though k > 2, though of course the sequences start for k = 0.




                                                      37
Substituting the consumption equation from the main text, we have
                        µ                   ¶        "∞                                #
                                 1                    X             it+k
   Vf,t−1 (ϕ̂f,t ) =                          Et−1        β k i∗t+k ∗ π f,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )
                       Et+k [St+k+1 ]i∗t−1           k=0
                                                                    it+k
                       µ       ¶                     µ           ¶
                           θ      κμ ρ1 σ2i                θ         κμ 1ρ σ2i∗
                     −                 e V (0) −                         fe                    (A6)
                         θ − 1 χϕ̄                      θ − 1 χϕ̄∗
                          "∞                                       #
                           X             i t+k
                   = Et−1       βk                 π f,t+k (ϕ̂f,t )
                                   E t+k t+k+1 ]
                                         [S
                       µ k=0¶                        µ           ¶
                           θ      κμ ρ1 σ2i                θ         κμ 1ρ σ2i∗
                     −                 e V (0) −                         fe
                         θ − 1 χϕ̄                      θ − 1 χϕ̄∗
                          "∞                                       µ                          ¶#
                           X             i t+k                                         W  t+k
                   = Et−1       βk                 cf,t+k (ϕ̂f,t ) pf,t+k (ϕ̂f,t ) −
                                   Et+k [St+k+1 ]                                       ϕ̂f,t
                       µ k=0¶                        µ           ¶
                           θ      κμ ρ1 σ2i                θ         κμ 1ρ σ2i∗
                     −                 e V (0) −                         fe     .              (A7)
                         θ − 1 χϕ̄                      θ − 1 χϕ̄∗

    In this paper, the objective is to compare entry across steady states. In a steady
state, agents expect the one-period-ahead forecast of the nominal exchange rate and
functions of the nominal interest rate to be constant across all future periods. In
steady state, the number of active firms from abroad and the price level are also
constant. That is, for all k ≥ 0,

                    Et−1 [Et [St+1 ]] = Et−1 [Et+k [St+k+1 ]] ,
                    ∙      ∙ 1 ¸¸            ∙ 1¸
                              −ρ               −
              Et−1 Et+k−1 it+k        = Et−1 it ρ
                  ∙        ∙ ρ−1 ¸¸          ∙ ρ−1 ¸
                               ρ
              Et−1 Et+k−1 it+k        = Et−1 it ρ
                                     ϕ̂f,t = ϕ̂f,t+k = ϕ̂f =⇒ ϕ̄t = ϕ̄t+k = ϕ̄

   Thus, the expected exchange rate on each side of (A7) cancels out. Substituting
the equations for the demand for an individual good, the pricing rule, and the wage




                                                38
relation, the value function above reduces further:
                                 ⎡                                                                            ⎛                              ∙           ¸   ⎞⎤
                                                                                                                                                  − ρ1
                                         µ                ¶ µ                ¶ 1ρ
                    1         ⎢X  ∞
                                           pf,t+k (ϕ̂f,t ) −σ         μ           ⎜ σit+k Et+k−1            ⎟⎥                                   it+k
Vf,t−1 (ϕ̂f,t ) =       Et−1 ⎣⎢      β k                                          ⎜              ∙ ρ−1 ¸ − 1⎟⎥
                  ϕ̂f,t                        Pt+k             χP       i
                                                                    t+k t+k
                                                                                  ⎝                         ⎠⎦
                                                                                                    ρ
                                 k=0                                                (σ − 1)Et+k−1 it+k
                              ∙ ¸
                                1
                  −fe Et−1 ∗
                                it
                                                         ⎛         ∙ 1 ¸ ⎞− 1ρ
                                                                      −ρ
                                µ         ¶− 1 ∞
                                             ρ X
                                                           E t+k−1   i
                           1
                             −σ     κσ                 k⎜
                                                         ⎜            t+k ⎟
                = ϕ̂σ−1
                    f   ϕ̄f
                           ρ
                                                     β   ⎝         ∙   ρ−1
                                                                           ¸⎟
                                                                            ⎠
                                   σ−1                                  ρ
                                               k=0         Et+k−1 it+k
                    ⎛              ∙ 1¸              ∙ 1¸                         ⎞
                                     1− ρ               −ρ
                                                                          ∙     ¸            ∙ ¸
                    ⎜ σEt+k−1 it+k Et+k−1 it+k                              − 1ρ ⎟            1
                  ∗⎜⎝                          ∙ ρ−1 ¸       − Et+k−1 it+k ⎟      ⎠ − fe Et−1 ∗
                                                   ρ                                          it
                             (σ − 1)Et+k−1 it+k
                                    µ         ¶− ρ1             σ2
                                                                     ∙µ         ¶                                                              ¸
                             1
                               −σ        κθ            1   −     i         θ             −1           1−ρ
                                                                                                          + ρ1    σ 2i          −1       ρ+1 2
                                                                                                                                            σ
              =   ϕ̂σ−1
                    f   ϕ̄f  ρ
                                                      ı̄ e
                                                       ρ        ρ2                  ı̄   ρ    e       2ρ2                − ı̄   ρ    e   2ρ2 i
                                        θ−1                               θ−1
                      ∞
                      X                   2
                  ∗         β k − fe eσi∗
                      k=0
                                    µ                           ¶µ          ¶− 1ρ
                             1
                             −σ               1                        κθ                 1       ρ−1
                                                                                                        σ2i                2
              =   ϕ̂σ−1
                    f   ϕ̄fρ                                                             ı̄ ρ e 2ρ2           − fe eσi∗
                                        (κ − 1)(1 − β)                θ−1


D      Calibration
Parameters are assigned the following values: β = 0.96, θ = 7 (between the standard
values of 2 and 11 used in international macroeconomics literature), γ = θ + 1 (to
ensure the boundedness of the variance of output-weighted average productivity),
κ = 1, f = 0.55 (so that approximately 25% of foreign firms invest if σ 2i = σ 2i∗ = 0),
ρ = 2, η = 0.5 (meaning half of all active domestically owned firms must purchase a
marketing and distribution facility), ı̄ = ı̄∗ = 1.045 (corresponding to a target rate
of 4.5%, similar to the Federal Reserve’s stated policies).


                                                           39
Author             Period      Freq. of FDI Data Freq. of ER Data
Alaba (2003)       unclear     quarterly1        quarterly
                                        2
Amuedo       Do-   1776I-98III quarterly         unclear
rantes and Pozo
(2001)
Campa (1993)       1981-87      annual3                monthly
Chakrabarti and    1982-95      annual4                monthly
Scholnick (2002)
Cushman (1985)     1963-78      annual5                quarterly
Cushman (1989)     1963-86      annual6                quarterly
Goldberg     and   1978-92      quarterly7             quarterly
Kolstad (1995)
Sekkat and Gal-    1980-94      annual8                monthly
gau (2004)
Zhang (2003)       1982-1999    annual9                unclear
1
  Nigeria
2
  Aggregate flows into US
3
  Startups in US from Canada, France, Germany, Japan, South Korea, Sweden, UK
4
  Flows from US to 20 OECD countries
5
  Flows from US to Canada, France, Germany, Japan, UK
6
  Flows to US from Canada, France, Germany, Japan, UK
7
  FDI/GFCF to and from US and Canada, Japan, and UK
8
  OECD
9
  EU member countries (15)

            Table 1: Previous Studies (Samples and Frequencies)




                                     40
Author              Real/Nom.   Definition    of     ER    Eﬀect of Volatility on
                                Volatility                 FDI
Alaba (2003)        nominal     GARCH                      (+) in agricultural
                                                           sector
                                                           (-) in manufacturing
                                                           sector
Amuedo Dorantes     real        (1) st.dev. (1-yr)         (+) for st.dev.
and Pozo (2001)
                                (2) GARCH                  (-) for GARCH
Campa (1993)        real        (1) st.dev. (2-yr)         (-)
                                (2) st.dev. (2-yr, for-
                                ward)
Chakrabarti and     nominal     st.dev.     of percent     (-)
Scholnick (2002)                changes (1-yr)
Cushman (1985)      real        (1) st.dev. (4-qtr)        (+)
                                (2) average level of de-
                                viations from
                                expected ppp (1-yr)
Cushman (1989)      real        (1) st.dev. (4-qtr)        (+)
                                (2) st.dev. (12-qtr)
Goldberg and Kol-   real        st.dev. (12-qtr)           (+)
stad (1995)

Sekkat and Galgau   nominal     (1) st.dev. of monthly     (+) between EU coun-
(2004)                          level                      tries
                                (2) st.dev. of monthly     (-) between EU and
                                pecent change              non-EU countries
                                (3) st.dev. of annual
                                percent
                                change (5-yr)
Zhang (2003)        nominal     st.dev.     of percent     (+)
                                change

     Table 2: Previous Studies (Definitions of Volatility and Results)




                                    41
Table 3: Results for level of first-time cross-border M&As

Dependent Variable: Log of number of first-time cross-border M&As (n f )

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)         (7)             (8)
                                 OLS         OLS         OLS       OLS       FGLS           FGLS        GMM (Ar-Bn) GMM (Ar-Bn)
                                                         Clustered Clustered                            (dep var: Δn f) (dep var: Δn f)

 2i ∗                           -.039***                -.039***               -.003***
                                 (-4.19)                 (3.57)                 (-4.76)

 2i                             .001                    .001                   .002***
                                 (0.30)                  (0.29)                 (3.05)

Δ 2i ∗                          .031***                 .031**                                         -.048***
                                 (3.51)                  (4.15)                                         (-4.30)

Δ 2i                            .002                    .002                                           .005
                                 (0.59)                  (0.90)                                         (1.26)

 2i ∗ −  2i                                -.006**                -.006**                 -.002***
                                             (-1.84)                (-1.50)                 (-7.59)

Δ 2i ∗ −  2i                             .003                   .003                                                -.004**
                                             (0.79)                 (0.79)                                              (-8.15)

Δn f,t−1                                                                                                .247***         .247***
                                                                                                        (9.97)          (9.99)

Fixed effects
   East Asian Crisis               Y            Y           Y           Y          Y          Y           N/A            N/A
   Host-source country pair        Y            Y           Y           Y          Y          Y           N/A            N/A
   Active EMU member               Y            Y           Y           Y          Y          Y           N/A            N/A
   1year before joining EMU        Y            Y           Y           Y          Y          Y           N/A            N/A
Linear and quadratic time trend Y               Y           Y           Y          Y          Y           Y              Y
Host-source pair heterosk.         N            N           Y           Y          Y          Y           N              N
Allow for autocorrelated error     N            N           N           N          Y          Y           Y              Y
No. observations                   4070         4070        4070        4070       5586       5586        3357           3357
Clusters or groups                                          448         448        522        522         366            366
R-squared                          .766         .766        .766        .766
Wald chi-squared(530)                                                              53718
Wald chi-squared(529)                                                                         53930
AR(1) coefficient                                                                  .092       .090
Wald chi-squared(5)                                                                                       326.81
Wald chi-squared(4)                                                                                                      312.45
Quantities in parentheses are t-statistics, except in the case of the Arellano-Bond results in columns (7) and (8), in which case
they are z-statistics. All variables pertain to period t unless otherwise indicated. Clustering by country-pair where noted.
***: Significance at 1% level, **: Significance at 5% level, *: Significance at 10% level
Table 4: Results for level of first-time cross-border M&As relative to first-time domestic M&As

Dependent Variable: Log of ratio of cross-border M&As (n f /n h )

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)               (6)         (7)             (8)
                                 OLS         OLS         OLS       OLS       FGLS              FGLS        GMM (Ar-Bn) GMM (Ar-Bn)
                                                         Clustered Clustered                               (dep var: Δn f) (dep var: Δn f)

 2i ∗                           -.028**                 -.028*                  .001
                                 (-2.48)                 (1.79)                  (.48)

 2i                             .006                    .006                    .002
                                 (1.46)                  (.94)                   (.83)

Δ 2i ∗                          0.017                   .017*                                             -.005
                                 (2.48)                  (1.88)                                            (.35)

Δ 2i                            -.002                   -.004                                             .011**
                                 (-.460)                 (-.59)                                            (2.54)

 2i ∗ −  2i                                -.009*                  -.009                     -.002***
                                             (-2.23)                 (-1.31)                   (-2.79)

Δ 2i ∗ −  2i                             .006                    .006                                                  -.010**
                                             (1.35)                  (.91)                                                 (-2.51)

Δn f,t−1                                                                                                   .350***         .351***
                                                                                                           (12.58)         (12.69)

Fixed effects
   East Asian Crisis               Y            Y           Y            Y          Y            Y           N/A             N/A
   Host-source country pair        Y            Y           Y            Y          Y            Y           N/A             N/A
   Active EMU member               Y            Y           Y            Y          Y            Y           N/A             N/A
   1 year before joining EMU       Y            Y           Y            Y          Y            Y           N/A             N/A
Linear and quadratic time trend Y               Y           Y            Y          Y            Y           Y               Y
Host-source pair heterosk.         N            N           Y            Y          Y            Y           N               N
Allow for autocorrelated error     N            N           N            N          Y            Y           Y               Y
No. observations                   4049         4050        4051         4052       3991         3991        3308            3308
Clusters or groups                                          448          448        389          389         366             366
R-squared                          .844         .844        .844         .844
Wald chi-squared(397)                                                               191353
Wald chi-squared(395)                                                                            173969
AR(1) coefficient                                                                   .184         .184
Wald chi-squared(5)                                                                                          258
Wald chi-squared(4)                                                                                                          258
Quantities in parentheses are t-statistics, except in the case of the Arellano-Bond results in columns (7) and (8), in which case
they are z-statistics. All variables pertain to period t unless otherwise indicated. Clustering by country-pair where noted.
***: Significance at 1% level, **: Significance at 5% level, *: Significance at 10% level
Table 5: Results for level of veteran cross-border M&As

Dependent Variable: Log of number of veteran cross-border M&As (n f )

                                 (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)         (7)              (8)
                                 OLS        OLS         OLS       OLS       FGLS           FGLS        GMM (Ar-Bn) GMM (Ar-Bn)
                                                        Clustered Clustered                            (dep var: Δn f ) (dep var: Δn f )

 2i ∗                           -.015                  -.015                  -.005
                                 (-1.60)                (-1.53)                (.17)

 2i                             .016*                  -.016                  -.001
                                 (-1.82)                (1.90)                 (.32)

Δ 2i ∗                          .016*                  .016**                                         -.003
                                 (1.66)                 (2.30)                                         (-.30)

Δ 2i                            .005                   .005                                           -.018**
                                 (0.72)                 (0.79)                                         (-2.18)

 2i ∗ −  2i                               .002                    .002                   .001
                                            -0.23                   (0.22)                 (.49)

Δ 2i ∗ −  2i                            .004                    .004                                                .010
                                            (0.69)                  (0.86)                                              (1.48)

Δn f,t −1
   f,t−1                                                                                               .140***          .140***
                                                                                                       (4.13)           (4.12)

Fixed effects
   East Asian Crisis               Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y          N/A            N/A
   Host-source country pair        Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y          N/A            N/A
   Active EMU member               Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y          N/A            N/A
   1year before joining EMU        Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y          N/A            N/A
Linear and quadratic time trend Y              Y           Y            Y         Y           Y          Y              Y
Host-source pair heterosk.         N           N           Y            Y         Y           Y          N              N
Allow for autocorrelated error N               N           N            N         Y           Y          Y              Y
No. observations                   2555        2555        2555         2555      3442        3442       2084           2084
Clusters or groups                                         312          312       366         366        254            254
R-squared                          .818        .818        .818         .818
Wald chi-squared(374)                                                             126260
Wald chi-squared(373)                                                                         79313
AR(1) coefficient                                                                 .090        0.07
Wald chi-squared(5)                                                                                      408.97
Wald chi-squared(4)                                                                                                     406.68
Quantities in parentheses are t-statistics, except in the case of the Arellano-Bond results in columns (7) and (8), in which case
they are z-statistics. All variables pertain to period t unless otherwise indicated. Clustering by country-pair where noted.
***: Significance at 1% level, **: Significance at 5% level, *: Significance at 10% level
Table 6: Results for level of veteran cross-border M&As relative to veteran domestic M&As

Dependent Variable: Log of ratio of veteran cross-border M&As (n f /n h )

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)              (6)         (7)              (8)
                                 OLS         OLS         OLS       OLS       FGLS             FGLS        GMM (Ar-Bn) GMM (Ar-Bn)
                                                         Clustered Clustered                              (dep var: Δn f ) (dep var: Δn f )

 2i ∗                           -.033***                -.033***               -.027***
                                 (-3.02)                 (2.91)                 (-4.14)

 2i                             -.015                   -.015                  -.008***
                                 (-1.41)                 (-.80)                 (-7.41)

Δ 2i ∗                          .019*                   .019*                                            -.000
                                 (1.77)                  (1.98)                                           (.00)

Δ 2i                            -.000                   .000                                             .008
                                 (.02)                   (.01)                                            (-.81)

 2i ∗ −  2i                                .008                   -.008                     .003***
                                             (-1.05)                (-.64)                    (2.16)

Δ 2i ∗ −  2i                             .010                   .010                                                   -.004
                                             (1.58)                 (1.07)                                                 (0.50)

Δn f,t−1                                                                                                  .236***          .238***
                                                                                                          (6.21)           (6.28)

Fixed effects
   East Asian Crisis               Y            Y           Y           Y          Y             Y          N/A             N/A
   Host-source country pair        Y            Y           Y           Y          Y             Y          N/A             N/A
   Active EMU member               Y            Y           Y           Y          Y             Y          N/A             N/A
   1year before joining EMU        Y            Y           Y           Y          Y             Y          N/A             N/A
Linear and quadratic time trend Y               Y           Y           Y          Y             Y          Y               Y
Host-source pair heterosk.         N            N           Y           Y          Y             Y          N               N
Allow for autocorrelated error N                N           N           N          Y             Y          Y               Y
No. observations                   2544         2544        2544        2544       3395          2498       2073            2073
Clusters or groups                                          307         307        358           261        253             253
R-squared                          .891         .890        .891        .89
Wald chi-squared(366)                                                              82619
Wald chi-squared(365)                                                                            65776
AR(1) coefficient                                                                  .126          .130
Wald chi-squared(5)                                                                                         62.54
Wald chi-squared(4)                                                                                                         62.78
Quantities in parentheses are t-statistics, except in the case of the Arellano-Bond results in columns (7) and (8), in which case
they are z-statistics. All variables pertain to period t unless otherwise indicated. Clustering by country-pair where noted.
***: Significance at 1% level, **: Significance at 5% level, *: Significance at 10% level
Table 7: Poisson Quasi-Maximum-Likelihood Specifications

Dependent Variable: Number of cross-border M&As (n f )

                                     First-Time                           Veteran
                                     (1)                                  (2)


 2i ∗                               -0.024***                            -.009
                                     (-3.02)                              (-0.92)

 2i                                 -0.002                               -0.01**
                                     (-0.51)                              (-2.04)

Incidence Rate Ratios

 2i ∗                               0.976***                             0.991
                                     (-3.02)                              (-0.92)

 2i                                 0.998                                0.987**
                                     (-0.51)                              (-2.04)

EMU                                  1.209***                             1.151**
                                     (3.10)                               (2.24)

Fixed effects
   East Asian Crisis                  Y                                    Y
   Host-source country pair           Y                                    Y
   Active EMU member                  Y                                    Y
   1 year before joining EMU          Y                                    Y
Linear and quadratic time trend       Y                                    Y
Host-source pair heterosk.            Y                                    Y
Allow for autocorrelated error        N                                    N
No. observations                      5586                                 3442
Clusters or groups                    522                                  366
Wald chi-squared(9)                   2320.62                              1846.75
Quantities in parentheses are z-statistics.
***: Significance at 1% level, **: Significance at 5% level, *: Significance at 10% level
Table 8: Endogeneity and Exchange Rates




                                              DepVar:    2s                  DepVar: n f
                                     (1)            (2)      (3)              (4)           (5)       (6)
                                     departure from demeaned
                                     mean           change

 2i ∗                               0.000              0.000
                                     (0.20)             (-0.06)

 2i                                 0.003***           0.001***
                                     13.30              13.30

 2s                                                               -1.305*                  2.772
                                                                   (-1.91)                  (0.89)

 t                                                                           -1.456*                 6.003*
                                                                              (-1.63)                 (1.73)

Incidence Rate Ratios

 2s                                                               0.271*                   15.988
                                                                   (-1.91)                  (0.89)

 t                                                                           0.233*                  404.53*
                                                                              (-1.63)                 (1.73)

Fixed effects
   East Asian Crisis                  Y                Y           Y            Y           Y         Y
   Host-source country pair           Y                Y           Y            Y           Y         Y
   Active EMU member                  Y                Y           Y            Y           Y         Y
   1 year before joining EMU          Y                Y           Y            Y           Y         Y
Linear and quadratic time trend       Y                Y           Y            Y           Y         Y
Host-source pair heterosk.            N                N           Y            Y           Y         Y
Allow for autocorrelated error        N                N           N            N           N         N
No. observations                      857              857         885          885         884       855
Clusters or groups                    54               54          55           52          55        52
R-squared (overall)                   0.30             0.31
Wald chi-squared(7)                                                1449.47      1433.60     1440.66   1438.31
Quantities in parentheses are t-statstics in Columns1-2, z-statistics in Columns 3-6.
***: Significance at 1% level, **: Significance at 5% level, *: Significance at 10% level
