                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WAGE STRUCTURE, RAISES AND MOBILITY:
INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS OF THE STRUCTURE OF WAGES WITHIN AND ACROSS FIRMS

                                              Edward P. Lazear
                                              Kathryn L. Shaw

                                            Working Paper 13654
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w13654


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        November 2007




    Forthcoming, An International Comparison of the Structure of Wages, Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn
    Shaw, editors, University of Chicago Press, NBER. We thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for
    their generous and longstanding support for this work, and we thank the seminar participants at the
    AEA, Society of Labor Economics, NBER, and university seminars. The views expressed herein are
    those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

    © 2007 by Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L. Shaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
    to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
    © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Structure, Raises and Mobility: International Comparisons of the Structure of Wages
Within and Across Firms
Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L. Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 13654
November 2007
JEL No. J01,J2,J24,J3,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

The returns to talent or performance have grown over time in developed countries. Is talent concentrated
in a few firms or are firms virtual microcosms of the economy, each having close to identical distributions
of talent?

The data show that talent is not concentrated in a few companies, but is widely dispersed across companies.
 Wage dispersion within firms is nearly as high as the wage dispersion overall. The standard deviation
of wages within the firm is about 80% of the standard deviation across all workers in the economy.
 Firms are more similar than they are dissimilar, but they are not identical: the firm mean wage displays
considerable dispersion across the population of firms.

There is evidence that talent is becoming more concentrated over time within some firms relative to
others. In four countries that estimated wage regressions with firm fixed effects, the firm fixed effects
are contributing more to the R-squared of the wage regression over time. Law firms have more lawyers
than janitors. Janitorial firms have more janitors than lawyers and the differences between firms have
become more pronounced. Still, the variance of wages within the average firms remains high.


Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
and Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
(on leave)
and NBER
lazear@gsb.stanford.edu

Kathryn L. Shaw
GSB, Littlefield 339
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu
1. Introduction
       The variance of wages across individuals is a summary statistic that means many things.
Wage variance is an indicator of income inequality: high variance suggests high income inequality.
But the “wage structure” of an economy – or the mean and the variance of wages – is also an
indicator of the degree to which some individuals invest in human capital, the degree to which they
work hard in response to incentives, the rates of return to human capital investments, and
institutional factors that shape wage determination. Thus far, economists have had data on the
distribution of wages across individuals in the economy, but not on the distribution of wages across
individuals within firms. Now with new matched employer-employee data sets, we can look at the
structure of wages within firms as well as across firms. New questions can be raised and addressed
empirically.
       Every country has wage variation across individuals. Not all workers earn the same amount.
Think about the following questions:
   1. Is there wage variance because workers find themselves in different firms, some of which are
       high wage firms while other firms are low wage firms? That is, is there a high variance of
       mean wages across firms, or are mean wages of firms quite similar across firms?
   2. Is there wage variance across individuals because within every firm, some workers are
       highly paid and others are less well paid?
   3. Do all firms have the same wage structure or are wage structures widely varying across
       firms? That is, do some firms have a wage structure that is very compressed – paying low
       and high-wage workers very similar wages – while other firms have a very dispersed or
       high-variance structure of wages within the firm? If some wage structures within firms are
       more compressed than others, what factors account for differences across firms? Do most
       firms specialize in a narrow range of jobs, so the structure of pay looks very different across
       firms? Does the boundary of the firm matter? When there is pay compression, does it result
       in losses of the most able workers or of the retention of the least able?
   4. The distribution of income is always skewed across individuals within for a country—it has
       a long upper tail. Is this because salaries within firms are skewed or does the skewness
       result from a few firms paying high wage levels? Skewness is relevant in the context of
       tournament theory, which suggests that there should be skewness within firms, since salary

                                                                                                    2
       jumps at the higher end of the skill hierarchy are greater than salary jumps at the lower end
       of the hierarchy as a reward for effort.
       We can ask similar questions about wage growth rates, or pay raises, for individuals:
   1. Are average pay raises very different across firms, so that finding employment in a high-
       growth firm insures a person of high wage growth?
   2. Are pay raises uniform within firms or are some workers treated very differently from
       others? It is possible that workers’ raises within firms are nearly identical – moving lockstep
       across workers when conditions change for the firm – so that differences in wage growth
       across workers in the economy is accounted for primarily by firm differences in mean
       growth rates. It is also possible that mean wage growth rates are very similar across firms,
       but that significant within-firm variation produces the economy’s variation in wage growth
       rates.
   Answers to these questions are revealing. For example, if wage levels are very different across
firms, then firms must be sorting workers based on individual workers levels of human capital or
their effort levels, and moreover, workers can improve their pay only by moving across firms. On
the other hand, if mean wages are very similar across firms but wage variance is high within firms,
then human capital development within firms and promotions within firms are predominant features
of the labor market. Furthermore, if pay increases are very different across workers within the same
firm, then effort and skills are being heavily rewarded within firms.
       Finally, do the answers to these questions vary across countries? Do wage structures appear
to vary significantly across countries as a function of different institutions or human capital?
Ultimately, the answers might reflect difference sources of productivity in firms. So, do the patterns
help explain differences in productivity across countries?
       Until very recently, it would be impossible to answer these questions because the answers
would require data on all of the workers in a firm for a large number of firms. Now, this required
data is available from a number of different countries to answer many of these questions and more.
The employer-employee matched data sets, from many European countries and from the U.S., either
contain information on nearly all workers and firms in that country or information on all workers
within a large subset of firms. As a result, it is possible to examine the worker’s position in the
context of his or her entire firm. Additionally, the existence of data for a large number of firms

                                                                                                    3
permits new questions, like those listed above, to be addressed.
        This is not the first time such questions have been asked. The first economics paper on this
subject is Lazear (1992). That study made use of a complete data set on one large firm and studied
both wages and mobility. The work was followed by similar papers by Baker, Gibbs, and
Holmstrom (1994,a,b). They studied a different company and also examined the structure of
promotion, ports of entry, and wages. The advantage of those analyses is that it is possible to
examine the entire firm, thereby analyzing promotion paths, determinants and consequences, as well
as wage determination and structure. The disadvantage is that because the studies only cover two
different firms, it is difficult to generalize the results and not all results are consistent across papers.
        It is important, therefore, to have data not only on entire firms and all workers in them, but
on a large number of firms so that results can be generalized. The authors in this book have used the
new style of data to ask and answer questions that cannot be answered with traditional data sets. For
example, many of these data sets can be used to calculate returns to experience and tenure and can
perhaps do it better because of their richness. In this book, we have steered away from some
questions because they are addressed well by traditional individual-level panel data sets that use the
individual as the unit of analysis and sample randomly from a large population. Those data sets
have very few observations from the same firm and in most cases, the identity of firm is unknown.
As a consequence, neither a firm=s wage structure nor its hiring and promotion patterns can be
gleaned from traditional data. Our focus is on exactly the questions that could not be answered
historically using individual panel data.
        In this introduction we set out to do two things. First, we use the data from all countries to
address the questions, drawing out general patterns about firm wage structure, promotion, hiring and
mobility patterns to answer the questions posed above and more. Second, because this kind of
analysis is new and because we are covering a large number of countries and studies in this
introduction, we aim to raise as many questions as we provide answers. But the questions
themselves may be useful, if for no other reason than they cast light on the kinds of issues that can
be addressed with this type of data.
        This study is based on the extensive empirical work done by all of the country-specific
authors in this book.     The authors provided to us statistics that they each constructed to be as
comparable as possible across countries, so that we might identify patterns across countries (though

                                                                                                          4
differences in the underlying data sets do not make these statistics perfectly comparable, as
described below). However, in this Introduction, we make no attempt to delve deeply into the
sources of differences across countries. The individual country chapters describe the primary
institutional features of the countries, and the macroeconomic conditions. In addition, the country
chapter authors provide much greater expertise and analysis of data that is specific to the countries
(such as the occupational structures of firms or productivity information). After a broad description
of the data next, we then look at the structure of wage levels and at alternative models of interpreting
these structures. After that, we turn to wage growth rates and mobility.
2. The Data
         The data come from all of the Scandinavian countries (Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden)
and from Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands as well as the United States. The
sampling frames are different across countries. In a broad fashion, we can group the data of the
countries into five basic sampling schemes, as shown in Table 1. The sequence of data is as follows.
At the top of the list are the country data sets that cover most of the populations, and then
descending in the table are data sets that cover subsets of the population are covered in the data. For
example, at the top of the list are Denmark, Norway, and the U.S., because they have data on all
workers in all firms in the economy (though for a subset of states in the U.S.). Next, Finland,
Sweden, Belgium have data on all workers in large firms; Germany and Norway (using more
matched data) have data on all workers in manufacturing. Italy and France cover all firms, but
within firms they have only a sample of workers, not data on every worker.1 Finally, additional
analysis is done for Norway and Sweden for white and blue collar workers, because additional
detailed matched data is available for these groups.
         Table 1 also provides a brief summary of the key wage variables and the age or time
restrictions on the data, but for more detailed analysis of the country-specific differences, see
Appendix Table A1. Inevitably, variables differ, as in how wages are measured (with or without
bonuses, hourly or salary, monthly or annual), and these differences naturally enter the statistical
comparisons that we make. In addition to the descriptions in Appendix Table A1, each paper
describes its own data in detail.

1
  Italy has a 1/90 sample within firms, so the Italian authors provide information on synthetic firms by taking data from
similar industries and locations and blending them into cells, which they treat as firms. France has a 1/25 sample, so we

                                                                                                                       5
         Appendix Tables A2 and A3 contain basic descriptive statistics for all the countries for the
key variables that are used in the figures below.
         The key to constituting an employer-employee matched data set is that there is substantial
information on a cross-section of workers within each firm spanning many firms. This is essential
to drawing inferences about wage structure, worker mobility, and promotion and hiring patterns
within and across firms.
3. Primary Findings
         The main finding is that countries are remarkably similar in their structures of wages levels
and of wage changes. Given the similarity of the wage structures across countries, we reach some
general conclusions based on the data. The Discussion section at the end of the chapter introduces
more policy conclusions on why these empirical regularities matter.
    1. There is a striking amount of wage variation within firms: the within firm wage variation is
         about 60 to 80 percent of the wage dispersion across all individuals in the economy. There is
         also variation across firms in the mean wages they pay: the standard deviation of the mean
         wages of firms is about 60 percent of the standard deviation across all individuals. However,
         when we scale the mean wages firms pay relative to the average worker’s wage in the
         economy, one standard deviation in firm means is only 15-20 percent of the average wage:
         firms don’t differ that much in what they pay. Overall, despite very different labor
         institutions across countries, the evidence favoring high within-firm wage dispersion appears
         across countries.
    2. The across (or ‘between’) firm differences in wages appears to be growing over time. That
         is, for a significant number of countries, the firm-specific fixed effects are explaining a
         larger percent of the distribution of wages across firms. This may be because firms are
         increasingly segregated according to the skills that they require. Or it may be that firms that
         pay high-level efficiency wages (in exchange for skills or low turnover) are increasingly
         diverging from those that are pushed to low-level market clearing wages in lower-skilled or
         highly competitive industries. Or it may also reflect the boundaries of the firm associated
         with outsourcing: the high-skill firms now use more outsourcing for their low skill jobs.
    3. With respect to wage growth, although firms differ in the average raises they give in a

correct statistics for this sampling.
                                                                                                      6
         particular year, firms do not tie all workers to the same percentage point raise within the
         firm. The standard deviation of raises within firm is between 10 and 20 percentage points,
         even when the average wage increase for the firm is close to zero. This is most consistent
         with the view that firms respond to outside pressure (either market or governmental) to raise
         workers= wages commensurate with some occupational or skill standard; firms are not raising
         all workers’ wages equally in response to the conditions within the firm.
      4. Mobility levels differ across countries, but even here, mobility patterns seem relatively
         consistent. High wage firms have low turnover. Large firms are higher wage and lower
         entry.


4. Decomposing Wage Variance
         Return to the question raised at the outset, how much do firms differ? Figure 1 depicts the
two extremes views of the variance of wage levels within and across firms. In Figure 1A, all firms
are identical, so the variance of wages for each firm is the same as the variance of wages for the
country. At the other extreme, in Figure 1B, all firms differ, so the variance of wages within firms is
very narrow and the variance of wages for the country arises from differences in the variance of
mean wages across firms.
         The different sources of wage variation in Figure 1 can be decomposed more systematically
which is useful later in interpreting the sources of wage variation. Decompose the variance of wages
across individuals into the contribution of firms:

                ∑ p σ + ∑ p (w                       )
                  J            J                     2
(1)      σ2 =          j
                           2
                           j          j   j   − w.
                j =1           j =1

Where pj is the share of workers in the economy who are working in firm j, σ 2j is the variance of
wages in firm j, w j is the mean wage for firm j (across its workers), and w. is the mean wage for the
entire economy (across its workers and firms). Thus, the variance of wages for the economy will be
high if: 1) mean wages differ across firms, so w j − w. is large (as in Figure 1A), or if 2) the within
firm variance of wages, σ 2j is large (as in Figure 1B), or if both are true (not drawn in a figure).

         The wage structure underlying Figure 1 assumes that firms have identical wage variance
within each firm. Figure 2 depicts a more likely structure. In that figure, the variance of wages is
not only different across firms, but rises with the mean wage of the firm. There are numerous

                                                                                                        7
reasons for the positive correlation between wage level and variance, such as rising levels of human
capital in firms, that are introduced later.


5. The Structure of Wages: Wage Levels
        To get started, let us point out some initial observations. There are two (among many) ways
in which data have been displayed by the authors of this book. The first is to use the individual as
the unit of analysis. The second, and way most unique to this structure, is to use the firm as the unit
of analysis. Table A1 does the comparison. Here, the average level of wages, the standard
deviations, and 90th and 10th percentile are displayed. The units are own country currencies so
comparisons cannot be made across countries without conversions to ratios or other unit-free
numbers. The mean level of average wages in the firm based data is always lower than that of the
mean for the individual based data, although there is some variation in ratios across countries (see
Tables in the country chapters). This reflects weighting. If all firms were of identical size, then the
firm average would equal the individual average. The fact that the firm mean is below the individual
mean implies that the largest firms, which account for disproportionately more workers, have higher
average wages than the smaller firms. The firm average, which does not weight by firm size, puts
relatively more emphasis on the small firms and pulls the average wage down. That firm size and
average wage are correlated is not a new result. (Brown and Medoff; 1989, Fox 2007, ).
        The key question raised above is, how does the variation in wages within and across firms
contribute to the variation in wages for the country. First, if all firms were alike, then their wage
distributions would be identical to the distribution for the country as a whole as shown in Figure 1A.
At the other extreme, firms might treat their workers very similarly within the firm, and the variation
in wages throughout the country could be accounted for by differences in the mean value of wages
between firms, as shown in Figure 1B.
        We begin by displaying wage distributions for some typical countries. Consider the patterns
illustrated by Norway, France, and Denmark (as typical countries) in Figure 3. In Figure 3, there are
wage distributions displayed for three typical firms. The Low Wage Below 10%pt distribution is
represents the wage distribution for firms in the sample that have mean wages below the 10th




                                                                                                     8
percentile of the wage distribution of firms’ mean wages.2 The other two firm types are the firms
Around Median Wage (in the 45th to 55th percentile of the firm mean wage distribution), and the
High Wage Above 90thpt. The bold line is the distribution for all individuals in the data.
         Norway’s situation is typical and is a compromise between Figure 1A and Figure 1B. Firms
have very considerable wage dispersion within them, though not as high as the wage dispersion
across all individuals in the economy. The typical firm is not the almost spiked distribution as
shown in Figure 1B. However, the wage distribution for the typical firm that is below the 10th
percentile is tighter than that for the country as a whole. The same is true for the wage distribution
of the typical firm around the median and for the firm with mean wages in the top 10% of firms.3
While wage dispersion within firms is very high, firms have many different jobs within the firm. As
a result of differences in the means, the wage distributions of high wage and low wage firms are by
and large disjoint. At the mean, some of these firms have low pay low skill; some have high pay
high skill (or high variance). But the high variance of wages within firms causes wage distributions
of firms with very different means to overlap.
         Figures 4 through 6 summarize these primary results across countries on the structure of
wages. Figure 4 graphs the ratio of the average of the within-firm standard deviation of wages
divided by the country’s standard deviation of wages. Figure 4 shows that, on average, the
dispersion of wages within firms is about 60% to 80% of the total wage dispersion for the country
(across individuals). Figure 5 graphs the ratio of the standard deviation of the mean wages of the
firms divided by the country’s mean wage. By this measure, it appears that firms don’t differ much
in their mean wages – the standard deviation is only 10 to 20% of the average wage for the country.
However, the dispersion of mean wages for firms is high relative to the overall dispersion of means:
the standard deviation of mean wages of the firms is about 60% of the total wage dispersion for the
country (Figure 6).
         Thus, these figures show that – across all countries – the structure of wages is a compromise
between Figures 1A and 1B. There is very high wage dispersion within firms. But the mean wages

2
  In these figures, each distribution is a graph of the normal distribution given the mean wage and standard deviation for
that subsample.
3
  The typical firm was constructed by averaging the mean and standard deviat graphs the mean wage and the within firm
standard deviation of wages for all the ion of log wages for firms in the 0-10th percentile, the 45-55th percentile and the
90th and above percentile. The distributions were constructed assuming that wages are distributed log normally.

                                                                                                                         9
of firms also differ considerably: there are high wage firms and there are low wage firms. The figure
for Norway, Figure 3, is very representative of the structure of wages across countries.
         What is especially striking about these results is that it is true across all countries.4 Figure 7
expands upon these two points by providing the average coefficients of variation for within firms
across all countries. Countries are remarkably similar: for the average firm, the standard deviation
of wages is about 25% of the mean wage. For example, Finland has considerably different firms in
that the firms with larger internal wage dispersion have coefficients of variation equal to about .35,
whereas those with little internal wage dispersion have coefficients of around .15. But the average is
around .25, which is about the same value as the average value for almost all countries. The average
firm across Europe has a standard deviation of wages that is about one-fourth the wage of that firm.
This is slightly higher in some countries and slightly lower in others, but the variation is small
relative to the within-country differences in coefficients of variation for wages. Whether this reflects
some kind of universal constant remains to be determined.
         Thus, despite different labor market institutions, countries do not differ dramatically in their
wage patterns. Does it imply that there is a typical skill distribution for all countries and these are
reflected in the coefficient of variation that is seen for the country as a whole? Or does it imply that
wage policies vary across firms, but tend to average out at the country level because firms adopt the
same distribution of wage polices irrespective of country? These questions remain open ones, but
we turn to themes that describe the wage patterns.
6. The Structure of Wages: Some Themes
         What do these results tell us about our basic models of the determination of wages and
productivity across workers? To answer, we begin by identifying three different models of wage
setting that permeate the literature. Given these models, we then ask, why do workers differ within
firms, and why do firms differ?
         The best known theory of wage setting is human capital theory, which states in its most basic
form, that workers are paid on the basis of their general skills and that these skills can be measured
as a scaler, meaning that there is one skill and everything can be expressed in efficiency units of that
skill. The wage equation for individual wages is:

4
 The low number belongs to Italy and the Italian data contain synthetic firms which are closer to a random draw from the
overall population. This reduces reported dispersion below the amount that would be present in real firms.
                                                                                                                    10
(2)     wijt = β0 + β1 Educijt + β2 Experijt

where wages for person i in firm j at time t are a function of his education, experience. Were human
capital the only determinant of wages, then it would not matter at all in which firm a worker finds
himself. The competitive labor market would require that all firms pay the worker exactly the same
thing, irrespective of the firm in which he works. Otherwise, other firms could easily steal him away
by paying a slightly higher wage and capturing the profits. This is most easily described as a spot
market view of the labor market, where competition forces workers to be paid on the basis of the
productivity, which is in turn reflected perfectly in measurable skills. The β1 and β2 in (2) measure
the rates of return to skills.

        The human capital model of wage setting does not tell us why wages differ within or across
firms because firms are irrelevant. Firms matter if we add a model of worker sorting across firms
and thus of differences in the underlying production functions of firms. Table 2 lays out the
alternatives. In column 1, there is large wage dispersion within firms and all firms are identical
(mimicking Figure 1A). There is high wage dispersion within firms if the within-firm production
function requires a combination of workers with different skills to optimally produce output. The
appropriate model of the firm would be one in which workers within the firm have complementary
skills, as in models of teamwork or of hierarchy.5 In contrast, if firms differ by occupation, then
workers are likely to be sorted by occupation or skill: the within-firm wage dispersion is low, but
there are large differences in mean wages across firms (as in column 2 of Table 2). Lastly, it is
likely that mean wages and the variance of wages are positively correlated: high human capital firms
(like law firms or large businesses) are more likely to have teams or hierarchies that produce higher
wage variance than low-wage low human capital firms. A law firm will have high-wage lawyers
and lower-wage assistants and janitors, but a janitorial service firm will have few high-paid
managers. This theoretical positive correlation between the mean wage and variance is displayed in
Figure 2.
        An alternative model of wage setting, a purely institutional theory of wage determination,
also has the implication that a worker’s wage is independent of firm in which he is employed.

5
 See Lazear(1999) for a model of complementary team workers, and Hubbard (2006) for a model of complementary
workers within a hierarchy.
                                                                                                         11
Suppose that wages were set by a central authority and the authority set the wage based on the
worker’s occupational title, where his occupational title was determined by his worker
characteristics. For example, a particular level of experience and educational background could be
used to determine occupational status using some index such as:
(3)     wijt = β0 + b Educijt + c Experijt
Although the index might look similar to a human capital wage function, there need be no direct
relation of the coefficients b and c to anything having to do with productivity. The central authority,
such as union, might simply determine that the selected weights b and c are appropriate in some
sense, based on equity or any other consideration. In the institutional model, the sharing of rents
between the worker and firm is determined by institutional rules (such as those set by union
negotiations).
        As in the human capital model, the institutional model predicts wage dispersion within firms
if firms contain many occupations, or, alternatively, predicts very different mean wages across firms
if firms are organized by occupation or industry (comparing the predictions of columns 1 and 2 of
row 2 in Table 2). The institutional model differs from the human capital model in that the
underlying model of wage setting is quite different despite similar predictions. In an institutional
model of wage setting, pay dispersion may arise within the firm if pay rises with seniority, even if all
workers have the same level of human capital. Alternatively, workers may have very different levels
of human capital, but the same wages within the firm, if unions compress all wages to be equal.
Firm profitability also enters. If negotiated pay is a function of the profitability of the firm, there
will be little wage dispersion within the firm, but very different mean wages across firms as a
function of profits. In this case, “a rising tide lifts all boats:” rising profits raise the pay for all
workers in the firm and there is no wage dispersion within the firm.
        Finally, firms can have ‘wage policies’ that are aimed at incentives for effort or at optimal
sorting and that thereby affect wage dispersion. Most wage policies that are aimed at pay for
performance will increase wage dispersion within firms. That is true of piece rates policies or of
implicit contract theories that create divergence between wages and productivity. Consider first the
piece rate model, in which a firm pays a piece rate that is given by:
(4)     Payijt = a + b Outputijt


                                                                                                     12
The higher is b, the greater is the amount of effort that a worker puts into a job.6 Thus, if workers
differ in skills or in effort, then piece rate pay accentuates the variance of pay within firms.
Similarly, tournaments models increase within-firm pay variance as well. Tournament models
(Lazear and Rosen, 1981), which are most applicable to white collar workers, suggest that wage
structures within firms serve incentive purposes and that it is the hierarchical structure of
accelerating wages at each level, rather than the current wage that determines the strength of the
incentives. In tournament theories, workers at higher levels of the firm’s hierarchy receive pay that
has impacts on those below them. Lower level workers want to become higher level workers and
their desire to climb the internal job ladder depends on the raise that workers receive when they are
promoted (non-monetary as well as monetary). Since the optimal size of the raise depends on
internal conditions like the riskiness of the activity and the shape of the firm’s hierarchy and the
firm’s production function, tournament theory suggests that workers will be treated differently in
different types of firms, even when the workers have the same basic characteristics. Overall,
tournaments increase pay dispersion within firms, holding fixed the level of human capital.
         Wage policies, such as forms of incentive pay, can also cause striking differences in mean
wages across firms due to worker sorting.7 Firms offering incentive pay are also the high-wage
high-effort firms. Those firms without incentive pay are low-wage low-effort, and thus there is
variance of mean wages across firms when workers preferring the high effort firm sort to those and
others do not (as summarized in column 2 of Table 2). These differences in mean wages and
incentives reflect differences in the production environment that determines the value of incentive
pay.
         In sum, these models suggest at least two possible reasons why firms might have significant
within-firm variation in wages. First, and most obvious, is that workers are different. The workers
that firms employ within are not identical and as a result, wages reflect the skill heterogeneity of the
workers within the firm. Those wages might be determined completely externally, either by a

6
 The worker maximizes: a + b (output) - C(output), where C(output) is the effort cost of producing a given output level
and where C=>0. The first order condition is C=(output) = b. Since C=>0, increasing b increases the amount of effort.


        7
          For example, see Bentley McLeod and Malcolmson (1989), Stole and Jeffrey Zweibel (1996) for models of
    bargaining theories, where the outside alternatives as well as the worker’s value to the firm affect the actual wage
                                                                    level, and thus create differences in what firms pay.
                                                                                                                     13
competitive labor market process, in the extreme by a spot market, or by a centralized wage setter,
like a government or tripartite (labor, management, government) body. If worker skills are different
within firms, and wages are set externally, then wages within firms will reflect the underlying skill
distributions within them.
       Alternatively, the wage variance within the firm might reflect wage policy not skill
heterogeneity. Even if all workers were identical ex ante, a wage policy could result in paying
different wages to different people. This happens in a tournament, for example, where pay is more
dispersed than ex ante talent and where the relation of pay to ex post output is positive, but with a
correlation far from one. In the other direction is that wages may be more compressed than ex ante
ability. Pay compression might simply reflect wage policy of the firm. It is well-known, for
example, that certain institutions, like labor unions, compress wages relative to non-union firms. It
is also possible that wage setting in a centralized or negotiated environment might result in wage
compression that brings up the wages of the least skilled and cuts the wages of the most skilled.
There is no reason why this pattern would necessarily be uniform across firms, industries or
occupations. Thus, pay policy is another variable that lies behind the within-firm wage distribution.
       It is key to try to disentangle these alternative explanations. That takes us beyond this
introductory analysis, but in the next sections, we will describe evidence that speaks to these
differences and will try to suggest additional questions or lines of research that might assist in
obtaining answers.


7. The Structure of Wages: Disentangling the Themes
       The data shows that across all countries there is very significant wage dispersion within
firms. However, firms are different: mean wages vary considerably.
       We cannot identify whether the wage dispersion within firms is due to the heterogeneity of
skills within firms or due to wage policies of incentive pay that increase pay variance. However,
some forms of wage policies can be rejected. We have two pieces of evidence rejecting the
possibility that firms compress pay within the firm (relative to market-level wage rates). The first is
the correlation between firms’ mean wages and firms’ spread in wages within each firm. Second is
the correlation between the wage spread in the firm and worker mobility.
7.1 Wage Level and Wage Variance

                                                                                                    14
         There is a positive correlation between the log wage and the within-firm variance of the log
wage (Figure 8). The correlation ranges between .1 and .3 across countries. There are a number of
interpretations of this finding. Two are worth mentioning. The first is causal; the second is
statistical.
         One causal explanation is the human capital story: firms that have high levels of human
capital are more likely to have a high-within firm variance of human capital. The second causal
explanation is more subtle, regarding wage policy. Apparently, firms are rejecting policies of pay
compression in favor of policies of within-firm incentives and human capital growth. A policy of
pay compression – or egalitarian pay and compressed incentives – could arise in large firms with
high mean wages. Such a policy of pay compression could increase performance if it enhances
teamwork and workers are very complementary (or have high amounts of firm-specific human
capital). However, such a policy could be harmful to productivity—it would induce adverse sorting
and adverse incentives: the top performers would sort out of the firm and would work less hard if the
firm lacks tournaments or piece rate pay.8 The data rejects pay compression: high wage firms are
also high incentive, high human capital firms. In the next subsection, we provide evidence on
mobility that also rejects the pay compression model.
         A second explanation for the correlation between average wage and its standard deviation is
purely statistical. It is well known that the distribution of wages is positively skewed: there is
significant positive skew in worker ability. Suppose that firms are partitions of the overall income
distribution. A positive correlation between average and standard deviation of wage would result.
For example, suppose that wage distribution is partitioned into two firms: the bottom 50% of wage
earners work for the low-wage firm and the top 50% worked for the high wage firm. The high wage
firm would have higher variance due to the positive skew of the overall income distribution. Thus, if
there are low and high wage firms due to people sorting by human capital levels across firms, the
skewness of the wage distribution will produce a positive correlation between wages levels and



8
  The sorting mechanism is more important at the firm level than at the country level. Within country, between country
there is less sorting than between firms within a country. Workers who do not like pay compression in Sweden might
choose to move to Denmark, but less readily than those at Volvo move to Saab. As a result, the correlation between
average wage and variance in wage might be expected to be stronger within county than between. (It is difficult to
compare wages across countries because of exchange rates, ppp issues of non-tradeable goods, etc.)

                                                                                                                  15
variance.9
         Finally, the basic results – of positively correlated mean and wage variance – rules out the
“extreme sorting” of workers into firms according to either their occupation, skill, or effort level.
Even within the high-wage firms, there are lower wage workers: high-wage firms are not just firms
of lawyers or high-tech programmers. Law firms must have janitors, but building cleaning
contracting firms need not have lawyers.


7.2 Wage Level and Worker Mobility
         A key determinant of whether within-firm wage variation reflects wage policy or underlying
characteristics is the pattern of mobility. For example, consider a firm that has a small standard
deviation of the log of wages. This could reflect a policy of pay compression or it could reflect a
homogeneous work force. If it is pay compression that hurts the top relative to the bottom, then the
top workers should be more likely to leave the firm than the bottom workers. If we find a pattern
where firms with tight wage distributions also have disproportionate exit of the highest paid
workers, then the inference that we would draw is that the pay compression is policy. Conversely, if
low wage workers have their pay increased relative to the market in such firms, then they should be
less likely to leave. There would be no reason for top workers to leave disproportionately nor for
bottom workers to stay disproportionately if all were paid their competitive wage.
         Figure 9 provides some evidence. The exit rates of workers who are highly paid but work in
compressed pay firms are lower than the exit rates of top workers in non-compressed firms. If these
findings hold up, they would suggest that the pattern observed reflects worker heterogeneity more
than it does wage policy. That is, firms that have more compressed wages have a more homogeneous
work force and within that work force there is less difference between the top workers and the
median workers. As a result, top workers are less likely to be underpaid in that environment and less
likely to exit. Overall, we do not find evidence that pay compression in firms is pushing out more
skilled workers. We leave it to future research to disentangle the relationship between compression

9
  The positive skew could be due to luck or effort, or both. Assume the firm has a wage policy of incentive pay. When
the firm gets ‘lucky’ the incentive pay rewards all those within the firm, but it rewards the highest paid the most. And
extreme example of this would be stock options. For example, Microsoft was a high wage and a high wage variance firm
due to options and incentive pay. When Microsoft got ‘lucky’ many within Microsoft did well. Since greater amounts of
stock options and incentives are given out to those at the highest pay levels, there is a positive correlation between pay
level and variance. Researchers could examine the role of ‘luck’ by looking more closely at the role of individual fixed
                                                                                                                      16
and mobility.10
         In sum, firms that allow high wage spread also have higher wages. This pushes a
productivity interpretation: firms that allow disparate wage treatment also reap the benefit through
incentive and selection effects of higher productivity. Firms that compress wages drive out their best
workers and stifle incentives to produce. However, workers don’t exit more in compressed wage
firms. Apparently, firms with compressed wages also have higher wage levels or lower skill levels.
But across all countries, we find no evidence that policies of pay compression are reducing
productivity.
         The general conclusion from this section is that there is considerable within firm variance in
wages in all countries. Although firms differ considerably within a country, both in terms of average
wage and in terms of wage spread, there is a significant amount of variation within each firm. Some
of this reflects differences in workers within each firm, but some may reflect wage policy. At this
point it is difficult to distinguish, but the wage compression evidence points more to heterogeneity
than to wage policy.


8. Wage Growth
         Alternative views of the sources of wage growth build directly from the themes developed
above in studying the variation in wage levels across and within firms. Imagine Figure 1 as a picture
of the distribution of wage growth rates rather than wage levels. At one extreme is Figure 1B, in
which firms have very different mean pay raises. Firm-specific differences in pay raises would
arise: when occupational segregation or skill heterogeneity within firms causes some firms to pay
high raises in response to hot occupational labor markets; when some firms with a policy of pay
compression pay lower raises due to lower performance; when the profitability of the firm that
translate into pay differences through institutions or union bargaining. At the other extreme is
Figure 1A, in which firms have extreme heterogeneity of wage growth rates within the firm. These
within firm differences in wage growth would arise: when workers build human capital at different
rates within their careers in the firm; when firms respond to the external labor market pressures for

effects versus firm effects in contributing to high variance income.
10
   Why is pay compression and exit rate negatively correlated? It could be because large firms have high exit rates, and
have high but compressed wages. In these data, exit rates are lower in large firms that have compressed wage structures.
 It could also be because highly skilled workers avoid compressed pay firms. Or, it could be that unions compress wages

                                                                                                                    17
wage growth that vary across the occupations within the firm; when tournaments or incentive
structures introduce pay raises for effort; or when institutional seniority-based pay structures vary
across occupations.


8.1 Raises Within and Across Firms
        The data reveals extensive heterogeneity of wage growth both within each economy and
within most firms. Within the economy, workers experience very different outcomes: the standard
deviation of the growth of log wages is much larger than the average level of wage growth for most
countries (Figure 10). In most economies, the average growth of wages is 2 to 5 percent, but the
standard deviation of wages is about 10 to 30 percentage points. Workers in the 90th percentile of
wage increases obtained increases in the range of 15 to 20% in most countries (Appendix Figure
A1). Even when wages were not growing that rapidly on average, some workers experienced very
high wage increases. This is an interesting fact, and one that could have been learned from standard
panel data sources. The advantage of the new data is they enable us to look next at how the firm
influences these wage changes.
        Within the firm, wage dispersion is also very high. The within-firm standard deviation in
wage increases is always larger than the mean wage change and in many countries, very much
larger: mean wage dispersion ranges from 5 to 15 percentage points (Figure 11). The within-firm
dispersion of wage growth is often about 50 percent of the dispersion of wage growth for the
country. But it is often more than twice the mean wage growth for the firm. For example, in
Denmark, in 2000, average wage growth for the firm was 3.4%. The within firm standard deviation
of growth rates was 8%.
        Overall, a very interesting pattern emerges. The picture for wage levels is mirrored and
amplified in wage growth. Figure 12 is the wage growth counterpart to Figure 3 for wage levels.
Figure 12 shows wage growth distributions for low-wage-growth firms and high-wage-growth firms.
France has higher wage growth dispersion than does Norway (according to these measures). But for
all three countries, the firm is a ‘microcosm’ of the economy – the dispersion of wage growth within
the firm is strikingly similar to wage growth across firms and individuals.
        Modeling wage growth introduces a role for business cycles. One common view of business

and raise wages.
                                                                                                  18
cycles and economic growth is that when things are good for some, they are good for all. When the
economy is good, wages grow for the economy as a whole and every firm and every worker
experience the same increase in wage growth. In this extreme view, firms change wages in lock-
step: wages rise or fall at the same rate and same time for all firms. At the other extreme, the
relevant unit of analysis is the worker and the state of the economy has little effect on wage growth.
Each worker’s annual wage increase is an independent draw from some distribution that is a function
of skills or effort. The firm wage increase is then aggregation of its workers’ increases and the
economy as a whole an aggregation of the firms’ increases. Of course, neither extreme will be true.
But what our data shows us is that even though mean wage growth varies over time with the state of
the economy, most workers’ wage increases do not move in lock step with the state of the economy,
but vary widely in every year regardless of the state of the economy.
       The fact that within-firm variation in wage growth is high suggests a number of things. First,
a rising tide does not lift all boats, at least to the same extent. Second, the fact that wage growth is
quite varied within the firm suggests that raises are tied to some other factor, like the outside labor
market. Lazear and Oyer (2004) find that occupation is a much more important determinant of wage
growth than is the firm. At least in Sweden, workers’ wages are more closely related to their skill
set than to their firms’ fortunes. The same appears to be true of other countries, because the within
firm variation in wage growth is so high. High variance of wage growth within the firm also
suggests high variation in human capital growth or effort across workers within the firm.
       Firms are different, however, in that some firms have much more of a lock-step approach to
raises than others. Figure 13 plots the standard deviation of the change in log wage for firms with
that have very high within-firm variation, specifically are in the 90th percentile of firms’ standard
deviations of the change in the log wage. It does the same for firms in the 10th percentile. For
example, in 2000 in Finland, the firms that treated workers most disparately with respect to raises
had a standard deviation of Δ log wage equal to .15, whereas those that treated workers most
similarly with respect to raises had a standard deviation of .05. Some firms have a lock-step raise
policy. What one worker gets as a raise, the other workers get as well. Other firms do not have
much within firm conformity.
       One key area for future investigation is whether the standard deviation of wage changes
within the firm is fairly stable over time. Figure 13 shows that it is remarkably constant over time

                                                                                                     19
for the country as a whole. Whether and why the within-firm standard deviation of raises is stable is
an area for future research, but a conjecture is that the structure of the firm remains relatively
constant over time.11 One way of examining this would be to estimate firm fixed effects in the wage
growth equation and see if these firm effects are fixed over time, and whether they contribute
equally to the variance of firm growth over time.12
8.2 Raises and Tenure
         Standard in the literature on human capital is that wage growth is more rapid during the early
years of career than during the later years. The average wage increase is larger for young workers
than older workers. This can come about through a variety of mechanisms. One is that young
workers move across more firms than old workers. The other is that within firms, there is a policy to
give larger wage increases to young workers than to older ones. That policy could reflect incentive
rewards for early effort or human capital growth. Most academics experience this first hand:
academic deans invariably send out a letter each year bemoaning the small pool available for raises
and justifying small senior professor raises by stating that the pool must be reserved to increase the
wages of more junior professors. Is this a valid characterization of the typical firm and how general
is this policy across firms and countries?
         Figure 13 shows the difference between the wage growth rate of high tenure workers and low
tenure workers within the firm, averaged across firms in the economy. The difference is almost
always positive, and in some country-years, it is large. Of course, this is wage growth for those who
stay in the firm. Much of the difference in wage growth at the individual level that occurs over the
life cycle may work through mobility across firms.
         Young workers who are ‘stars’ also receive considerably higher raises than older workers
who are the stars within the firm. Figure 14 shows the difference in the wage growth rate among the


11
   Wage growth dispersion within the firm should reflect the fact that some occupations enjoy relatively large increases in
demand during some years, whereas other occupations enjoy large demand increases in other years. Although it is not
the same occupation that experiences high wage growth over time, it is true that firms with many occupations are more
likely to have more disparate wage growth than firms with few occupations. If so, there will be relative stability in the
within-firm variance in wage growth, even if occupations switch places in terms of which are treated well or poorly in a
given year.
12
   Another question is whether firms that have little wage change also have small variance in wage change. It has long
been known that at the national level, inflation and cross-sectional variation in prices are positively correlated; there is a
higher variance of wage growth during periods of high inflation. We have not yet investigated this phenomenon, but it is
possible to do so with these data.

                                                                                                                          20
90th percentile raises among low tenure workers from that of the 90th percentile of high tenure
workers within the firm. The difference is positive and often 2 to 8 percentage points. This suggests
more positive skew in the distribution of raises among the young than among the senior. Some
young workers do very well and may be on a fast track. To ascertain that, it would be necessary to
examine the pattern of serial correlation of raises for a given worker over time, which is possible in
these data but left for another study.


9. Mobility
         Exit rates vary substantially across firms and countries. The typical firm’s exit rate varies
from lows of around 15% in Norway’ Sweden, Finland and early observations for Germany, to highs
of 35% in France. However, we caution against comparing exit rate levels across countries for these
data. Because the different data sets measure exit over different time intervals and types of jobs, exit
levels are not comparable.13 Instead, we focus on within-country correlations. For example, in
countries where exit rates are high, entry rates are also high (Figure 15). This must be true to provide
an equilibrium where approximately the same number of workers are employed over time.14


9.1 Mobility and Wage Levels
         There is a negative correlation between both exit and entry rates and wage levels (Figure 16).
Firms that are high wage firms are also low turnover firms. This could reflect one of two
phenomena. First, high wage firms may pay above the market. Workers queue for jobs in those
firms. When they finally land a job in a high wage firm, they keep it because their alternatives are
rarely better. Low wage firms scrape for workers, lose them whenever something better comes
along, and must have high hiring rates to compensate for the high quit rates.
         An alternative explanation is that high wage firms have more skilled workers and the
turnover rates for the less skilled are higher than those for the more highly skilled. Work experience
could account for this alone. A firm with many high tenure workers would be expected to have
lower turnover rates than those with low tenure workers.

13
   For example, exit rates based on monthly data will be much higher than those based on annual data because one job
can have many workers turnover in that job within one year.
14
   There are some notable exceptions. Germany, during the early 90s, had exit rates that far exceeded entry rates. This
invariably reflects the re-unification and fundamental changes in the labor market that occurred during that period.
                                                                                                                   21
        A very interesting new fact comes from Figure 17. Growing firms tend to be low wage
firms. The firms with the high entry rates also have the lowest average wages. The pattern holds
across countries and over all years, but is stronger in some cases than others. This finding makes
sense. New firms are likely to be growing more rapidly than older firms and new firms are also
likely to be smaller than mature firms. It is also interesting that the pattern holds across countries.


9.2 Mobility and Firm Size
        Another related and new fact is that exit rates and entry rates in big firms are lower than the
exit and entry rates in the average firms. Figure 18 shows that the exit rates at big firms are about 80
to 90 percent of the exit rates at average firms. The pattern is strikingly consistent across countries
(with a few exceptions). The same is true of entry rates; there is less hiring at big firms and more
hiring at small firms relative to the size of the firms. Figure 19 shows the net entry rate (entry - exit
rates) and then taking the difference between all firms and big firms. There is no consistent pattern.
This neither supports nor rejects Gibrat’s law. In some country years, there is a pattern of growth
being lower in large firms. In other country years the reverse is true. But the difference is rarely
zero, which would be the prediction of Gibrat=s Law. (Given the number of firms in each sub-
sample, the differences shown in Figure 19 are most likely significant in almost all cases.)
Apparently other factors are important in determining the size distribution of growth rates and the
statement that growth is independent of firm size seems to be inaccurate. A more accurate statement
is that growth rates vary with firm size across time and location. The causal nature remains unknown
at least for this study.
        The determinants of firm turnover rates (industry, occupation, wage, skill, average tenure,
etc.) could be investigated. Although we present no evidence on those factors here, it is a possible to
perform an analysis of this sort using the country-wide datasets used in this book.


9.3 Firm Mobility and Wage Growth
        If the typical labor market allows for some rent sharing between capital and labor, worker
wages should rise when firm profits rise. It is also reasonable to expect that profits and employment
would be positively related. Firms that are profitable are likely to be doing more net hiring than
firms that are unprofitable. When profits are down, firms typically cut the size of their labor force.

                                                                                                      22
As a result, good times might be accompanied by super-normal wage growth and also by super-
normal employment growth. The cross-country data provide evidence on the correlation between
wage and employment policy and we believe that this is the first evidence of this sort that cuts across
many firms.
       Figure 20 reports that the correlation between wage change and entry rates tends to be
positive. In a given country-year, firms that are raising wages are also likely to have higher than
average entry rates. But firms that are raising wages do not consistently (across country-years) have
lower exit rates. In the most open countries, like Denmark, the finding is strong. High wage growth
and low exit rates move together. But in Sweden, the results are weak and in the opposite direction.
This might reflect the “dot.com Boom” phenomenon. During the dot.com boom, the typical view
was that the Silicon Valley labor market was in a talent war. Programmers and other skilled
technical workers moved from firm to firm frequently, as demand shifted to reflect the fortunes of
one company or another. Firms with rapidly growing wages hired many workers, but also lost them
to other firms with rapidly growing wages because of the nature of industrial structure. Turnover
rates were lower, and wages were increasing less rapidly, in more traditional parts of the economy
where the situation was closer to stable. So exit rates and high wage growth might go together if
they characterize firms that are in industries which are undergoing rapid change. Again, this is a
question that requires additional evidence, obtainable in these data sets, but not presented here.


10. The Structure of Wages: Why Care? Discussion and Summary
       Several results in these data have revealed key features of the employment and wage
structure of firms that were not previously known.
   •   The general structure of wages is remarkably similar across all countries. No previous study
       has had the data on employees within firms to assess wage structures across countries.
   •   The wage dispersion within firms is nearly as high as the wage dispersion overall. The
       standard deviation of wages within the firm is about 80% of the standard deviation across all
       workers in the economy (Figure 4). In addition, the variance in wage growth rates across
       individuals within the firm is very high. Even when the average raise is 4 percent within the
       firm, the top 10% of workers will typically receive increases of 8 percent. Wage levels and
       raises vary considerably across workers within the firm.
                                                                                                    23
   •   Firms are more similar than they are dissimilar. The standard deviation of mean wages
       across firms is only about 20% of the average worker’s wage for the economy (Figure 5).
       But firms are not identical: the standard deviation of mean wages is about 60% of the
       standard deviation of all individual wages (Figure 6).
       In sum, most firms have many different jobs within the firm; wage variance is high within
firms. But the jobs differ across firms. Janitorial firms have lawyers, but few. Law firms have
janitors, but few. Consequently, mean wages differ across firms. Firms are not microcosms of the
entire economy, and yet, most firms do reflect a subsample of many of the jobs done in the economy.
Figure 2 is the more accurate depiction of the sources of wage variance from within and across
firms; the extremes of Figures 1A and 1B are not evident in the data. Recalling equation (1), the
variance of wages for the economy combines a high within-firm variance and significant gaps in
mean wages across firms.
       What do we learn about wage setting policies and worker sorting across firms? First, there is
no evidence of extreme sorting of workers across firms. That is, most firms contain a broad mixture
of workers’ skills or effort levels within the firm: wage levels vary greatly within the firm and wage
growth rates vary greatly within the firm. Moreover, an average worker moving from a low-wage
firm to a high-wage firm would increase wages by only about 20 percent. Having said this, one can
look at the same data and reach a different conclusion. There are differences in mean wages across
firms: law firms do not pay the same as cleaning-service firms and people do sort by occupation or
industry.
       Second, there is sorting within the firm. High effort or high skilled workers are sorted into
jobs that pay more within the firm. High effort workers are rewarded with pay increases, and thus
sorted into the jobs where they are the most productive. Again we know this to be true because there
is a high variance of pay levels and pay increases within firms: firms do not have policies of equal
pay for all. Instead, what they have is some combination of: heterogeneous teamwork within the
firm; systems of incentive pay that reward for effort; and sensitivity of wages to outside market
conditions for each occupation or individual. Firms are more hierarchical than homogeneous. Of
course, a law firm would not be expected to have the same average wage as a cleaning service firm.
The differences in skill between these two firms is obvious. There is also likely to be a difference in
wage policy: law firms may by choice introduce tournaments models; cleaning service firms may

                                                                                                    24
have compressed wages from unionized bargaining. It may be possible to distinguish skill
heterogeneity if we estimate models with individual specific and firm effects; given individual
effects, the residual wage variation across firms represents policy. We leave it to future researchers
to work on the underlying wage setting models (extending the work of (Abowd, Kramartz,
Margolis,1989). Why does all this matter? We highlight three reasons.
          One reason to care about within-firm variation in wages and even more to the point, worker
characteristics, is that it may help us learn about the nature of the firm’s production function. One
possibility (as shown in Figure 1B) is that workers are almost identical within firm, both in wages
and in characteristics. The need for different skills to produce a product might be handled by the
market, say, where low skilled workers sell the commodity that they produce to more highly skilled
workers who know how to market and distribute the product. Alternatively, team production may
make it essential to have many different types of workers within the same firm. It may be difficult to
use the discipline of the market to supervise workers within one firm by workers in another firm.
The evidence here is that firms are comprised of workers that are more heterogeneous than
homogeneous, but further work should be done.
          Some analysis suggests that firms are becoming more dissimilar over time. That is, firms
that specialize in high-end skills are increasingly different from firms that specialize in low-end
skills.    The evidence for this is from regressions with firm fixed effects. In the chapters that
estimated wage regressions with firm fixed effects, the firm fixed effects are contributing more to the
R-squared of the wage regression over time. Thus, increasingly the firm matters more: high wage
firms are selecting or rewarding the highest skill. This is an interesting technological change.
Kremer and Maskin (1996) posit that firms in recent years require more skill segregation across
firms as a response to skill biased technological change. In all the countries that study this we have
evidence lending support to this hypothesis. In general, a deeper understanding of the wage
distribution within firms might give us a clue as to the labor ingredients required to produce, how
those ingredients vary over time and among industries, and might shed some light on the nature of
team production.
          The ultimate question is whether wage policy specifically and labor policy in general has an
effect on productivity. It is conceivable that data of this type might allow investigation of this issue
within countries and among countries. Within a country, firms that (randomly) adopt different

                                                                                                     25
policies with respect to the types of workers they hire and how they pay them might experience
different levels of productivity. For example, some have suggested that firms that limit the levels of
top salaries relative to its median levels are less productive. Since the unit of analysis is the pay
policy of the firm, only these employer-employee data can address issues such as this. By attaching
measures of firm productivity or profitability, or in the absence of profitability, firm survival, we
may get some hints as to the effects of various policies. For example, if it were found that firms with
either a too compressed or too disparate wage policy were more likely than firms in the middle to go
out of business, this would be a starting point. Then, an examination of the detailed nature of
turnover at those firms might shed additional light.
          Finally, these data shed new light on workers’ careers. The fact that there is considerable
wage variation within firm means that, at least potentially, workers are not locked into a particular
wage slot as a function of their first job assignment.               If wages were compressed within firms,
mobility would be necessary to change one’s position, both over the lifecycle and relative to other
workers. Luck might play an important role. If a worker landed in a low-wage firm like the one
pictured at the far left of Figure 1B, he would have no hope of changing his income without leaving
the firm. In an economy where mobility is costly (either as a result of market forces or government
mandated severance pay that makes firms reluctant to hire), young workers who begin in low wage
firms suffer significant lifetime losses on their human capital. On the other end, those who start in
high wage firms experience a windfall. Thus, if firm effects dominated the market (as in Figure
1B), then a bad initial ‘draw’ of one’s firm has a huge income effect for the rest of the worker’s
career.
          In this context, if all of the variation in wages within firms were accounted for by person
effects, then there would be constancy over time in a worker’s position in the firm, given his initial
position. Workers care that their position can improve in the firm as a result of experience and
promotion. If there is no within-firm residual variation, then the only way for a worker to improve
his relative position is to move. Given our evidence on the high levels of variance of individual
wage growth rates within firms, the data suggests significant promotions and little evidence of
getting stuck in one position, but further work expanding on these points would be highly valuable.15


15
  One interesting extension is to estimate wage growth models as a function of individual specific fixed effects in wage
growth rates.
                                                                                                                    26
11. References:
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, David N. Margolis, 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
Wage Firms," Econometrica, Econometric Society, vol. 67(2), pages 251-334, March.
Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. "The Internal Economics of the Firm:
Evidence from Personnel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (November 1994).
Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. "The Wage Policy of a Firm."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (November 1994).
Brown, Charles and James Medoff, "The Employer Size Wage Effect," Journal of Political
Economy, 97(5), October 1989, 1027-1059.

Fox, Jeremy T. “Explaining Firm Size Wage Gaps with Equilibrium Hierarchies” The University
of Chicago (May 2007).

Hubbard, Thomas N. “The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of Trucking,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May2000, 533-560.

Kremer, M.,Eric Maskin, "Segregation by Skill and the Rise in Inequality," Papers e-95-7,
Stanford - Hoover Institution.(1995)

Kremer, Michael., Eric Maskin, "Wage Inequality and Segregation," Harvard Institute of
Economic Research Working Papers 1777, Harvard - Institute of Economic Research (1996).

Kremer, M, Eric Maskin, "Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill," Working papers 96-23,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Department of Economics (1996).

Lazear, Edward P. “The Job as a Concept.” In Performance Measurement, Evaluation, and
Incentives, ed. William J. Bruns, Jr. (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1992): 183-215.

Macleod, Bentley W and J. Malcomson, "Implicit Contracts, Incentive Compatibility and
Involuntary Unemployment," 1989, Econometrica, Vol 56, No. 2, March, 447-480.

Stole, Lars A. Jeffrey Zwiebel; "Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts." The
Review of Economic Studies, 1996, 63(3), pp. 375-410.




                                                                                                27
                 Table 1: Country Classifications by Type of Data


       Data Type                                  Country Details
All private firms, all    United States - All firms, all employees, wages plus
 employees                   bonuses, quarterly data annualized
                          Denmark - All firms, all employees, wages plus bonuses,
                             annual (November)
                          Netherlands – all firms (including non-profit, government),
                             all employees, wage plus bonses, annual (September)
Firms in employer         Finland - Employer association (TT) (large firms), all
  associations, all          employees, wages plus bonuses, annual
  employees               Belgium - Random sample of firms, all employees, 1995,
                             wages plus bonuses, annual
                          Sweden (Plant) - All industries, plants only, all employees,
                             annual
Employer associations, Germany – Manufacturing and services (IAB; large firms),
  plants (not firms), all    plants only, top-coded wages are input, annual (June)
  employees               Norway - Heavy manufacturing (industry 38), all
                             employees
All private firms,        Italy - Private sector, large employers, permanent
  sample of employees        employees, 1/90 sample of workers, annual (May)
                          France - All firms, 1/25 sample of workers in firms, wages
                             plus bonuses
Firms in employer         Norway - White collar, employer association (NHO),
  associations, all          manufacturing and services (more manufacturing), all
  employees, but only        employees, wage plus bonuses
  white or blue collar    Sweden (Firm) - White collar, employer association (SAF)
                             Blue collar, employer association (SAF)




                                                                                         28
Table 2: Models of wage setting that would produce Figures 1A and 1B

                          Wages vary within firms:       Wages vary across firms:
                          Broad dispersion of skill or   Workers sort into firms
                          effort within the firm.        based on their skill or effort
                                                         levels.
                          Figure 1A: All firms alike,    Figure 1B: All workers
                          but high within-firm wage      paid same within firm;
                          dispersion.                    firms differ in mean wages.
                           w j = w. ;σ wl = 0            w j ≠ w;σ wl > 0;σ wl , low;
 Wage setting based on    All firms have a broad         Wage structures differ
 occupation (human        distribution of occupations    across firms because there
 capital skills).         within the firm (same          is one occupation per firm.
                          distribution of human          Workers sort into firms by
                          capital).                      occupation or by skill level.
 Wage setting based on    Workers identical skills;      Workers sort across firms
 wage policy aimed        tournament or piece rates      according to preferences for
 incentive pay (e.g.      create pay dispersion. Or      piece rate pay. Narrow
 piece rates or           workers differ in ambition,    wage dispersion implies no
 tournaments) or at       but distribution of types      tournaments; there is pay
 wage compression.        identical in every firm.       compression within the
                                                         firm.
 Institutional wage       All firms have a broad         Wage structures differ
 setting (such as         distribution of occupations    across firms because
 unions) for sharing      or job titles on which         workers sort by occupation,
 rents between worker     wages are based, or a steep    or because pay is a function
 and firm.                seniority structure on which   of the profitability of the
                          wages are based.               firm.




                                                                                          29
                          Figure 1A
      Within firm variation; No between firm variation
      PDF for country, PDF for median and extreme firms all identical


3.00E+00
2.50E+00
2.00E+00
1.50E+00
1.00E+00
5.00E-01
0.00E+00
           .6




           .2
            2
            4
            6
            8


            2
            4
          04
          12


          28
          36
          44
          52
            2




            6
         .5
         .4
         .3
         .2


         .1
         .0




         0.




         0.
        -0




        -0




       0.
       0.


       0.
       0.
       0.
       0.
      -0
      -0
      -0
      -0


      -0
      -0
                                              log wages



                             Figure 1B
            Within-firm Similar; Between firms Different

4.50E+01
4.00E+01
3.50E+01
3.00E+01                                                            Below 10
2.50E+01                                                            Near 50
2.00E+01                                                            Above 90
1.50E+01                                                            All
1.00E+01
5.00E+00
0.00E+00
       6
              5
                     4
                            3
                                          2

                                   1E 1


                                         1
                                         2
                                         3
                                         4
                                         5
                                         6
                                         5
        .
               .
                      .
                             .
                                    .
                                        .


                                      0.
                                      0.
                                      0.
                                      0.
                                      0.
                                      0.
                                      -1
     -0
            -0
                   -0
                          -0
                                 -0
                                     -0




                                        log wages




                                                                               30
 Figure 2: Positive Correlation in With-Firm Mean Wages and Variance




                      Figure 3A: Norway 1997
2.00E+00
1.80E+00
1.60E+00
1.40E+00
1.20E+00                                                     Below 10
                                                             Near 50
1.00E+00
                                                             Above 90
8.00E-01                                                     All
6.00E-01
4.00E-01
2.00E-01
0.00E+00
          3

          6
          9

          2

          5
          8
          8




                                              11
         .1

         .4
         .7



                                               .3
        8.

        8.
        8.

        9.

        9.
        9.
       10

       10
       10



                                             11




                           log wages




                                                                        31
                                   Figure 3B: France 1996

1.40E+00
1.20E+00

1.00E+00
                                                                                                        Below 10
8.00E-01                                                                                                Near 50
6.00E-01                                                                                                Above 90
                                                                                                        All
4.00E-01
2.00E-01

0.00E+00
             4

             8

                              2

                              6



                                                 4

                                                 8

                                                                  2

                                                                  6



                                                                                           4
       2




                                         4




                                                                                     6
           2.

           2.

                            3.

                            3.



                                               4.

                                               4.

                                                                5.

                                                                5.



                                                                                         6.
                                              log wages




                             Figure 3C: Denmark 2000
1.40E+00

1.20E+00

1.00E+00

                                                                                                        Below 10
8.00E-01
                                                                                                        Near 50
6.00E-01                                                                                                Above 90
                                                                                                        All
4.00E-01

2.00E-01

0.00E+00
           8
               8.25
                      8.5
                            8.75
                                   9
                                       9.25
                                              9.5
                                                    9.75
                                                           10
                                                                10.3
                                                                       10.5
                                                                              10.8
                                                                                     11
                                                                                          11.3
                                                                                                 11.5




                                              log wages




                                                                                                                   32
                                        0
                                            0.1
                                                  0.2
                                                        0.3
                                                              0.4
                                                                    0.5
                                                                          0.6
                                                                                0.7
                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                            1
                   United States 1993

                   United States 1998

                      Denmark-1981

                      Denmark-1990

                      Denmark-2000

                    Netherlands-1999

                    Netherlands-2000

                    Netherlands-2001

                    Netherlands-2002

                    Netherlands-2003

                        Finland-1981

                        Finland-1990

                        Finland-2000

                        Belgium 1995

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 4:




     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997

                           Italy-1990

                           Italy-1993

                           Italy-1998

                        France-1977

                        France-1979

                        France-1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to the Standard Deviation of Wages (Across All Individuals)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ratio of the Average Within-Firm Standard Deviation of Wages




                        France-1989

                        France-1996

            Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                employees




            Norway-White Collar-1986

            Norway-White Collar-1993

            Norway-White Collar-1997
                                                                                                  but only white or blue collar




         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 All private firms, all employees




         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
                                                                                                                                                       All private firms, sample of employees
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Employer associations, plants only, all




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974

          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Firms in employer associations, all employees




                                                                                                      Firms in employer associations, all employees,




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
33
                                        0
                                            0.1
                                                  0.2
                                                        0.3
                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.7
                   United States 1993
                   United States 1998
                      Denmark-1981
                      Denmark-1990
                      Denmark-2000
                    Netherlands-1999
                    Netherlands-2000
                    Netherlands-2001
                    Netherlands-2002
                    Netherlands-2003
                        Finland-1981
                        Finland-1990
                        Finland-2000
                        Belgium 1995
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                           Italy-1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 5:




                           Italy-1993
                           Italy-1998
                        France-1977
                        France-1979
                        France-1987
                        France-1989
                        France-1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to the Mean Wage for the Country (Across Individuals)




            Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ratio of the Standard Deviation of the Mean Wages of Firms




            Norway-White Collar-1986
            Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                              only white or blue collar




            Norway-White Collar-1997
         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      All private firms, all employees




         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                       All private firms, sample of employees




         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Firms in employer associations, all employees




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                  Firms in employer associations, all employees, but
                                                                                                                                                                  Employer associations, plants only, all employees




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
34
                                        0
                                            0.1
                                                  0.2
                                                        0.3
                                                              0.4
                                                                    0.5
                                                                          0.6
                                                                                0.7
                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                                         1
                  United States 1993
                  United States 1998
                      Denmark-1981
                      Denmark-1990
                      Denmark-2000
                    Netherlands-1999
                    Netherlands-2000
                    Netherlands-2001
                    Netherlands-2002
                    Netherlands-2003
                        Finland-1981
                        Finland-1990
                        Finland-2000
                       Belgium 1995
                    Sweden-Hol-1986
                    Sweden-Hol-1990
                    Sweden-Hol-1995
                    Sweden-Hol-2000
                      Germany-1993
                      Germany-1995
                      Germany-2000
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wages for the Country (Across All Individuals)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 6: Ratio of the Standard Deviation of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean Wages of Firms to the Standard Deviation of




     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                           Italy-1990
                           Italy-1993
                           Italy-1998
                        France-1977
                        France-1979
                                                                                                  only w hite or blue collar




                        France-1987
                        France-1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        All private firms, all employees




                        France-1996
            Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                                                                                           All private firms, sample of employees




            Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Firms in employer associations, all employees




            Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                                                                      Firms in employer associations, all employees, but
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Employer associations, plants only, all employees




            Norway-White Collar-1997
35
                                        0
                                            0.1
                                                  0.2
                                                        0.3
                                                              0.4
                                                                    0.5
                                                                          0.6
                                                                                0.7
                                                                                      0.8
                   United States 1993

                   United States 1998

                    Netherlands-2000

                    Netherlands-2001

                    Netherlands-2002

                    Netherlands-2003

                        Finland-1981

                        Finland-1990

                        Finland-2000

                        Belgium 1995

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997

                           Italy-1990

                           Italy-1993

                           Italy-1998

                        France-1977

                        France-1979

                        France-1987

                        France-1989

                        France-1996

            Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                            Figure 7: Within Firm Coefficient of Variation of Wages




            Norway-White Collar-1986

            Norway-White Collar-1993

            Norway-White Collar-1997

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990

          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974

          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982

          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
36
                                   -0.1
                                          0
                                              0.1
                                                    0.2
                                                          0.3
                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
              United States 1993                                                                                                                                                                                              0.7


              United States 1998

                   Denmark-1981

                   Denmark-1990

                   Denmark-2000

                Netherlands-1999

                Netherlands-2000

                Netherlands-2001

                Netherlands-2002

                Netherlands-2003

                    Finland-1981

                    Finland-1990

                    Finland-2000

                   Belgium 1995

                    France-1977

                    France-1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and the Within-Firm Mean log(Wage)




                    France-1987

                    France-1989

                    France-1996

     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                      only w hite or blue collar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 8: Correlation of the Within-Firm Standard Deviation of log(Wages)




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              All private firms, all employees




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
                                                                                                                               All private firms, sample of employees




      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Firms in employer associations, all employees




      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                          Firms in employer associations, all employees, but
                                                                                                                                                                          Employer associations, plants only, all employees




      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
37
                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                                               United States 1993
                                                                                                                                                               United States 1998
                                                                                                                                                                   Denmark-1981

                                                                                                                                                                   Denmark-1990
                                                                                                                                                                   Denmark-2000
                                                                                                                                                                    Finland-1981

                                                                                                                                                                    Finland-1990
                                                                                                                                                                    Finland-2000

                                                                                                                                                                Sweden-Hol-1986
                                                                                                                                                                Sweden-Hol-1990
                                                                                                                                                                Sweden-Hol-1995

                                                                                                                                                                Sweden-Hol-2000
                                                                                                                                                                   Germany-1993
                                                                                                                                                                   Germany-1995

                                                                                                                                                                   Germany-2000
                                                                                                                                                  Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
                                                                                                                                                  Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993

                                                                                                                                                  Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                                                                                                                                                                        Italy-1990
                                                                                                                                                                        Italy-1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Firms with Non-Compressed Wages




                                                                                                                                                                        Italy-1998
                                                                                                                                                                     France-1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wages, Minus the Exact Rate for Workers in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whose Wages are in the 90th Percentile of Wages




                                                                                                                                                                     France-1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 9: Difference Between Exit Rate of Workers

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Within the Firm for Workers in Firms with Compressed




                                                                                                                                                                     France-1987
                                                                                                                                                                     France-1989

                                                                                                                                                                     France-1996
                                                                                                                                                         Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                                                                                         Norway-White Collar-1986

                                                                                                                                                         Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       only w hite or blue collar




                                                                                                                                                         Norway-White Collar-1997

                                                                                                                                                     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               All private firms, all employees




                                                                                                                                                     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                All private firms, sample of employees




                                                                                                                                                      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Firms in employer associations, all employees




                                                                                                                                                      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
     "Compressed Wages" means the firm's wage variance is below the median. "Non-compressed" meanst eh firm's wge variance is above the median.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Firms in employer associations, all employees, but
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Employer associations, plants only, all employees




                                                                                                                                                      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
38
                                        -0.2
                                               -0.1
                                                      0
                                                          0.1
                                                                0.2
                                                                      0.3
                                                                            0.4
                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                            0.7
                                                                                                                          0.8



                   United States 1993
                   United States 1998
                       Denmark-1981
                      Denmark-1990
                      Denmark-2000
                    Netherlands-2000
                    Netherlands-2001
                    Netherlands-2002
                    Netherlands-2003
                        Finland-1981
                        Finland-1990
                        Finland-2000
                    Sweden-Hol-1986
                    Sweden-Hol-1990
                    Sweden-Hol-1995
                    Sweden-Hol-2000
                      Germany-1993
                      Germany-1995
                     Germany-2000
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                           Italy-1990
                           Italy-1993
                           Italy-1998
                        France-1977
                        France-1979
                        France-1987
                                                                                                                   Mean




                        France-1989
                        France-1996
            Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                              Standard Deviation




            Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                                                                                Figure 10: Mean and Standard Deviation of Wage Growth (across individuals)




            Norway-White Collar-1993
            Norway-White Collar-1997
         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
39
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                            United States 1993                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percent
                                                                            United States 1998
                                                                                Denmark-1981
                                                                                Denmark-1990
                                                                                Denmark-2000
                                                                              Netherlands-2000
                                                                              Netherlands-2001
                                                                              Netherlands-2002
                                                                              Netherlands-2003
                                                                                  Finland-1981
                                                                                  Finland-1990
                                                                                  Finland-2000
                                                                              Sweden-Hol-1986
                                                                              Sweden-Hol-1990
                                                                              Sweden-Hol-1995
                                                                              Sweden-Hol-2000
                                                                                Germany-1993
                                                                                Germany-1995
                                                                                Germany-2000
                                                               Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
                                                               Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
                                                               Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                                                                                     Italy-1990
                                                                                     Italy-1993
                                                                                     Italy-1998
                                                                                  France-1977
     Wage growth = log(waget ) - log(waget-1), annual change                      France-1979
                                                                                  France-1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                               employees




                                                                                  France-1989
                                                                                  France-1996
                                                                      Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                      Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                      Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                                                                                  but only white or blue collar




                                                                      Norway-White Collar-1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             All private firms, all employees




                                                                  Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 11: Average Standard Deviation of the Wage Growth for Workers Within the Firm




                                                                  Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                                      All private firms, sample of employees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Employer associations, plants only, all




                                                                  Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
                                                                    Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Firms in employer associations, all employees




                                                                    Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                                                                     Firms in employer associations, all employees,




                                                                    Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
40
                                                   Figure 12A

                                                 France 1996

8.00E+00
7.00E+00
6.00E+00                                                                                           Below 10
5.00E+00                                                                                           Near 50
4.00E+00                                                                                           Above 90
3.00E+00
                                                                                                   All
2.00E+00
1.00E+00
0.00E+00
                            -1
            -1.5
                    -1.3


                                  -0.7
                                          -0.5
                                                 -0.3
                                                        0




                                                                                1
                                                            0.2
                                                                   0.5
                                                                         0.7


                                                                                      1.2
                                                                                             1.5
                                         change in log wages




                                                   Figure 12B


                                                 Norway 1997

8.00E+00
7.00E+00
6.00E+00                                                                                           Below 10
5.00E+00                                                                                           Near 50
4.00E+00                                                                                           Above 90
3.00E+00
                                                                                                   All
2.00E+00
1.00E+00
0.00E+00
           -0.3
                   -0.3
                           -0.2
                                  -0.2
                                          -0.1
                                                 -0.1
                                                        0
                                                            0.05


                                                                         0.15


                                                                                      0.25
                                                                   0.1


                                                                                0.2


                                                                                             0.3




                                         change in log wages




                                                                                                              41
                                    0
                                        0.1
                                              0.2
                                                    0.3
                                                          0.4
                                                                0.5
                                                                      0.6
                                                                                0.7
                                                                                                                0.8




              United States 1993
              United States 1998
                   Denmark-1981
                   Denmark-1990
                   Denmark-2000
                Netherlands-2000
                Netherlands-2001
                Netherlands-2002
                Netherlands-2003
                    Finland-1981
                    Finland-1990
                    Finland-2000
                Sweden-Hol-1986
                Sweden-Hol-1990
                Sweden-Hol-1995
                Sweden-Hol-2000
                  Germany-1993
                  Germany-1995
                  Germany-2000
                       Italy-1990
                       Italy-1993
                       Italy-1998
                    France-1977
                    France-1979
                    France-1987
                    France-1989
                    France-1996
        Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                                                           of the Standard Deviation of Within-Firm Wage Growth Rates




        Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                                                                      Figure 13: The 90th Percentile and the 10th Percentile of the Distribution




        Norway-White Collar-1993
        Norway-White Collar-1997
     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                            10th percentile
                                                                                              90th percentile




      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
42
                                        -0.01
                                                0
                                                    0.01
                                                           0.02
                                                                  0.03
                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                                                                                                   0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.08




                      Denmark-1981
                      Denmark-1990
                      Denmark-2000
                    Netherlands-2000
                    Netherlands-2001
                    Netherlands-2002
                    Netherlands-2003
                        Finland-1990
                        Finland-2000
                    Sweden-Hol-1990
                    Sweden-Hol-1995
                    Sweden-Hol-2000
                      Germany-1993
                      Germany-1995
                      Germany-2000
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                           Italy-1990
                           Italy-1993
                           Italy-1998
                        France-1977
                        France-1979
                        France-1987
                        France-1989
                        France-1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 14: Difference in Wage Growth by Tenure Group:




            Norway-White Collar-1981
            Norway-White Collar-1986
            Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                                                only w hite or blue collar




            Norway-White Collar-1997
        Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             All private firms, all employees




        Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Low Tenure (< 3 years) Wage Growth Rate Minus High Tenure (≥ 3 years) Wage Growth Rate




                                                                                                                                         All private firms, sample of employees




        Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Firms in employer associations, all employees




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                                    Firms in employer associations, all employees, but
                                                                                                                                                                                  Employer associations, plants only, all employees




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
43
                                        0
                                            0.05
                                                   0.1
                                                         0.15
                                                                0.2
                                                                      0.25
                                                                             0.3
                                                                                   0.35
                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                    0.45
                                                                                                                           0.5




                   United States 1993
                   United States 1998
                      Denmark-1981
                      Denmark-1990
                      Denmark-2000
                    Netherlands-1999
                    Netherlands-2000
                    Netherlands-2001
                    Netherlands-2002
                    Netherlands-2003
                        Finland-1981
                        Finland-1990
                        Finland-2000
                    Sweden-Hol-1986
                    Sweden-Hol-1990
                    Sweden-Hol-1995
                    Sweden-Hol-2000
                      Germany-1993
                      Germany-1995
                      Germany-2000
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                           Italy-1990
                           Italy-1993
                                                                                                                                 Figure 15: Entry and Exit rates




                           Italy-1998
                        France-1977
                        France-1979
                        France-1987
                        France-1989
                        France-1996
            Norway-White Collar-1981
            Norway-White Collar-1986
            Norway-White Collar-1993
            Norway-White Collar-1997
        Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
        Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
        Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
                                                                                                        Exit Rate
                                                                                          Entry Rate




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
44
                                       -0.25
                                               -0.2
                                                      -0.15
                                                              -0.1
                                                                     -0.05
                                                                             0
                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                           0.1




                      Denmark-1981

                      Denmark-1990

                      Denmark-2000

                    Sweden-Hol-1986

                    Sweden-Hol-1990

                    Sweden-Hol-1995

                    Sweden-Hol-2000

                      Germany-1993

                      Germany-1995

                      Germany-2000

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997

                        France-1977

                        France-1979

                        France-1987

                        France-1989

                        France-1996

            Norway-White Collar-1981

            Norway-White Collar-1986

            Norway-White Collar-1993

            Norway-White Collar-1997

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                 Figure 16: Correlation of Firms' Entry and Exit Rates With Firms' Average Wage Rate




         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990

          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974

          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                                                               Correlation-exitrate-wage
                                                                                  Correlation-entryrate-wage




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
45
                                    0
                                        0.1
                                              0.2
                                                    0.3
                                                          0.4
                                                                0.5
                                                                      0.6
                                                                                   0.7
                                                                                                                0.8




               United States 1993

               United States 1998

                  Denmark-1981

                  Denmark-1990

                  Denmark-2000

                Netherlands-1999

                Netherlands-2000

                Netherlands-2001

                Netherlands-2002

                Netherlands-2003

                    Finland-1981

                    Finland-1990

                    Finland-2000

                Sweden-Hol-1986

                Sweden-Hol-1990

                Sweden-Hol-1995

                Sweden-Hol-2000

                  Germany-1993

                  Germany-1995

                  Germany-2000

                       Italy-1990

                       Italy-1993

                       Italy-1998

     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                                                                             Wages in the Firm and in the Bottom 10th Percentile of Wages Within the Firm




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                      Figure 17: Entry Rate for Workers in the Firm for those Workers in the Top 90th Percentile of




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990

      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974

      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                            10th Percentile
                                                                                              90th Percentile




      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
46
                                    0
                                        0.2
                                              0.4
                                                    0.6
                                                          0.8
                                                                1
                                                                                                            1.2
                   Denmark-1981

                   Denmark-1990

                   Denmark-2000

                Netherlands-1999

                Netherlands-2000

                Netherlands-2001

                Netherlands-2002

                Netherlands-2003

                    Finland-1981

                    Finland-1990

                    Finland-2000

               Sweden-Hol-1986

               Sweden-Hol-1990

               Sweden-Hol-1995

               Sweden-Hol-2000

                  Germany-1993

                  Germany-1995

                  Germany-2000

                       Italy-1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Big Firms (Employees ≥ 100)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Divided by Exit Rates of All Firms




                       Italy-1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 18: Exit Rates of Workers From




                       Italy-1998

        Norway-White Collar-1981

        Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                                                                                                                 employees




        Norway-White Collar-1993

        Norway-White Collar-1997

     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                    but only white or blue collar




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     All private firms, all employees




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990

      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
                                                                                                                        All private firms, sample of employees
                                                                                                                                                                   Employer associations, plants only, all




      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982

      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Firms in employer associations, all employees




                                                                       Firms in employer associations, all employees,




47
                                    -0.08
                                            -0.06
                                                    -0.04
                                                            -0.02
                                                                    0
                                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                          0.04
                                                                                                                                                                        0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.08
                   Denmark-1981                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                   Denmark-1990

                   Denmark-2000
                Netherlands-1999

                Netherlands-2000

                Netherlands-2001

                Netherlands-2002
                Netherlands-2003

                    Finland-1981

                    Finland-1990
                    Finland-2000

                Sweden-Hol-1986

                Sweden-Hol-1990

                Sweden-Hol-1995
                Sweden-Hol-2000

                  Germany-1993

                  Germany-1995
                  Germany-2000
                                                                                                                                                                               employees




                       Italy-1990

                       Italy-1993

                       Italy-1998
                                                                               but only white or blue collar




        Norway-White Collar-1981

        Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           All private firms, all employees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 19: Entry Rate Minus Exit Rate of Workers in all Firms




        Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                                                                                                   All private firms, sample of employees
                                                                                                                                                                                 Employer associations, plants only, all




        Norway-White Collar-1997

     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Minus Entry Rate Minus Exit Rate of Workers in Big Firms (Employees ≥ 100)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Firms in employer associations, all employees




                                                                                  Firms in employer associations, all employees,




     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982

     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974

      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982

      Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
48
                                       -0.2
                                              -0.1
                                                     0
                                                         0.1
                                                               0.2
                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                    0.4




                      Denmark-1981

                      Denmark-1990
                      Denmark-2000
                        Finland-1981

                        Finland-1990

                        Finland-2000

                    Sweden-Hol-1986

                    Sweden-Hol-1990

                    Sweden-Hol-1995
                    Sweden-Hol-2000

                      Germany-1993

                      Germany-1995

                      Germany-2000

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1987

     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1993
     Norway-Heavy Manufacturing-1997
                        France-1977

                        France-1979

                        France-1987

                        France-1989

                        France-1996

            Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                                                                                                                 Correlation of the Firm's Entry Rate and Wage Change




            Norway-White Collar-1986
            Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                                                                                                          Figure 20: Correlation of the Firm's Exit Rate and Wage Change and




            Norway-White Collar-1997

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982

         Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                                                        Correlation-exitrate-wage
                                                                           Correlation-entryrate-wage




          Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
49
                                            Appendix Table 1: DATA SOURCES AND CRITERIA

                                                                                                           The Netherlands
                 United States                                 Denmark
                                                                                                           Social Statistical Database of jobs (SSB
Source:          All employees in the population for __        IDA Bdatabase kept by Statistics
                                                                                                           Banen) kept by Statistics Netherlands.
Surveys          states, based on Unemployment Insurance       Denmark.
                                                                                                           This is an event history database of all
                 records filed quarterly with every state.     This is a longitudinal database from
                                                                                                           employment relationships bringing
                                                               1980-2001.
                                                                                                           together information from tax and social
                                                               Register data supplemented with data
                                                                                                           security authorities combined with
                                                               from the 1970 Census and reports from
                                                                                                           demographic information about Dutch
                                                               all educational institutions (educational
                                                                                                           inhabitants and their households from the
                                                               register).
                                                                                                           joint register of Dutch municipalities
                                                                                                           (GBA).
                                                                                                           All firms (incl. non-profit and
Population       All employees age __ for plants of size       All Workers 18-66 years of age and all
                                                                                                           government), all employed workers.
                 greater than __.                              workplaces and enterprises. The link
                 Workers are included in analysis if real      between workers and employer is
                 monthly earnings exceed $100 and are          established every year on a day in
                 less than $100,000.                           November. Data used are only on primary
                                                               employment.

                                                                                                           Demographics, tenure, earnings.
Variables        For each person: gender, age,                 Demographics, education, labor market
                 compensation.                                 experience, tenure and earnings.
                 For each establishment can calculate
                 wage and entry and exit given all person-
                 level data for the establishment.
                                                                                                           1999-2003
Years            1993, 1998                                    1980-2001
                                                                                                           Gross monthly wages including bonuses.
Wage             Earnings are from UI wage records. UI         Gross hourly wages, with bonuses and
                                                                                                           Data contains tax-based information on
Definitions      wage records measure “gross wages and         overtime. Register data containing tax-
                                                                                                           total earnings per individual and firm
and Parameters   salaries, bonuses, stock options, tips, and   based information on the total earnings
                                                                                                           combination. Earnings are calculated for
                 other gratuities, and the value of meals      paid to each individual worker during the
                                                                                                           the most important employer only, if
                 and lodging, where supplied” (U.S.            year (considered high quality data).
                                                                                                           multiple employers exist. Monthly wages
                 Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor          Earnings are for the employer in
                                                                                                           have been calculated on the basis of the
                 Statistics 1997a, p.44). They do not          November.
                                                                                                           annual salary multiplied with fraction of
                 include OASDI, health insurance,              Wage records constitute deductible labor
                                                                                                           months worked.
                 workers compensation, unemployment            costs for the employers, what makes
                 insurance, and private pension and            information more reliable).
                 welfare funds.                                Working hours: IDA computes annual
                                                               number of working hours from


                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                     employer=s contributions to the pension
                                                                     scheme (contributions to the pension
                                                                     scheme are proportional to the number of
                                                                     hours worked). Hourly wage rates are
                                                                     calculated by dividing the earnings at a
                                                                     particular employer with the estimated
                                                                     annual hours at the employer.
                      Entry (accession) and Exit (separation)                                                       Entry rate calculated as the proportion of
Mobility:                                                            Entry rate calculated as the proportion of
                      rates reflect links across years for unit of                                                  new employees in the firm during the
Entry rate                                                           new employees in the firm in the end-of-
                      observations defined as PIK SEIN year                                                         calendar year (t) compared to previous
                                                                     November year t as compared to mean
                      observations (persons linked to an SEIN                                                       year (t-1).
                                                                     employment in firm over the year.
                      in a given year).
                      Entry refers to workers who have zero
                      earnings with SEIN in prior year (t-1) and
                      have positive earnings in current year (t).
                      Workers are only counted for purposes of
                      computing rates if they satisfy above
                      earnings thresholds. Note however that a
                      worker who has positive earnings in year
                      t-1 and t but in one year earnings do not
                      satisfy thresholds is not counted as an
                      entrant.
                      No measure.                                                                                   Tenure is calculated based on the first
Tenure                                                               Tenure is calculated as contiguous time
                                                                                                                    day employment (as observed by the
                                                                     employed at workplace, firm and
                                                                                                                    fiscal authorities) relative to the third
                                                                     industry.
                                                                                                                    Thursday in September of a year (cut date
                                                                                                                    for annual data).
                      Exit refers to workers who have positive                                                      Exit rate calculated as the proportion of
Mobility: Exit rate                                                  Exit rates are calculated as the proportion
                      earnings in year t at SEIN and zero                                                           employees leaving a firm during the
                                                                     of employees who have exited from the
                      earnings in year t+1. Workers are counted                                                     calendar year (t) compared to previous
                                                                     firm over the year (*since the
                      for purposes of computing rates if they                                                       year (t-1).
                                                                     comparisons are between end-of-
                      satisfy above earnings thresholds. Note
                                                                     Novembers, and this will neglect
                      however that a worker who has positive
                                                                     intermittent short-term jobs, the entry rate
                      earnings in year t-1 and t but in one year
                                                                     and exit rates are downward biased.)
                      earnings do not satisfy thresholds is not
                      counted as an exit.
                      Note the timing difference – entry refers
                      to flow into firm from t-q to t; exit refers
                      to flow out of firm from t to t+1. Hence,
                      inappropriate to compute net flow from
                      entry and exit given timing differences.



                                                                                                                                                            51
             Finland                                      Belgium                                        Sweden-Edin, Holmlund, Nordström-
                                                                                                         Skans=s paper

Source:      Wage survey of the Confederation of          2 Surveys conducted by Statistics Belgium      RAMS provided by Statistics Sweden
Surveys      Finnish Industry (TT) – about 30% of         and merged using the form social security      contains data on all individual workers
             private sector employees.                    number:                                        that were employed at each plant
             Complete wage records on blue and white-     $ 1995 Structure of Earnings Survey            sometime during the year.
             collar workers are available from 1980-         (SES)
             2002.                                        $ 1995 Structure of Business Survey
             Excludes top management.                        (SBS)
                                                          October 1995


Population   All employees in all large TT member         All firms with 10+ workers. Economic           16-65 years of age residing in Sweden
             firms, excludes small firms with less than   activity in mining and quarrying,              sometime between 1990 and 2000, ages
             25 employees. Most TT firms are in           manufacturing, electricity and water           16-60 in 1985 and ages 16-64 in 1989.
             manufacturing and construction. Excludes     supply, construction, wholesale and retail     This paper is focused on the corporate
             top-management and trainees.                 trade; repair of motor vehicles,               sector, including only establishments
             Workers whose usual weekly hours exceed      motorcycles and personal and household         with at least 25 employees.
             30.                                          goods, hotels and restaurants, transport,      Annual data (November).
                                                          storage and communication, financial
             All persons age greater than 15.                                                            Workers employed full time, in job with
                                                          intermediation, and real estate, renting and
                                                                                                         person’s highest wage.
                                                          business activities.
                                                          Final sample=34,969 individuals in 1,498
                                                          firms.

Variables    Worker demographics and details on all       SES: firm characteristics and individual       Total annual earnings, first and last
             forms of compensation. Annual data           employee demographics.                         salaried month for each employee. Year
             (December).                                  SBS: (firm level survey) sales, value          of birth, gender, education and
                                                          added, production value, gross operating       immigration status for each individual.
                                                          surplus and value of purchased goods and       Sector and industry for each
                                                          services.                                      establishment.



Years        1980-2002                                    1995 ONLY                                      1985-2000, more detailed for 1986, 1990,
             Data analyzed was mainly from 1981,                                                         1995 and 2000.
             1990 and 2000.


                                                                                                                                              52
Wage             Gross hourly wages, with bonuses and          Gross hourly wages -without bonuses-          Monthly wage is calculated by dividing
Definitions      overtime, and real wage 2000. Payroll         calculated by dividing total gross earnings   total earnings during the year by the
and Parameters   records. Blue-collar workers (hourly wage)    (including overtime and premiums) in the      number of remunerated months, including
                 from the last quarter of each year, and       reference period by the corresponding         only employment spells that cover
                 white-collar workers (monthly salary)         number of total paid hours (including paid    November of each year.
                 from each December.                           overtime).                                    Employment definition: a person is
                 Wage is calculated with all wage              Gross hourly wage - with bonus -              employed if and only if the wage for
                 components (bonuses, overtime, etc.) and      calculated by adding to the gross hourly      November exceeds 75% of the mean
                 dividing the total wages by total hours.      wages (without bonuses) the annual            wage of a janitor employed by a local
                 White collar worker wages: hourly wages       bonuses dived by: i) the number of months     municipality according to Statistics
                 are calculated based on monthly wages         to which the bonuses correspond and ii)       Sweden=s information on monthly wages.
                 and usual weekly hours.                       the number of total paid hours in the         An individual is only allowed to be
                 All wages are deflated to year 2000 euros     reference period, respectively. Thus, in      employed by one plant each year and
                 using the consumer price index.               Average wage, observation = a person the      priority is given to the observation
                 Wage dynamics obtained by calculating         individual grossly hourly wages (in EUR)      generating the highest wage.
                 the firm averages in year t and t-1, taking   include overtime paid, premiums for shift     Dataset is based in information collected
                 the difference, and then the across firm      work, night work and/or weekend work.         to calculate taxes.
                 average of these differences. This                                                          Data contains earnings of all employees
                 calculation does not necessarily have the                                                   including CEO:s (possible outliers)
                 same employees in both years.                                                               wages of the top earners (see table 2)
                                                                                                             have a large impact on the standard
                                                                                                             deviation of monthly wages while the
                                                                                                             mean hardly is affected at all. (See paper)
Tenure           Wage growth and entry rates calculated        Not available.                                When calculating wage change or plant
                 from year t-1 to t. Wage growth for the                                                     change, they only counted those who
                 workers that enter the firm as well as the                                                  switched between firms that were 25+
                 wage growth by tenure are calculated                                                        employees (if the firm size was less, the
                 using the information on the date when the                                                  subject was dropped).
                 employee was hired to the current firm.

                 Current year – entry year.                    Not available.                                Tenure is calculated within the sample
                                                                                                             (tenure = the number of consecutive years
                                                                                                             a person has his/her main employment at
                                                                                                             the same plant). Thus, the fraction on
                                                                                                             long tenured workers may be lower than
                                                                                                             if calculated from the year of hiring since
                                                                                                             tenure is broken by absence and only the
                                                                                                             main employer is used.

                 Calculated from the year t to the year t+1.                                                 Calculated exit rates will not include

                                                                                                                                                      53
Any restrictions on the firm size (25         Not available.   plant closings because the authors require
employees) will refer to the base year.                        that establishments have at least 25
Therefore, it is not required that a firm                      employees in both years.
would have had at least 25 employees or
even that a firm would have existed in year
t-1 or year t+1.




                                                                                                    54
             Germany                                         Norway                                         Italy
                                                             Data sets are linked employer-employee
Source:      Plants: IAB-Establishment-Panel                                                                WHIP dataset (Workers Histories Italian
                                                             from administrative files from Statistics
Surveys      conducted by the Institute for Employment                                                      Panel) by LABORatorio R. Revelli. It is
                                                             Norway. Plant level information is from
             Research (since 1993). (annual survey                                                          built from a randomized sample drawn
                                                             the annual census for manufacturing.
             sample based on a register of the Federal                                                      from INPS, the Italian National Social
                                                             White collar data sets are from the
             Employment Service -entry, exits, and                                                          Security Institute. More info at
                                                             Confederation of Norwegian Business and
             wages are all mandatory reports for the                                                        www.laboratoriorevelli.it/whip.
                                                             Industry (NHO). Blue collar data sets from
             social security system).                                                                       Administrative data set on employees.
                                                             the Federation of Norwegian
             Employees: all employees in Germany
                                                             Manufacturing Industries (TBL).
             covered by the social insurance and who
             work at least one day in a plant of the
             IAB-Establishment panel in the respective
             year.
                                                             White collar sample: All workers in all
Population   The register covers more than 90% of all                                                       Employees ages 14-75.
                                                             NHO member firms; N=97,000 white
             employees in the manufacturing and 75%                                                         INPS archives:
                                                             collar workers per year in different
             in the service sector.                                                                         Employee population: all dependent
                                                             industries during the period 1980-1997.
             Excluded: Civil servants, self-employed                                                        workers in the non agricultural private
                                                             Restrictions on white collar sample: the
             and those not eligible for s.s.; apprentices;                                                  sector.
                                                             number of hours worker per week is 30+
             switchers from part to full time and                                                           Firms population: all firms in the non
                                                             (full-time only); the number of full time
             opposite. Aall employees in plants with a                                                      agricultural private sector with at least
                                                             employed white collar workers (ages 16+)
             valid interview in the respective years and                                                    one dependent.
                                                             in each firm is at least 25 in year t and in
             at least 25 full time workers.
                                                             year t-1.
             Number of observations varies from year                                                        WHIP dataset:
                                                             Blue collar sample: N=34,000 blue collar
             to year.                                                                                       A sample is drawn selecting all
                                                             workers per quarter. Data managed much
             Workers are age 15-65.                                                                         employees born in four fixed dates of the
                                                             the same way as white collar workers.
                                                                                                            year (sample rate ~1:90), and matching
                                                                                                            them with all firms where they have been
                                                                                                            employed. As a result, there are ~130,000
                                                                                                            individuals, ~90,000 firms per year.

                                                                                                            Inclusion criteria here: individuals
                                                                                                            reported to have a job spell during the
                                                                                                            month of May of the year of interest, blue
                                                                                                            and white collars working full-time only;
                                                                                                            thus a cross-section of workers for each
                                                                                                                                                        55
                                                                                                            referred years.
                                                             White collar workers: organized
Variables        Primary job in June.                                                                       Annual data (May), full-time jobs.
                                                             hierarchically with 22 different
                 Employees:                                                                                 Employee
                                                             combinations of groups and levels.
                                                                                                            Register: Employee id; dob; sex; place of
                 Demographics, entries and exits,
                                                                                                            birth.
                 occupation (3-digit), gross daily precise   Both plant and firm identifiers are
                                                                                                            For every year and every job: Employee
                 wages (including all bonus payments), an    available. See the section “Defining plant
                                                                                                            id; place of work; months paid; # salaried
                 unique plant identifier and the industry    and firm” in the Norwegian chapter for
                                                                                                            weeks/days; job start/end date; salary yr.;
                 code, since 1999: regional information      details.
                                                                                                            wage supplements paid by employer;
                 - Nominal wages are deflated by the                                                        status full time/PT/temp; code of
                 consumer price index and are written as     The person i.d. number is used as merging
                                                                                                            contractual agreement and position in
                 Euros in 2000                               variable when adding in plant and firm
                                                                                                            contractual ladder; wage supplements on
                                                             information from the Employer-Employee
                                                                                                            behave of INPS (1989-).
                                                             register.
                 Employers:                                                                                 Employer (Firm)
                                                                                                            Register: Employer id; economic activity
                 Detailed information about total
                                                                                                            (NACE rev. 2, 3 digit), dates of
                 employment (also for different skills),
                                                                                                            registration and termination;
                 standard and overtime hours, wage
                                                                                                            For every month: # of employees, salaries
                 recognition, output, exports, investment,
                                                                                                            paid, contributions paid, total days for
                 urbanicity, ownership.
                                                                                                            which salary was paid, wage supplements
                                                                                                            paid for s.s. and rebates on contributions.

                                                             1980-1997: specifically 1981, 1986, 1993
Years            The survey is conducted annually since                                                     1985-1998
                                                             and 1997.
                 1993 to present. In the paper only the
                 years 1993, 1995 and 2000 are observed
                 (meanwhile worker data are applicable
                 until 2002).
                                                             White collar: monthly salary (per Sept. 1st)
Wage             All wages are gross wages. The                                                             Defined as the total amount of the
                                                             including the value of fringe benefits and
Definitions      information about wages is censored,                                                       earnings paid to the worker: basic wage,
                                                             exclusive of overtime and bonuses.
and Parameters   because payments for the social security                                                   cost-of-living allowance, residual fees,
                                                             Indirect costs to the firm such as
                 system are limited to a certain amount.                                                    overtime plus back pay, bonuses,
                                                             employers’ fee, pensions etc. are not
                 This threshold varies from year to year.                                                   supplement holiday pay, sick pay.
                                                             included. Nominal wages were
                 Thus, the observed wage at the threshold                                                   Wages reported in the tables are defined
                                                             transformed to real wages using the
                 are imputed with predicted values using a                                                  as average daily retributions, referring to
                                                             Consumer Price Index with base year
                 Mincerian earnings function augmented by                                                   a single job spell/year. This is computed
                                                             1990.
                 ten sector and ten occupation dummies and                                                  as the total annual wage earned in the

                                                                                                                                                     56
                      adding an error term (further details                                                        firm divided by the number of paid
                      describes Gartner, 2005). Varying from                                                       working days. Nominal daily wages are
                      year to year 10-15% of all observations are                                                  deflated by the CPI index and are
                      imputed. In the group of employees with a                                                    expressed in 1990 Italian Liras (1 Euro
                      university degree 50% of all observations                                                    =1936.27 Italian Liras).
                      are censored.
                                                                     For each firm in year t, how many of the
Mobility:             Job tenure was computed by checking the                                                      Job start and job end are imputed by a
                                                                     workers were not present in year t-1. This
Entry                 appearance of the employee identifier in t,                                                  procedure that identifies continuing work
                                                                     number is then divided by firmsize in year
                      t-n (n 0 N) with the condition of the                                                        spells of a worker within the same firm,
                                                                     t.
                      duration equal 365 (366) days. With larger                                                   taking into account possible brief
                      n they have less plant observations                                                          interruptions due to suspensions, illness
                      because of panel attrition. Therefore, they                                                  and maternity leaves, temporary layoffs.
                      calculated the job tenures only up to 3yrs.                                                  The procedure starts from the first year of
                      Also, to be in the group job tenure >3yrs                                                    the panel, so that tenure is left censored at
                      there must be full time employment in t                                                      1985.
                      and t-1 and the individual identifier in the
                      plant must be observed in all 3 yrs. In
                      addition; there has to be an annual job
                      duration in these 3 yrs. of 365 (366) days.
                                                                     Tenure is based on the variable “job start
Tenure
                                                                     date”, i.e. the date when the worker was
                                                                     first employed with his current employer.
                                                                     Note: there is some censoring with the
                                                                     year 1978 as the censoring point.
                                                                     They look at each firm in year t-1 and ask
Mobility: Exit rate
                                                                     how many workers in the firm leave the
                                                                     firm by year t. This number is then divided
                                                                     by firmsize in year t-1.




                                                                                                                                                            57
                 France                                      Sweden-Oyer=s paper

Source:          DADS (Déclaration Annuelles de Données      Swedish Employer=s Federation (SAF)
Surveys          Sociales): longitudinal employee-firm       provided employment data.
                 matched data collected by INSEE.
                 *Tax based employer mandatory reports.

Population       All statutory employed persons.             White and blue collar data is on separate
                                                             databases-there is no way to match the
                 Final sample=13,770,082 observations,       two groups.
                 corresponding to 1,682,080 individuals      There are more blue collar firms than
                 and 515,557 firms.                          white collar firms.
                                                             Firms = every private sector industry.
                 Sample selection procedure: persons born    Firm = white-collar workers at a
                 in October of even-numbered years.          company or the blue-collar workers at a
                                                             company.

Variables        Demographics for each person: number of     GDP data presented in dollar terms.
                 days worked in the firm, employment         Data set variables include occupation,
                 status (ft, pt, intermittent), sex,         age, and wages.
                 DOB+place, occupation, total net earnings   ALevels within firms@-white collar worker
                 yr, yr. Gross nominal earnings*.            occupation codes used to observe
                 Nominal values were deflated by the         hierarchy within firm.
                 consumer price index and are written as
                 k=s of 1980 FF.

Years            1977, 1979, 1989, 1996                      1970-1990. Mainly 3 points: 1974, 1982
                 *1987 only used when it was useful to       and 1990.
                 compute 10-year-long differences.

Wage                                                         Actual wages paid in monthly units.
                 Minimum wage: since 1951, indexed to
Definitions
                 the rate of change in consumer prices and
and Parameters
                 to the average blue collar wage rate.

                 Total annualized net real wage (excluding
                 employer and employee taxes, but
                 including bonuses). French CPI used, base

                                                                                                         58
                      year = 1980.

Mobility:             Based on observed firm identifier for all
Entry                 jobs starting after 1976 (first year of data).
                      For jobs already started in 1976,
                      imputation is based on the wage structure
                      survey of 1978 (see Abowd, Kramarz and
                      Margolis 1999, data appendix).




Tenure                                                                 Tenure calculations are limited by the
                                                                       entry of individual firms.

Mobility: Exit rate




                                                                                                                59
                                            Appendix Table A2: The Structure of Wage Levels Within and Between Firms
                                                              United States-1998   Denmark-2000   Netherlands-2003   Finland-2000   Belgium- 1995   Sweden-Hol-2000   Germany-2000


Average Wage, observation = a person                                 3,253             21,097           2,767             10             15              17,843           3,314
  (s.d.)                                                            (4,230)           (8,674.6)        (1,986)          (3.46)         (7.056)           (7,040)        (1,144.24)
  (90%-ile)                                                         (5,925)          (31,858.6)        (4,211)         (14.82)        (22.274)          (26,716)        (4,844.97)
  (10%-ile)                                                          (855)            (12,456.)        (1,485)          (5.95)         (9.055)          (11,208)        (2,175.74)
  [N - workers]                                                  [40,110,897]       [1,081,555]      [4,600,000]      [380,644]       [31,788]         [860,581]
Average of firm average wage, observ = a firm (weights               3,020             20,473           2,206            9.01         13.1851
observations differently from previous row)
  (s.d.)                                                           (2,051)            (4,572.9)        (1,107)          (1.63)         (4.018)
  (90%-ile)                                                        (5,070)           (26,584.2)        (3,066)         (11.13)        (18.037)
  (10%-ile)                                                        (1,336)           (15,336.2)        (1,249)          (7.01)         (9.317)
  [N - firms]                                                     [202,528]           [13,999]        [71,445]         [1,863]         [1,445]
Average of s.d. of wage, observ = a firm                            2,434               7,065           1,135            2.29          3.7197
  (s.d.)                                                           (2,452)            (2,736.6)        (1,764)           (.94)         (3.382)
  (90%-ile)                                                        (4,888)            (10,764.)        (1,799)           (3.6)         (7.503)
  (10%-ile)                                                         (732)             (3,980.4)        (535.6)          (1.15)          (.802)
  [N - firms]                                                     [202,528]           [13,995]        [70,736]         [1,863]         [1,445]
Average Coefficient of variation of wages, observ = a firm)          0.75                              0.5081            0.25          0.2531
  (s.d.)                                                            (.37)                                (.21)           (.08)          (.154)
  (90%-ile)                                                         (1.2)                               (.758)           (.36)          (.461)
  (10%-ile)                                                         (.42)                               (.282)           (.15)          (.083)
  [N - firms]                                                     [202,528]                           [70,736]         [1,863]         [1,445]
Correlation (average wage, s.d. of wage), observ = a firm          0.7856              0.672           0.7299            0.53           0.831
Average of firm average wage, observ = a plant                                                                                                           17,245          2,861.15
  (s.d.)                                                                                                                                                 (3,663)         (677.69)
  (90%-ile)                                                                                                                                             (22,497)        (3,806.67)
  (10%-ile)                                                                                                                                             (13,413)        (2,007.83)
  [N - plants]                                                                                                                                           [9,067]          [1,569]
Average of s.d. of wage, observ = a plant                                                                                                                  5484           818.24
  (s.d.)                                                                                                                                                 (2,222)         (226.69)
  (90%-ile)                                                                                                                                              (8,635)        (1,113.54)
  (10%-ile)                                                                                                                                              (2,936)         (522.29)
  [N - plants]                                                                                                                                           [9,067]          [1,565]
Average Coefficient of variation of wages, observ = a plant                                                                                               0.312            0.293
  (s.d.)                                                                                                                                                  (.088)           (.071)
  (90%-ile)                                                                                                                                               (.429)           (.387)
  (10%-ile)                                                                                                                                                 (.2)           (.196)
  [N - plants]                                                                                                                                           [9,067]          [1,565]
Correlation (average wage, s.d. of wage), observ = a plant                                                                                                0.768            0.616
Average Wage for workers between 25 and 30, observation = a         2,618             19,556                             9.77          12.6091           16,258            2,832
person
  (s.d.)                                                           (4,325)            (6,334.9)                          (3.08)        (3.768)           (4,929)         (740.02)
  (90%-ile)                                                        (6,822)           (27,067.9)                         (13.72)       (17.113)          (22,121)        (3,688.77)
  (10%-ile)                                                         (891)            (12,935.1)                          (5.82)        (8.901)          (11,009)        (2,062.87)
  [N - workers]                                                  [6,589,276]         [169,120]                         [51,046]        [7,004]         [138,219]
Average Wage for workers between 45 and 50, observation = a         3,932              23,044                            10.68         16.811            19,169         3,438.98
person
  (s.d.)                                                           (9,164)            (8,796.8)                          (3.56)          (8.7)           (7,772)        (1,204.48)
  (90%-ile)                                                        (6,989)           (34,613.3)                         (15.24)       (26.779)          (29,579)        (5,048.48)
  (10%-ile)                                                        (1,037)           (14,731.6)                          (6.13)         (9.98)          (12,108)        (2,211.54)
  [N - workers]                                                  [5,306,977]         [132,563]                         [70,212]        [4,873]         [116,080]           [105]



                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                       Appendix Table A2: The Structure of Wage Levels Within and Between Firms, continued
                                                               Norway-Heavy        Italy-1998   France-1996   Norway-White Collar-   Sweden-Oy-White   Sweden-Oy-Blue
                                                              Manufacturing-1997                                     1997              Collar-1990       Collar-1990

Average Wage, observation = a person                                18,311             95            56              21,838               15,990            10,571
  (s.d.)                                                            (5,374)         (33.359)      (34.28)            (7,084)              (5,435)           (2,690)
  (90%-ile)                                                                        (140.307)       (92.1)          (31,958.9)            (23,475)          (14,041)
  (10%-ile)                                                                         (61.751)       (29.9)           (14,625)             (10,400)           (7,223)
  [N - workers]                                                    [25,446]         [47,173]     [639,671]          [79,259]            [296,782]         [372,621]
Average of firm average wage, observ = a firm (weights              16,877            85.53         50.6             20,395               15,660            10,176
observations differently from previous row)
  (s.d.)                                                            (2,010)          (12.52)       (30.2)          (2,977.008)            (1,908)          (1,664)
  (90%-ile)                                                                         (99.774)       (81.3)          (24,359.63)           (17,970)         (12,400)
  (10%-ile)                                                                         (70.903)       (28.7)          (16,685.75)           (13,329)          (8,140)
  [N - firms]                                                       [139]             [775]      [213,493]             [565]              [2,493]          [3,931]
Average of s.d. of wage, observ = a firm                            4,026             25.87         19.3               5,566               4,895            2,112
  (s.d.)                                                                             (7.117)      (21.868)          (1,640.82)            (1,164)           (656)
  (90%-ile)                                                                         (34.762)       (44.9)          (7,421.265)            (6,335)          (3,012)
  (10%-ile)                                                                         (16.772)         (2)           (3,743.561)            (3,393)          (1,366)
  [N - firms]                                                       [139]             [731]       [68,997]             [565]              [2,493]          [3,930]
Average Coefficient of variation of wages, observ = a firm)         0.236              0.30        0.314            0.2703342              0.311            0.207
  (s.d.)                                                            (.054)            (.001)       (.235)             (.057)               (.058)           (.054)
  (90%-ile)                                                                           (.397)       (.647)             (.334)               (.382)           (.276)
  (10%-ile)                                                                           (.221)       (.051)             (.204)               (.235)           (.145)
  [N - firms]                                                       [139]             [731]       [68,997]             [565]              [2,493]          [3,930]
Correlation (average wage, s.d. of wage), observ = a firm                              0.59        0.744                0.72               0.657            0.561
Average of firm average wage, observ = a plant                                                                                            15,714           10,192
  (s.d.)                                                                                                                                  (2,020)          (1,706)
  (90%-ile)
  (10%-ile)
  [N - plants]                                                                                                                           [2,956]           [4,866]
Average of s.d. of wage, observ = a plant                                                                                                 4,926             2,103
  (s.d.)                                                                                                                                 (1,205)            (663)
  (90%-ile)
  (10%-ile)
  [N - plants]                                                                                                                           [2,956]           [4,865]
Average Coefficient of variation of wages, observ = a plant                                                                                0.31              0.21
  (s.d.)                                                                                                                                  (.061)            (.053)
  (90%-ile)
  (10%-ile)
  [N - plants]                                                                                                                           [2,956]           [4,865]
Correlation (average wage, s.d. of wage), observ = a plant                                                                                0.623             0.582
Average Wage for workers between 25 and 30, observation = a         16,571           83.74         48.0              17,630              13,244            10,642
person
  (s.d.)                                                            (2,999)         (23.969)     (22.819)          (3,546.809)            (2,813)          (2,671)
  (90%-ile)                                                                        (115.076)                       (22,202.05)           (16,787)         (14,143)
  (10%-ile)                                                                         (59.756)                       (13,386.13)           (10,100)          (7,373)
  [N - workers]                                                     [3,781]          [9,318]     [117,395]           [9,123]             [37,423]         [54,590]
Average Wage for workers between 45 and 50, observation = a         19,338           105.80        67.3               23,262              17,699           11,020
person
  (s.d.)                                                            (5,959)         (35.541)     (39.133)          (7,844.934)            (5,949)          (2,707)
  (90%-ile)                                                                        (154.642)                       (34,460.62)           (26,395)         (14,511)
  (10%-ile)                                                                         (67.378)                         (15,250)            (11,500)          (7,639)
  [N - workers]                                                     [3,988]          [7,489]      [95,650]           [13,962]            [46,722]         [39,175]

 See country chapters for detailed discussion of these data and variables.
                                                                                                                                                                        61
                                                   Appendix Table A2: Change in Log Wages [(log wage in year t)-(log wage in year t-1)]
                                       United States-   Denmark-2000   Netherlands-2003 Finland-2000 Sweden-Hol-2000 Germany-2000   Norway-Heavy     Italy-1998   France-1996   Norway-White   Sweden-Oy-White   Sweden-Oy-Blue
                                           1998                                                                                     Manufacturing-                               Collar-1997     Collar-1990       Collar-1990
                                                                                                                                        1997
Average change in wage observation =      0.0496           0.031           0.04464         0.03          0.048          0.018           0.024          0.02          0.017        0.031724          -0.004           -0.011
a person
  (s.d.)                                    (.511)          (.17)           (.204)          (.1)         (.142)         (.013)           (.08)         (.127)        (.254)         (.068)            (.7)            (.22)
  (90%-ile)                                 (.495)           (.2)           (.175)         (.16)         (.207)         (.131)                         (.136)        (.198)        (.093)            (.07)            (.26)
  (10%-ile)                                (-.379)         (-.125)         (-.063)          (-.1)        (-.085)        (-.089)                        (-.081)       (-.142)       (-.007)          (-.06)           (-.27)
  [N - workers]                         [35,607,319]      [799,463]      [3,800,000]     [312,968]     [704,360]                       [19,489]       [43,377]     [519,770]      [69,210]
Average of firm average change in          0.0558           0.034          0.04726         0.03           0.053         0.021           0.022           0.02          0.022      0.0298882          0.001            -0.011
wage, observ = a firm
  (s.d.)                                    (.191)          (.08)            (.143)         (.06)        (.059)          (.034)         (.026)        (.025)         (.217)        (.023)           (.031)             (.12)
  (90%-ile)                                 (.215)         (.109)            (.148)        (.08)         (.114)          (.055)                       (.051)         (.185)        (.057)            (.04)            (.124)
  (10%-ile)                                (-.112)         (-.036)          (-.039)        (-.02)        (.001)         (-.012)                       (-.011)        (-.113)       (.006)          (-.031)           (-.139)
  [N - firms]                            [202,335]        [11,383]         [90,709]       [1,321]       [9,063]                         [139]          [734]       [148,995]        [565]
Average of s.d. of change in wage,         0.4917           0.205           0.1567          0.09         0.126           0.07           0.065           0.11          0.114      0.0585112          0.066             0.19
observ = a firm
  (s.d.)                                   (.206)          (.093)           (.125)         (.05)         (.039)         (.024)          (.031)         (.035)       (.136)         (.037)           (.029)           (.061)
  (90%-ile)                                (.755)          (.318)           (.302)         (.15)         (.176)         (.096)                         (.153)       (.263)         (.095)             (.1)           (.269)
  (10%-ile)                                (.262)           (.11)           (.038)         (.05)         (.082)         (.045)                         (.073)       (.012)         (.026)           (.355)           (.124)
  [N - workers]                          [202,335]        [11,366]         [85,396]       [1,307]       [9,054]                         [139]          [687]       [46,573]        [565]
Avg change in wage for people who         0.1031           0.043                           0.05          0.053           n.a.           0.023           0.06        -0.004                          0.02             -0.003
change firms, observ = a person
  (s.d.)                                   (.786)           (.313)                          (.16)        (.213)          n.a.            (.14)         (.244)       (.441)                         (.097)             (.267)
  (90%-ile)                                (.997)           (.376)                          (.26)        (.319)          n.a.                          (.327)       (.477)                          (.14)             (.319)
  (10%-ile)                               (-.799)          (-.296)                         (-.16)        (-.218)         n.a.                         (-.209)       (-.487)                        (-.055)           (-.324)
  [N - firms]                          [10,522,612]       [240,362]                      [14,473]       [40,217]         n.a.           [697]         [3,496]      [68,164]

See country chapters for detailed discussion of these data and variables.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               62
                                                                                           -0.5
                                                                                                  -0.4
                                                                                                         -0.3
                                                                                                                -0.2
                                                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6




                                                                     United States 1993
                                                                     United States 1998
                                                                         Denmark-1981
                                                                         Denmark-1990
                                                                         Denmark-2000
                                                                      Netherlands-2000
                                                                      Netherlands-2001
                                                                      Netherlands-2002
                                                                      Netherlands-2003
                                                                          Finland-1981
                                                                          Finland-1990
                                                                          Finland-2000
                                                                      Sweden-Hol-1986
                                                                      Sweden-Hol-1990
                                                                      Sweden-Hol-1995
                                                                      Sweden-Hol-2000
                                                                         Germany-1993
                                                                         Germany-1995
                                                                         Germany-2000
                                                                              Italy-1990
                                                                              Italy-1993
                                                                              Italy-1998
                                                                           France-1977
                                                                           France-1979
     Wage Growth = log(waget ) - log(waget-1); annual change



                                                                           France-1987
                                                                           France-1989
                                                                           France-1996
                                                               Norway-White Collar-1981
                                                               Norway-White Collar-1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure A1: Distribution of Mean Wage Growth (Across All Individuals)




                                                               Norway-White Collar-1993
                                                               Norway-White Collar-1997
     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1974
     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1982
     Sweden-Oy-White Collar-1990
                                                                                                                                                                        Mean




        Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1974
        Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1982
                                                                                                                                                      10th Percentile
                                                                                                                                                                               90th Percentile




        Sweden-Oy-Blue Collar-1990
63
