        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MICRO—PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS ARENtT PRETTY:
      FIRM-LEVEL AND INDUSTRY-LEVEL
   SPECIFICATION FOR INPUTS AND OUTPUTS




              Casey Ichniovski



          Working Paper No. 1365




   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
            Cambridge, MA 02138
                 June   198k
                                                         NBER Working Paper #1365
                                                         June 1984



                      Micro—Production Functions Aren't Pretty:

                     Firm—Level and Industry—Level Specification

                                For Inputs and Outputs


                                       ABSTRACT




        This   study documents extreme variations in productivity within a panel of

eleven firms in the same narrowly defined industry classification. Many of the

sources of this variation were identified in field investigations of each plant.

These investigations in turn allowed for the development of detailed specifica-

tions for inputs and outputs using data collected from the sites. The empirical

estimates show that, irrespective of the precise functional form adopted, these

detailed   specifications,   particularly those for output heterogeneity, are criti-

cal determinants of the performance of plant—level production functions. When

the xist detailed input and output specifications are used, 95% of the observed

variation in plant production is explained. However, when the eleven firms are

treated as an industry, less detailed specifications for inputs and outputs are

shown to be nre appropriate for explaining the variation in industry produc-

tion.




                                               Casey Ichniovski
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, MA    02138
                                      —2—




I. Introduction

      Economic theory treats the firm as something of a black box that eff i—

ciently transforms input into output. Since a firm's productivity is determined

by available technology and conditions in the factor and product n.rkets in the

neoclassical framework, this "black box" view is not surprising. The view has

lead some economists to believe that analysis and comparison of the operations

of competing firms would reveal little of interest)- Add to this the problem of

scarce data, and it is understandable why production functions are rarely esti-

mated with establishment level data and are not intended to be direct represen-

tations of the operations of individual plants. Recently, however, micro—

productivity studies have attracted greater attention from economists. These

studies, often citing the large productivity residuals in aggregate studies that

focus on a standard set of inputs, stress the need to consider other sorts of

inputs2 that can best be studied at the plant—level. For such studies, the tra-

ditional economic view provides very little guidance on how to develop a produc-

tion function that can accurately account for the variation in input—output

relationships at the plant—level. In this study, by analyzing a unique data set

on eleven plants in the same four digit Standard Industrial Classification (sic

no.   2621—paper), I provide a guide on developing specifications for input and

output variables in micro—level production functions.

      The study is developed in five sections. Section II describes the plant

data and the mix of econometric and field research used in this study. Section

III describes the production processes in these paper mills. This section also
                                      —3—




discusses how best to structure the available data to represent inputs and out-

puts for this panel of eleven plants. In Section IV, equations that incorporate

the detailed input and output specifications are estimated. To gauge the

contribution of these detailed specifications, the results from these equations

are compared to results from equations using more conventional specifications

for the variables. Section V illustrates whether the detailed specifications

are necessary in more aggregate analysis by estimating the equations using data

aggregated across the eleven mills.

      By way of preview, the study yields four principal conclusions. Most

importantly, the study flatly rejects the simple view that firms in the same

narrowly defined industry classification are homogeneous configurations of

equally productive inputs. Ouput, as well, is heterogeneous. The result is that

productivity, by any metric, varies considerably in a narrowly defined industry

sample. Second, a large number of sources of this variation were identified

through field investigations of each mill. These investigations led to the

development of detailed input variables and controls for output differences.

Third, irrespective of the precise functional form adopted, the inclusion of

these detailed specifications, particularly the controls for output heteroge-

neity, are critical determinants of the performance of the production function.

For example, a simple Cobb—Douglas estimated with inputs defined as total labor

hours, total value of capital, and total energy input is shown to be an extre-

mely poor representation of plant production. However, expanding this model to

include controls for output heterogeneity significantly improves the performance
                                       —




of   the Cobb—Douglas. The fourth conclusion indicates that there is still pro—

inise for the simple Cobb—Douglas without detailed output controls in industry

analysis. The principal reason for the improved performance of the simple

Cobb—Douglas at the industry level is that the controls for output heterogeneity

are plant—specific and drop out of industry equations.
                                                —5—




II.     Sample and Methodolor

        The data in this study, monthly observations from January 1916 to

September 1982, describe the operations of eleven paper mills. The initial hope

was that with competing plants within a narrowly defined industry classifica-

tion, many specification issues on inputs, output and functional form would be

minimized. Figure 1      presents    some initial evidence that lead to a reevaluation

of these expectations. The figure shows the distribution of monthly values of

the labor productivity index, tons per hourly manhour, for each mill in a

"boxplot" (see illustration).

        The average labor productivity' for
                                                          _____________     maximum
the whole sample is .2147. Four mills consist-

ently produce with higher rates of labor pro—                   I
                                                                            upper quartile

ductivity; the other seven with below average                       X       mean

labor   productivity. There is also considerable           -————            median

within—mill labor productivity variation. Even
for the most compressed distribution (mill 6,
                                                                        j   lower    quartile

                                                          ______________    minimum
a =   .013),   there is a 147.9%   difference
                                                               Boxplot Illustration
between the maximum and minimum        values   of the

distribution. For the least compressed distribution, (mill 10, a =             .099),    the

maximum value of the labor productivity index is approximately three and one—

third times greater than the minimum value.

      Rather than assume that such extreme variation was due to differences in

the intensities of complementary factors, I expanded the methodolo,r to include
           .60




           .50




           .40
 TOH S
  PER
MAN-IOUR


           .30




           .20




           .10
                                      _             L+H
                                                                  _
                 HILL   HIU.   HILL   HILL   HILL   HILL   HILL   HI.   HILL   HILL   HILt   ALL
                  1.     2      3      4                    7      g     9      10     11    HILLS

                                                     r
                                       —6-.




field   investigations of each plant's production process with a mill engineer.

Many theoretical issues were uncovered inside these supposedly similar firms:

product differences across plants; multi—product technologies with issues of

economies of scope; heterogeneous inputs particularly for capital; investments

of varying vintage; limited within—plant subsititution possibilities once machi-

nery is put in place. The next section considers how these issues can be

addressed by using an understanding of the production processes to develop

reasonable input and output specifications.
                                        —1--




III.     Plant Production Processes, Input—Output Data, and Model Specifications

         To help understand why productivity indices for a set of firms in a

narrowly defined industry would vary to the extent indicated in Section II,

field interviews and tours of production processes were conducted in each of the

eleven mills in the sample. The aim of the field research was to identify what

was different from plant to plant and what might have changed during the seven

year history of each plant to cause the variation in relative input—output

ratios and configurations. A brief description of some of the indiosyncratic

features of these rnil1sprovides a necessary background on how the available

input—ouput data described below will be structured to account for productivity

variations.

       While paper—making is basically a continuous—flow process, the eleven

mills can be represented as combinations of five stages: woodhandling and pulp

production; stock preparation to convert dark brown pulp into the desired color

and consistency; conversion of pulp into paper; additional converting operations

such as sheeting and coating; and wrapping and shipping. Figure 2 represents

the   sequencing of these stages, and the flow of intermediate goods into final
products. As illustrated in the diagram, one finding from the field research is
that while the mills may be classified in the same four—digit industry, they are
not in fact direct competitors producing identical output. Mills that do not

have optional stages 2 and I can only produce final product Q(5,3,l) — large

rolls of wrapped newsprint. When all five stages are present, Q(5,4,3,2,1) —

coated   or sheeted paper of higher quality than newsprint —   is   produced. While
                           Figure 2



Production Stage           Flow of Intermediate goods
1. Pulping                             RM




2. Stock                                  (i)
    Preparation
    (Optional)
                                         / \\
3. Paper                             q(2,l)      g(l)
   Machines




                                                  ,,
. Converting

                                    /\
                                 g(3,2,1)       g(3,1)
    (Optional)                       /\            \

                                 /                     '
                                I
5. Wrapping    and          q.(14,3,2,1)_g(32,l)_g(3,l)
    Shipping




  Final Products
                                I
                          Q(5,14,3,2,1) Q(5,3,2,l) Q(5,3,l)
                                                           I_
      Notes: q(j) refers to intermediate goods processed
              through stage i.
                                       —8—




these   mills can produce Q(5,3,l), the mill always operates its significant stage

2 and 1 capital investments to produce the higher—priced output. Similarly,

Q(5,3,2,l) in Figure 2 represents large rolls of higher quality paper that has

not been coated or sheeted.

        In addition to these principal differences in output, the inputs within a

given stage of production vary. For example, in stage 1, five different tech-

nologies were observed for producing pulp in the eleven mills: mechanical

grinding of logs; sulfur chemical processing of wood chips; chemical processing

in batch digesters; chemical processing in Kamyr digesters that convert wood

chips continuously; and thermo—mechanical pulping which combines elements of

mechanical and chemical processes. In addition, one mill buys market pulp

rather than making its own. in the central paper—making process of stage 3, two

principal paper machine technologies are used in the mills: a "twin—wire" and a

?tfoundrinerfl process. The different technologies for a given stage across

plants represent very different combinations of capital, labor, and energy

inputs. While each stage of production across all    mills   appears to have fixed—

factor characteristics, department—specific data could be used to estimate the

types of substitution possibilities mapped out for a given stage of production

across mills. Unfortunately, the input—output data available from company and

plant sources, while extremely rich, are not detailed enough to develop

department—or stage—specifc production functions. The discussion to follow con-

siders how output and each major input can best be specified with available data

to account for plant—level variation in production.
                                      —9—




Output

     The narrow focus of the sample did not insure homogeneous output. Two out-

put indices are available for the study: tons produced and total sales. What

adjustments to either of these indices are required to develop a reasonable

index of the mills' output?

    When product differences exist as in aggregate productivity studies, value

added is the standard output index.   To illustrate the data required to adjust

net sales into a usable output index (i.e. to illustrate the ways that net sales

differs from value added in this particular sample), simplify the production

technology described in Section III to the multi—product process3 shown in

Figure 3. In Figure 3, raw materials (RM) are converted into a common stock(S)

which can be processed through various combinations of additional stock treat-

ment, paper machines, and converting operations (collectively represented as

FM()). These machines produce the array of final products, Q1 to Q.

         A simple model illustrates how the prices of the final products

and inputs of the process can be used to weight the individual Q.'s to


                                  Figure 3




                       +                          :::
                              S




                                                  PM(N)        +   Q
                                                                       n
                                                     —10—




produce a common output index. Each final product, q, requires a certain

fraction, 0., of the stock.

                                 n
                           S =       0.     Q.                                (Equation i)
The price of each final product, p., reflects in competitive markets the

stock requirements and additional input requirements. For purposes of

illustration, let the additional labor requirements (Xl) represent all such

input requirements. With an associated per unit labor cost of w, the pro-

duct price can be written:

                   p        = 0 p +                                           (Equation 2)
                       i         is         i


Summing across products, one obtains:

                   p Q = p (e Q ) +
                        ii S                         w ii
                                                       Q                      (Equation 3)


Next, the stock requirements must               be   expressed. Let A represent the labor

requirements of one unit of stock and                       be the price of raw materials

used to prepare the stock. The stock requirements equation becomes:

          pS (EOQ)p
               ii   EOQ)+Aw(ZOQ)
                    RM ii     ii                                              (Equation1)


Combining 3 and 4, one solves for an expression that represents final

products weighted br their prices:

          Ep Q = wE (x Q ) +                             +                   (Equation
                                                             EM(o ii
                                                                  Q )
                                          XE (0 Q )1                                     5)
            ii               ii                  ii
     Under this simplified multi—product representation, one sees in equation 5

that the available net sales index is a function of a number of factors that vary

with the specific product type Q1. Furthermore, Figure 3 is not a particularly

accurate representation of the production process. First, there exists no
                                           —11—




common stock that is transformed by paper machines. The wood materials reQuired

for different papers vary greatly in quality and therefore price. To obtain an

accurate value added index, net sales would have to be adjusted for these sorts

of raw material differences. In addition, the markets in question are not

necessarily competitive. Because of the weight of the commodity, the market for

paper is regional. The isolated mills may         enjoy   some degree of market power as

well as a degree of monopsonistic power in the labor market. Furthermore,

unions for production workers may produce a situation of bilateral monopoly in

the labor market. Wages therefore vary across mills and time periods. The

price and wage adjustments to net sales would be extensive and far exceeds the

capacity of even the rich data set collected for this study.

        An alternative   approach involves adjustments of the output variable, tons
produced. In the     discussion accompanying Figure 2,       three main categories of
paper   produced in these mills were described: rolls of newsprint (Qc(3i));

rolls of white paper (Q5(3,2,1)); and sheeted or coated white paper

                  One could adjust the tons variable by introducing dummy

variables for the presence of optional stages 2 and 4. Both dummy variables

should obtain a negative coefficient; that is, for a given level of inputs, a

mill produces fewer tons of paper when it devotes inputs to either the stock

preparation stage and/or the converting stage.            Additionally, a dummy for the

presence of stage 1 is required in the analysis for the mill in the sample that

buys rather than makes its own pulp. This dummy too should obtain a negative

coefficient. For the empirical work, then, the tons produced variable will be
                                       —12--




used as the dependent variable along with three dummy variables which control

for the presence of stages 1, 2, and 4•

     Still,   within any plant, there is a distribution of paper grades. The

approach adopted for this study will be more appropriate if the distibution of

paper grades produced in any one plant is relatively fixed. Any shift in the

distibution of paper grades that does affect the input requirements should be

accompanied by a change in the structure of the input variables developed below.

Capital Inputs

     The mill tours revealed heterogenity in inputs as well as outputs. Capital

stock, for example, is comprised of machinery in each stage of production,

buildings, land, transportation equipment, office supplies, and pollution

controls. Since the paper industry is one of the most capital intensive in the

United States, and since capital investments dictate the levels of other

inputs, the specification of this input is critical. In this study, I construct

a set of capital variables from the complete monthly inventories of each mill's

assets. These inventories also give each asset's purchase price, and depre-

ciation schemes based on engineering estimates of the life of each asset. For

any month, there are as many as 15,000 individual assests in place in these

mills. The task then is to transform this extensive list of assets into a set

of useful capital variables.

     Solow establishes the necessary and sufficient condition for collapsing two

inputs into one in a production function: the marginal rate of substitution of

one input for another must be independent of other inputs in use.5 Applying
                                        -13—




this principle here, I create nine categories of capital inputs. First, there

are six variables that measure the capital in the five stages of the process

described in Section III: wood handling and pulp production (stage 1); stock

preparation (stage 2); paper machines (stage 3); converting operations (stage

Ii.); and wrapping and shipping (stage 5). The argument for these aggregations is

that virtually no substitution opportunities exist among the individual assets

(e.g., pumps, screens, belt, wires, engines) in a given stage, regardless of 'the

level of other inputs. For example, the individual engines, pumps, belts, or

rollers that make up a coater are treated as indispensible components of one

large machine. It is assumed that there are no substitution possibilities

across these component assets of a coater regardless of the level of other

inputs   in the mill. Three other categories of capital inputs are developed:
energy generation capital; pollution and recycling captial; and a miscellaneous
category.. Aggregation of the   energy generation assets is motivated by the

assumption that each asset in the category is an indispensible part of one large

unit; however, energy or possibly labor may well be substituted for this capi-

tal. Therefore this category will not be combined with any other capital cate-

gory. Pollution capital, purchased to meet various environmental standards, are

unlikely to make the same contribution to output that other production machinery

does; therefore this category will be kept separate from other categories.

Finally, assets that I could not allocate to a particular category

(approximately 13% of the value of all mill assets) are allocated to a separate

category.
                                          _)4_




        Specifically,   these nine capital variables are created as follows: (1)

each asset in each month is assigned to one of the nine categories; (2) the

value    of assets in a stage is calculated as the depreciated book value of those
assets deflated by an industry—specific cost of captial. The depreciation
scheme used in the inventories is straight—line depreciation allocated over the
engineering    life of each specific asset. The deflator6 is intended to adjust

for price inflation of otherwise equally productive machinery.

        While the discussion of the production processes indicate some substition

possibilities between capital in a given stage and some inputs (particularly

purchased intermediate goods), a machine in one stage is only useful in that

stage and not substitutable for machinery in other stages. For this reason,

specifications will also be estimated that collapse the capital in the five sta-

ges into one measure (i.e., total value of direct production capital) as well as

a total value of capital measure.

Scale

     Economies of scale may     exist in the mills. The capacity constraint of' the
mills    is generally imposed by the capacity of the paper machines. A set of dum-

mies describing the number of paper machines in the mill is added to control for

possibility of scale economies. In addition, since a paper machine's capacity

varies with vintage, depreciation and deflation of the paper machine's value may

also help to adjust for these sorts of vintage effects. While these variables

will not be a perfect control for scale, they should provide some measure of

control over the possibly critical issue of paper machine capacity.
                                        —15—




Labor
     Labor input is measured by total production manhours. An accurate salaried

manhours variable was unavailable. Additionally, the production manhours

variable has two principal components in these mills: operating and maintenance

labor. Separate variables for these components of the labor input were not

available. Finally, data on the labor input associated with each stage of the

production process were also unavailable.

Energy

     The energy input is measured as the total number of BTU's used per month in

a mill. One drawback of this variable is that it is not an "efficient" BTU

measure. More BTIJ's may be used in a plant simply because certain sources of

energy provide BTU's more efficiently. As with the labor input, the energy

input is not broken down by usage in each stage of production.

Raw Materials

     Detailed raw material data were unavailable. However, raw material

requirements are by and large dictated by the final product desired. Therefore,

if the capital dummies controlling for product and process variations are ade—

quate, this omission should not greatly affect the equations ability to account

for productivity variation.

Econometric Specification

        The input and output specifications above are described as desirable ela-

borations that should be incorporated in the production analysis regardless of

specific functional form chosen. In the next section, specifications will be
                                                  —16—




estimated with the detailed input and output variables and then compared to
results      obtained     from specifications with lesser degrees of detail. Perhaps the

simplest specification that incorporates all of the details for the specifica-

tions of inputs and outputs would be an equation of the following form:

                                      +        ÷
             Q =   B    + B1KD1_3 + B2K1_9 + B3SC ÷ B4L +
                                                                  ByE          (equation 6)


where            Q the natural logarithm of output
         +
        1—3        =   a vector of three dummies for the presence of stages 1, 2, and     4

                       that    control for heterogeneity of products and heterogeneity in

                       processes for providing similar products
         +
                   = a vector of nine capital value variables (measured in absolute

                       dollars due to the absence of capital in certain stages)
             +
             SC =      set of dummies for   the number   of paper machines as a measure of
                       scale
              L = log of total production manhours
              E log of total I3TU's used.

        While equation 6 may provide a reasonable local approximation that
accounts     for variation in production for the observed range of input con-

figurations, certain assumptions embodied in the functional form clearly make it

unreasonable to extend the interpretation of coefficients outside the range of

observed values. For example, individual inputs do not seem to change in

isolation; higher levels of capital in one stage might have to be associated

with   higher levels of capital in          the other stages before increases in output are
                                     —17—




realized. To see if this relatively simple equation 6 specification using the

detailed input variables and output controls provides a reasonable local

approximation of how production varies over the observed range of input con-

figurations, this model is estimated in the next section. After describing

these estimates, they will be compared to results from a Cobb—Douglas model with

more conventional input specifications. The Cobb—Douglas model is then expanded

to incorporate additional degrees of detail contained in the equation 6 model to

see if the added details serve to improve this functional form for the produc-

tion function. The hope is that the detailed input and output specifications

improve the performance of the production model regardless of its specific func-

tional from.
                                                 —18—




V. Estimation of Plant—Level Equations

       Table 1 represents the coefficients obtained from estimating the model in

Equation 6. Despite the lack of' stage—specific data on all inputs and the

potential problems associated with the assumptions embodied in this simple func-

tional form, all coefficients are quite consistent with the intuition behind

the description in the previous section. All of the capital dumirry variables for

stages of the production process (lines la, 2a, and 1a) are negative.

Production in tons is significantly lover relative to other mills when the paper

being produced is: converted paper (line na); white paper or other paper

requiring significant forms of stock preparation (line 2a); or paper produced

from roundwood or chips rather than from market pulp (line la). A regression

equation was also estimated that expressed the natural logarithm of hourly

manhours as a function of the capital variables to provide a better

understanding of the reasons for such lower tonnages of paper. This supplemen-

tary analysis revealed that producing converted paper requires approximately

20.2% additional hourly manhours, while those plants with significant stock pre-

paration, mostly the white paper mills, require 7.6% more hourly manhours. It

is for these reasons that the dummy capital variables are critical control

variables in the productivity model.

       The coefficients on the variables for production capital (woodhandling —

line   1(bl); pulping —        line   l(b2); stock preparation —   line   2(b); converting

capital —   line   )4   (b);   and wrapping and shipping —   line   5(a)) are all positive

and significant at conventional levels. More capital in any of these stages is
                Table 1: Complete Set of Regression Coefficients from
                           General Productivity Equation
                                                    (N=696)

            INDEPENDENT VARIABLES                      Dependent Variable: ln TONS of Paper

1. Wood Handling/Pulping Capital
  a.     dummy for stage
                                                                   (.0148)
      b.(l) value in voodhandling                                    .089 E.l4**
                                                                    (.051 E—14)
      b.(2) value in pulping                                         .115 E_14***
                                                                    (.035       E—14)


2. Stock Prep Capital
      a.        dummy for stage                                    _.096***
                                                                    (.032)
      b.        value in stage                                          .012 E...14***
                                                                    (.026 E—14)

3. Paper Machine Capital
      a.       2PM dummy                                           —0—
      b.       value of 2PM's                                           .036 E_14*
                                                                    /    —'—'t—    '- \
                                                                                1!—4)
      c.        3PM dummy                                          _.1478***
                                                                   (.0314)
      d.       value of 3PM's                                           .016 E—14
                                                                    (.021       E—14)
       .        .-t.L I'S S.tWIUIIJ                                — I 7 _)
                                                                    (.039)
      f.       value of 1PM's                                           .071 E_14**
                                                                    (.012 E—14)
      g.        5   or    more PM dummy                           _1.359***
                                                                    (.208)
      h.       value of 5             plus   PM's                    .1458 E_14***
                                                                    (.i86 E—14)
14.        Converting       Capital
      a.       dummy        for stage                              _.291***
                                                                    (.038)
      b.       value in stage                                        .766 E_14***
                                                                    (.1214      E—14)
                                       Table 1 (Con't)



INDEPENDENT VARIABLES                         Dependent Variable: in TONS of   paper
                                              TOTAL MANHOURS

5. Wrapping/Shipping Capitai
  a.    value only                                            .325 E_l***
                                                          (.119 E—1t)

6. Energy/Recycling          Capital
  a.         value only                                   —.061 E_lL***
                                                          (.016    E—14)


1. Pollution Caital
  a.         value only                                   —.012 E—4
                                                          (.022 E—14)

8. Land/Office/Other         Capital
  a.         value only                                   —.252 E_14***
                                                          (.011 E—)
9. Energy     —   in   I3TU's Used
                                                              .356***
                                                          (.021)
               in
1O.Labor —          Hourly Manhours
                                                              .bI'
                                                           (.026)
R2                                                         .955
SSB                                                      lO.869

  a —
           standard errors in parentheses
  *    — significant      at the .10—level, one—tailed test

 **    — significant      at the .05—level, one—tailed test

       —   significant    at the .01—level, one—tailed test
                                        —19—




 consistently   associated with higher production.   Again, these capital inputs

probably do not move in isolation. Higher levels of capital in one stage may

only exist in combination with appropriate increases in capital in other stages.

Still, higher levels of capital (regardless of how the increase is split among

the stages in these observations) are associated with higher levels of output.

Similarly the coefficients on the paper machine value variables all show posi-

tive coefficients (lines 3b, d, f, and h). Using the number of paper machines

as an indicator of scale, one observes that the coefficients on the paper

machine dummy variables become more negative as the number of paper machines

increases.

      The coefficients in lines 6 through 8 indicate the importance of separating

the   "energy generation," "pollution control," and "land buildings, and other"
capital from production process capital. None of this capital stimulates pro-
ductivity as does other capital. The coefficients on the capital variables in
the "energy generation" and "land" categories are significantly negative.

clearly, the assumption of a completely homogeneous capital stock would have

been inappropriate in this setting.

      Finally, the coefficients on the labor and energy variables are also both

significant and positive. Overall, the model accounts for nearly 96% of the

total variance in production. To demonstrate the performance of the model

further, the residuals from equation 6 are grouped by mill and displayed in

boxplots in Figure )4•   The large advantages observed for mills 1, 7, 10, and 11

in Figure 1 are no longer evident. The distribution for each plant is generally
          .20
LES IDUALS

ROH

'J'0t3UcTIvrrt

QUAt10U .10




             •   00




         —.10




         —.20




                      )IILL   Htl.t.   'ttILL   t!LL   i!Lt.     i1!.L        ;iLL   HILL   tL   tL   ALt
                        1       2        3       6       5            6        1      B     5



                                                             iigure       '
                     Table 2: Cobb—Douglas Specifications with Plant—Level Dataa
                           [Dependent Variables: in Tons of Paper; N696]


                                                             (1)                (2)

1. in (total value of capital)                          —.010                  •o4o***
                                                        (.017)             (.oio)
2. in (hourly manhours)                                  • 128
                                                        (.029)             (.026)
3. in (BTUIs used)                                           595                1465
                                                        (.021)             (.020)
4.   Dummy for stage 1                                                     —
                                                                           (.0414)

5.   Dummy for stage 2
                                                                           (.029)
).   '-'.'---.
     JJLWIIIIJ L     Ji   --,---..                                                     ** *
                                                                               .025)
7. Three     dummies for number                           No                   Yes
     of   paper machines


                                        B2               • 6148                .9014
                                       MSE               .122                  .033



          a —
                     standard        errors in parentheses

          *      — significant         at the .10—level, one—tailed test

        **       — significant         at the .05—level, one—tailed test

                 —   significant       at the .01—level, one—tailed test
                                          —20—




centered on zero, the average residual value. However, mill I and especially

mill 11 appear to be relatively productive mills given the measured levels of

inputs, while mill 10 appears to be relatively unproductive.

     While the model eliminates the large cross—plant productivity differentials

and provides a high level of explanatory power, the performance of the model can

be compared to alternative specifications without the same level of detail in

input and output specifications. As a popular empircal alternative, consider a

conventional Cobb—Douglas production function:

                  Q —   c1L2E                                  (Equation I)

where K, L, and E are total values of capital, labor and energy respectively and

A,     "2   and c3 are the parameters free to vary. After a log transformation,

equation I becomes:

         lnQ = mA + O.1lnK +   2lnL   +   3lnE                 (Equation 8)

      Estimating equation I by OLS produces the parameter estimates in column 1

of Table 2. Interpreting these coefficients in the standard way would have

been very misleading. The estimated coefficients on labor and energy are very

different from those obtained from the equation 6 model (Table 1, line 9 and

line 10). The capital coefficient is particularly misleading. The coefficient

is not significantly different from zero and the point estimate is actually

negative This is clearly a nonsensical result in this highly capital intensive

industry. The R2 for the Cobb—Douglas model is .6I8 as compared to .955 for the

equation 6 model. Using the mean—squared error as a criterion to judge the per-

formance of these models (S2 = SSR/degrees of freedom), the S2 for the equation

6 model is .0162 as opposed to .122 for the Cobb—Douglas model. The two prin—
                                          —21—




cipal differences between the Cobb—Douglas (Table 2, column 1) specification and

the Equation 6 specification (Table i) are the dummies for production stages

and number of paper machines, and the expansion of the capital variable into

detailed components.

      To see how much of the difference in performance is due to the dummy

variables, the Cobb—Douglas specification is expanded to include these

variables. These results are shown   in   column 2 of Table 2. The performance of

the Cobb—Douglas improves in a number of respects. First, the capital coef-

ficient is now significant and positive. The coefficients on labor (line 2) and

on energy (line 3) are more similar to the parameter estimates obtained from the

equation 6 model (Table 2, lines 9 and 10). Also the dummies for stages of

production (lines 1, 5, and 6) are significantly negative although different in

magnitude than those in Table I. The B2 after introducing the dummy increases

to .901t and the mean squared error reduces to .033. These dummies which help

control for heterogeneity in output and in production processes (make vs. buy

pulp in stage 1) are clearly important controls regardless of precise functional

form chosen.

      Some additional increases in explanatory power and reductions in mean

squared error are achieved from expanding the capital input into more detailed

components. A comparison of the summary statistics of the equation in Table 1

and the equation in column 2 of Table 2 illustrates this point. An alternative

illustration of the contribution made by the detailed capital variables is to

estimate mill—specific equations.7 To adapt the general model for plant—
                                        —22—




specific equations, all stage—of—production dummies are dropped from the
equation   since no plant changed its basic production process during this period.

In this way, mill—specific equations will not contain dummies for these cross—

plant product and process differences. Paper machine dummies only appear for

three mills that changed the number of paper machines in operation during the

seven—year period. Detailed capital variables for any particular stage will

appear for the plants that have the stage.

           After making the necessary changes, the detailed model is estimated

separately for each mill. The average          for the mill—specific equations is

.781. The minimum B2 is .550; the maximum is .959.       Again,   the performance of

these equations can be evaluated against a Cobb—Douglas alternative without the

added detail in the specification of capital inputs. When the Cobb—Douglas pro-

duction functions are estimated separately for each mill the average B2 js .598.

The average S2 for the Cobb—Douglas equation is .0092, while for the detailed

production equations it is only .0053. The complete set of B2s and S2's is

given in the Appendix to this chapter in Table A. In all cases, the

Cobb—Douglas model produces a lower B2 and a higher S2
      While these plant—specific equations may be more appropriately estimated

by linear programming because of the fixed—factor characteristics observed in

field investigations, the empirical results in this section taken as a whole

seem to warrant two principal conclusions. First, the relatively poor perfor-

mance of the simple Cobb—Douglas specification at the micro—level seems in large

part due to important cross—mill differences in products and processes. The

control variables for these differences are necessitated by the nature of the
                                        —23—




dependent    variable. In the absence of a value added dependent variable that

might inherently control for differences in the degree to which products are

processed, the dummy variables are critical controls in the model. Second, con-

ventional input specifications, particularly the inclusion of pollution controls

and other non—production capital in the capital stock, also are not entirely

satisfactory.

         These two difficulties are not so much problems with the functional form

of the Cobb—Douglas (or conversely advantages of the functional form of the

equation 6   model).   Rather, the differences are in the specification of the

input    and output variables within the functional form. That is, even with more
flexible functional forms such as the CES and translog, one would still want to
incorporate    the product and process dummy variables and the added information

provided by the detailed capital variables in the more flexible functions as

well.8
                                        —2t—




V.   Estimation of Industry—Level Equations

        These issues related to input and output specifications, while critical in

accounting for plant—level variations in production, may not be serious issues

when estimating industry—level equations. Houthakker, in summarizing his

theorem on how a Cobb—Douglas form results from the aggregation of fixed—factor

plant equations, suggests that his theory should be extended "...   to   take more

account of the fact that virtually all industries produce many different pro-

ducts, a compliction which cannot be satisfactorily dealt with by [his] present

approach."9 He argues that to test the empirical relevance of this extension to

his theory, "data would have to be gathered on the distribution of input—output

ratios between firms... [so as not] to neglect the variability in production

possibilities between firms."1° The basic principle of Houthakker's theorem has

already been incorporated in the empirical work in this paper.U However, nearly

thirty   years after his suggestions for extending his theorem, this is believed
to be the first attempt to illustrate the empirical relevance of his proposi-
tions   concerning the aggregation of disparate intra—industry input—output con-

figurations.

        The analysis now considers the performance of equations after aggregating

the data across the eleven mills. Table 3 presents these empirical results. In

all specifications, the dummies for plant—specific product and process dif-

ferences drop out since they sum to constants in industry—level data. Column 1

presents the coefficients from the model with the most detailed specification

for the capital input. In this specification, the paper machine dummies take on
        Table 3: Coefficients from Industry—Level Production Functions
                      Dependent Variable: in Tons of Paper
                                             (N=19)

Independent Variables                           (1)                  (2)        (3)
1. Labor
   a. in production manhours                 .193               .'49+          .521
                                             (.018)             (.088)         (.086)

2. Energy
   a. in BTUs                                .231***            .2I3***        .220***
                                             (.069)             (.o)           (.090)
3. Capital Variables (in
   in units)
                                                                        ** *
   a.  total value                           _______            .185           _______
                                                                (.031)
   b. total value of                         _______            _______
        production     machinery                                               (.031)

   c. woodhandling                           .l30***
                                               (.051)

   d. pulping
                                             .o62
   e. stock preparation
                                             2o1)
   f. paper machines                     —                     _______         _______
                                             (.0b2)
   g. converting operations                  .021*
                                             (.015)

   h. wrapping/shipping                  -   .06i.             _______         _______
                                             (.017)
   i. energy generation                  —                     _______         _______

   j. pollution       controls          —
                                             153)
   k. other capital                     —      305
                                             .092)

   1. paper machine dummies                  yes                no             no
                 R2                          .992               .967'          .910
                      SSR                    .l4l               .56            .509
                      MSE                    .002               .007'          .006
        a —   standard errors in parentheses
              —   significant   at the .01 —   level,   one—tailed test
        **    — significant     at the .05 —   level,   one—tailed test
        *     — significant     at the .10 —   level,   one—tailed test
                                          —25—




different values than they do in plant equations, now ranging from 29 to 4l

machines at the industry—level over this period. The detailed model accounts

for nearly all of the variation in industry output. However, the coefficients

on paper machine capital (line 3f) and wrapping and shipping capital (line 3h)

no longer have the expected positive sign. Coefficients on the capital outside

of the prodution process (lines 3i,j,k) are still significantly negative.

          Column 2 presents the estimates from the Cobb—Douglas production function

using only the simple input specifications for total values of capital, labor,

and energy. The capital        coefficient is no longer negative as it was in the

plant equation (Table 2, column i), but rather significant and positive. The

energy coefficient is similar to the coefficient in column 1. The manhours

coefficient is significantly positive, yet smaller in magnitude than its column

1 counterpart. Furthermore, the inclusion of nonproductive capital (lines 3i,

j,   k)   in the capital variable does not greatly affect the estimated coef-

ficients. In column 3, the Cobb—Douglas specification is re—estimated using

only the prodution process capital for the capital measure. The three input

coefficients are still significantly positive and similar to the magnitudes of

the column 2 coefficients.

          These differences in coefficients when going from plant—level to industry—

level data are one indication that simpler input and output specification are

more appropriate at the industry—level. Another striking indication of the

improved performance models with simpler input specifications at the industry—

level is the amount of variation explained by the models with the less detailed
                                        —26—




input specifications. The R2 for the column 2 and column 3 Cobb—Douglas speci-

fication are approximately 9T%——a marked increase over the explanatory power of

the plant—level Cobb—Douglas equations. The improved performance of the

Cobb—Douglas with simpler input specifications is perhaps not surprising. In

plant—level equations, the product and process dummy variables for stages of

production improves the performance of the simple Cobb—Douglas specification

dramatically (Table 2, column 2 vs. Table 2, column 1); these variables drop out

of industry—level equations.

      The disappearance of the dummy variables for product and process differen-

ces at this level of analysis is surely part of the reason for the improved per-

formance of the Cobb—Douglas equation. An additional reason why R2's may

increase   when going from plant—level to industry—level data has been suggested

by Grunfeld and Grilliches. They illustrate how larger multiple correlation

coefficients can result "... when we aggregate...'because within each group

(industry) the individuals (firms) are likely to be more alike with respect to

independent variables than with respect to disturbances."-2 For this panel of

firms, however, it does not appear to be the case that input variables at the

plant—level (using the simple input specifications) have a tighter distribution

than do the corresponding error terms.13 This factor, then, would not be respon-

sible for the higher R2's for the simple Cobb—Douglas model obtained after

aggregation. In short, the Cobb—Douglas equation with the less detailed speci-

fications for inputs appears to be a much more appropriate specification for

industry—level data than for plant—level data. The principal reason for this
                                     —2T—




seems to be that product and process dummy   variables   need to be included in

plant—level equations; such plant—specific variables, however, drop out of

industry—level equations.
                                       —28—




VI. Conclusion

       The empirical results in this study illustrate several problems that are

likely to arise in conducting micro—level productivity research. The paper also

illustrates how field research or interviews can be used to provide solutions to

these problems. Specifically, while research at the micro—level might be the

most appropriate way for identifying the types of factors that lead to more or

less efficient or productive organizations, modelling the inputs and outputs in

the production process may be particularly difficult at this level. Most impor-

tantly, a skeptical eye should be used in considering micro productivity studies

that assume that analyzing a sample of firms in a narrowly defined industry

insures homogeneity of outputs or production technologies. Value added indi-

ces,   the conventional method to control for output heterogeneity, can be   extre

mely difficult to construct accurately as is the case in this sample. Physical
output, while more easily measured, is shown to require adjustments before it

can be used as a valid cross—plant output index.

       The unique data in this study are also used to consider questions on

aggregation that have remained unanswered in the productivity literature for

some time. In response to some questions posed in the conclusions of important

articles on producton over twenty years ago: (1) As Houthakker suggested,

smoother functional forms seem to be reasonably appropriate even if plant pro-

duction is characterized by fixed—factor technology, as long as cross—plant

variation in these technologies is observed; (2) as Grunfeld and Grilliches

suggest, aggregation is not necessarily bad and has the advantage of eliminating
                                      —29—




 plant—specific factors from consideration;15 and (3) as Arrow, Chenery, and

 Minhas suggested, inputs can also be usefully subdivided, such as the capital in

 different stages of production or the distinction between maintenance, operating

 and salaried labor.16

       Perhaps, the most important conclusion to be drawn from this study is the

 reminder to the empirical researcher to develop as reasonable a framework as

 possible for productivity research given the level of analysis and the nature of

 the data. In this study the detailed model of plant production, which accounts

 for over 95% of the total variation in production, is intended to provide some

 guidance and illustrations of some of the specification issues for inputs and

 outputs that can arise even within a narrowly defined industry group.

       Finally, the framework developed in this study is being expanded to con-

 sider less conventional "inputs", such as industrial safety, grievance activity,

• and strike activity, as possible determinants of a firm's performance. While a

 large portion of the variation in productivity in this sample is accounted for

 by the models in this study, a large amount of within—plant variation remains.

 The role of these less conventional inputs may also add to an understanding of

 what determines productivity inside the microeconomic "black box."
                                         —30—




                                    APPENDIX

                Table A: R2's and S2's from Detailed Production
                    Models and Cobb—Douglas Production Models


                                 Detailed Production         Cobb—Douglas Production
                                       Model                         Model

       Sample                                   s2                R2            2
1.    pooled sample of           .955           .0161             .61t8          .1216
      11 mills

2.    mill 1                     .TTIt          .OO34             .101           .00314

3.    mill 2                     .901           .0021             .625           .0011

it.   miii 3                     .123           .0066             .1462          .0109

5.    miii 14                    .550           .0050             .163           .00814


6.    mill 5                     .68            .00314            .622           .0051

7,.   mill                       ..6S           .MOO              17              flfl5
8.    mill 7                     .730           .0020             .522           .0030

9.    miii 8                     .959           .0087             .929           .0133

10.   mill 9                     .939           .0055             .916           .0068

11.   mill 10                    .787           .0127             .438           .0295

12.   mill 11                    .800           .0061             .681           .0090
                                         —31—




                                  FOOTNOTES


1. For a discussion of the constraints imposed by the assumptions on the

     neoclassical framework, see Nelson, Richard R., "Research on

     Productivity Growth and Productivity Differences: Dead Ends and New

     Departures," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 19, (September

     1981), p. 1037.


2. For some examples of these sorts of studies, see Nelson, pp. lO331OIi5.


3. For a more general theoretical development of specification issues in

     multi—product technologies, see Hall, Robert," The Specification of

     Technology   with Several Kinds of Output," Journal of Political
     Economy, (May 1973), pp. 878—892.

4•   Data for 45O four   digit standard industrial classifications in the manu-

     facturing sector are available from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Annual

     Survey of Manufactures. Capital expenditures per production worker in

     the paper industry exceed the capital—labor ratio for all but 29 of

     these 1450 manufacturing industries. Most of the other industries that

     are more capital intensive are in metal or petro—chemical industries.

     These statistics are for 1976, the first year used in the productivity

     analysis in Section V of this study.


5. Solow, Robert M., "The Production Function and the Theory of Capital,"

     Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 23, No. 55, (1955—1956), pp. 101—108.
                                          —32—




6. Capital    price indices are taken from Economic Report of the President
    (Washington,      D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,   (1981), p. 229.
    Table   B—57, Producer Price Indexes for Major Commodity Groups —

    Machinery   and   Equipment.

7. These equations can also be used to test the importance of standard

    time series concerns related to serial correlations in the panel data.

    Durbin—Watson statistics revealed no evidence of AR—i correlation in

    the errors; more detailed inspection of residual from these plant spe-

    cific equation (or from the equations 6 model when plotted for each

    mill over time) revealed no clear pattern in residuals. The inclusion

    of month dummies in the equation 6 model does indicate the presence of

    some seasonality of production, but these dummies do not affect other

    coefficients to any appreciable extent.


8. The important and related issue of substition possibilites that are

   mapped across plants that is not addressed in this paper is the sub-

   ject of current research in progress. This research will consider a number

   of approaches for entering the detailed input and output specification

   within the Cobb—Douglas, CES, and trans—log functions. Substition parame-

   ters obtained using different functional forms with similar input specifica—
                                         —33—




     tions are incorporated within different functional forms. For the

     development of the CES      form, see Arrow, K.J., H.B. Chenery, B.S. Minhas,

     and R.M. Solow, "Capital Labor Substitution and Economic Efficieny," Review

     of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 63, No. 3, (August 1981), pp. 225—250;

     for the translog form, see Christensen, L.R., D.W. Jorgensen, and L..T.

     Lau, "Conjugate Duality and the Transcendental Logarithmic Production

     Function," (abstract), Econometrica, Vol. 39, No. 14, pp. 255—256.


9. Houthakker, H.S., "The Pareto Distribution and the Cobb—Douglas

     Production Function in Activity Analysis," Review of Economic Studies,

     Vol. 23, (1955-1956), p. 31.

1r
     LUiU. P

11. Whether with industry—level data, or with panel data across plants,
     the intuition on why a smooth curve can be adopted even if plant production

     has fixed factor characteristics is similar in both cases: if plant input

     configurations are clustered at the vertices of different discontinuous cur-

     ves, a smoother curve will be mapped out when considering data across the

     plant—level observations.


12. Grunfeld, Y. and Zvi Grilliches, "Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?"

     Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 62, No. 1, (February 1960), p. 4.


13. A simple test estimates each of the inputs and the errors from the simple

     Cobb—Douglas as a function of a complete set of month dummies. The variance
                                         — 3)4 —




      explained   (mean square error) is, in fact, higher (lower) when the residuals

      are used as the dependent variable in this model than when the labor, capi-

      tal, and energy inputs serve as the dependent variables. A more complete

      accounting of errors in aggregation is developed by Boot, J.C.G., and G.M.

      De Wit, "Investment Demand: An Emprical Contribution to the Aggregation

      Problem," International Economic Review, vol. 1, no.1, (January, 1960).


1)4. Houthhaklcer, pp. 21—31.


15. Grunfeld and Grilliches, pp. 1—13.


i6.   Arrow,   Chenery, Minhas, and Solow, p. 2)41.
