NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH, ECONOMIC RESOURCES AND THE WORK DECISIONS OF OLDER
MEN
John Bound
Todd Stinebrickner
Timothy Waidmann
Working Paper 13657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13657

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Financial support was provided by the National Institute on Aging (R01 AG17579-01), the Robert
Wood Johnson through the Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured at the University of Michigan,
and the Social Security Administration through the Michigan Retirement Research Center. Bound
would also like to thank the Center For Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University
for support. Michael Stevens provided able research assistance. The project was made computationally
feasible by our access to the supercomputer resources of SHARCNET at the University of Western
Ontario which were developed with funding from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation and the
Ontario Research and Development Challenge Fund. We would like to thank system administrator
Gary Molenkamp and Baolai Ge for their help on the computing front. Stinebrickner has also benefitted
from a time-release supported under the SHARCNET fellowship program. We have benefitted from
the comments on an earlier version of this paper from seminar participants at the University of Michigan
and the Canadian Econometric Study Group and especially from Peter Arcidiacono, Paul Contoyannis,
Eric French, Donna Gilleskie, Steve Haider, Marteen Lindeboom, Chris Swann, an anonymous reviewer,
and the editors of this Journal. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by John Bound, Todd Stinebrickner, and Timothy Waidmann. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Health, Economic Resources and the Work Decisions of Older Men
John Bound, Todd Stinebrickner, and Timothy Waidmann
NBER Working Paper No. 13657
November 2007, Revised January 2008
JEL No. J14,J22,J26
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we specify a dynamic programming model that addresses the interplay among health,
financial resources, and the labor market behavior of men in the later part of their working lives. Unlike
previous work which has typically used self reported health or disability status as a proxy for health
status, we model health as a latent variable, using self reported disability status as an indicator of this
latent construct. Our model is explicitly designed to account for the possibility that the reporting of
disability may be endogenous to the labor market behavior we are studying. The model is estimated
using data from the Health and Retirement Study. We compare results based on our model to results
based on models that treat health in the typical way, and find large differences in the estimated effect
of health on behavior. While estimates based on our model suggest that health has a large impact on
behavior, the estimates suggest a substantially smaller role for health than we find when using standard
techniques. We use our model to simulate the impact on behavior of raising the normal retirement
age, eliminating early retirement altogether and eliminating the Social Security Disability Insurance
program.

John Bound
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jbound@umich.edu
Todd Stinebrickner
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
trstineb@uwo.ca

Timothy Waidmann
The Urban Institute
twaidman@ui.urban.org

Section 1. Introduction
Population aging and other challenges to public and private pension financing highlight the
importance of understanding the determinants of retirement behavior. Much of the recent research on
the labor force behavior of older workers has focused on the effects of financial incentives such as
Social Security and private pensions, generally showing that these incentives have powerful behavioral
effects (e.g., Blinder, et al., 1980; Burkhauser and Quinn, 1983; Diamond and Hausman, 1984; Stock
and Wise, 1990; Rust and Phelan, 1997; Gruber and Wise, 1999, 2004; Gustman and Steinmeier, 1986,
2000, 2005). Additionally, a substantial amount of research has focused on the effects of the
availability of both privately and publicly provided health insurance on retirement behavior (Rust and
Phelan, 1997; Gustman and Steinmeier, 1994; Blau and Gilleskie, 2001a, 2006, Forthcoming). At the
same time, econometric studies of retirement behavior have provided strong evidence for the
importance of health factors (e.g., Quinn, 1977; Gordon and Blinder, 1980; Burkhauser and Quinn,
1983; Diamond and Hausman, 1984; Gustman and Steinmeier, 1986; Quinn et al., 1990; Rust and
Phelan, 1997; Bound et al., 1999; Blau and Gilleskie, 2001b). Indeed, in analyses using Census data
we found that more than half of men and one third of women who leave the labor force before reaching
the Social Security early retirement age of 62 report that health limits their capacity to work (Bound
et al., 1997).
However, as several reviews have noted, important questions remain regarding the magnitude of
the effect of health on labor market behavior (Chirikos, 1993; Lumsdaine and Mitchell, 1999; Currie
and Madrian, 1999). Moreover, except for early work by Quinn (1977) and research focusing
specifically on the effects of changes in Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) on the work force
attachment of older men (e.g., Parsons, 1980; Halpern and Hausman, 1986; Bound, 1989; Haveman
et al., 1991; Bound and Waidmann, 1992, 2002; Kreider 1999a; Kreider and Riphahn, 2000), no one
has studied the effect of the availability of financial resources on the relationship between health and
retirement. This despite the likelihood that health and financial factors interact in affecting retirement

1

decisions -- that is, deteriorating health will tend to make continued work less attractive, but
individuals will tend to retire only if they have sufficient financial resources.
More fundamentally, previous longitudinal retirement research has suffered from limited measures
of health, relying heavily on global measures such as self-rated work limitations and self-rated health.
There are a number of potential problems with such survey measures: (1) they are discrete, whereas
the construct researchers are interested in measuring is presumably continuous; (2) they are
presumably error ridden, since not everyone will use the same scale when responding to survey
questions; and (3) they are likely to be endogenous to retirement decisions, since it seems plausible
that responses to these global questions will be related to labor market status. 1
In this paper we use methods designed to address all three of these problems. We use both the
global and the more detailed health measures available on the Health and Retirement Study (HRS)
within the context of latent variable models. This approach can be thought of as using the detailed
health measures available on the HRS to instrument the global measures. We find that the choice of
how we model health is substantively important. To preview our results, our estimates confirm the
central role health plays in the early retirement behavior of men. Indeed, we estimate the rate of labor
force exit before the age of 62 to be 5 times as great for those in poor health than it is for those in
average health.

Importantly, however, we found that using the standard (binary) model of health

would overstate the magnitude of this effect. At the same time, our simulations suggest that the
availability of financial resources also plays an important role in determining behavior. In particular,
we find that a large fraction of those who leave the workforce in poor health before the age of 62 apply
for DI. Consistent with other estimates in the literature, our estimates imply that the DI application

1

The potential endogeneity of self-rated work limitations or health has received a good deal of attention in the literature (e.g.
Parsons, 1982; Myers, 1982; Anderson and Burkhauser, 1984, 1985; Bound, 1991; Waidmann et al.,1995). Indeed,
compelling evidence indicates that responses to such questions depend not just on health, but also on features of the
individual’s social and economic environment. Bound and Waidmann (1992, 2002) demonstrate that the fraction of working
aged men in the U.S. who are out of work and identify themselves as limited in their capacity for work tracks the fraction
receiving Social Security Disability benefits quite closely, rising in the 1970s, falling in the 1980s, and rising again in the
1990s. Bound and Waidmann argue that the most plausible interpretation of these findings is that exogenous changes in the
availability of disability benefits induced a change in reporting behavior. Waidmann et al. (1995) report similar trends for
a range of other health measures, including self-reports of overall health and specific chronic conditions.

2

decision is quite sensitive to benefit levels. Even so, our estimates suggest that seemingly dramatic
changes to Social Security rules-increasing the normal retirement age or eliminating the early
retirement benefit--would have small spill over effects on the DI program. The reason is simple: most
men in their 60s are too healthy to qualify for DI.
Similar approaches to modeling health have been used by other researchers in both cross-sectional
(Kreider, 1999a) and longitudinal studies (Lindeboom and Kerkhofs, 2004; Disney et al., 2006).
However, to our knowledge no one has embedded such modeling into the kind of dynamic
programming models that are currently state of the art for modeling retirement behavior. This is the
approach that we take in this paper.
For our method to yield valid results, responses to the more detailed measures available on the
HRS must be exogenous to labor market behavior. While many researchers have worked with the
presumption that the more specific health measures available on the HRS are less susceptible to the
kinds of problems we have discussed, these measures may not be completely immune. We discuss
evidence below that suggests to us that these measures are, indeed, exogenous. The latent variable
model we use is computationally intensive, which may explain why other researchers have continued
to use the global health measures available on the HRS. For this reason, it seems important to know
whether our model yields answers that are substantially different from those we obtain if we follow
the standard practice of simply including discrete health indicators in our behavioral models, and thus
we include estimates from both approaches.
Researchers increasingly view retirement as a process rather than a single event (Honig and
Hanoch, 1985; Honig, 1985; Quinn et al., 1990; Ruhm, 1990; Quinn and Kozy, 1996; Quinn, 1997,
2000). While poor health induces many individuals to leave the work force altogether, it may induce
others to merely change jobs or find ways to accommodate their limitation on their current job. A more
general literature on the adaptations that older adults make in response to deteriorating health indicates
that ceasing to perform an activity is often the response of last resort (Baltes and Baltes, 1990; Brim,
1988). Before this occurs, older adults will expend increased effort, allow more time, and reduce

3

performance standards in order to perform the activity. However, to date very little research has
attempted to model the effect of health on labor force transitions other than retirement. 2
As far as we know, with the exception of work in progress by Rust and his colleagues (Rust,
Benitez-Silva, Buchinsky 2001), we are the only researchers modeling retirement behavior to
distinguish the application for DI benefits from other modes of labor force exit. Doing so seems crucial
because: (a) our estimates suggest that, of those in poor health, the number that apply for disability
is greater than the number that simply leave the workforce, and (b) the financial incentives involved
in the two behaviors are quite different.
In our modeling and estimation to this point we have focused on single men nearing retirement age
during the 1990s. We focus on single individuals to avoid the very significant complication arising
from trying to model the joint labor supply decisions of married men and women. While, as a result,
our sample is not representative of the population, we believe that we can learn a considerable amount
by examining the behavior of this group. 3
In section 2 we describe our dynamic programming (DP) model and the methods that we use to
solve the value functions that are the key inputs into our estimation procedure. In Section 3 we
describe the estimation methods we use. In Section 4 we present parameter estimates and simulations
which highlight important aspects and implications of our model. Additionally we compare results
based on our model to results that simply use self reported work limitations as the measure of health.
In Section 5 we conclude.

2

Exceptions include Honig and Reimers (1987), who find little association between poor health and the move from full-time
work to partial retirement in their analysis of Retirement History Survey data; Blau and Gilleskie (2001a), who find that the
effect of health on the probability that a person changes jobs is much smaller than its effect on labor force exit (using HRS
data); and Bound et al. (1999), who find that poor health is a significant predictor of labor force exit -- particularly of exit
combined with application for DI -- and of job change among people who choose to stay in the labor market.

3

We focus on men because we do not have reliable information on the financial incentives facing single women. Their
Social Security Benefits will often depend on their ex-husbands earnings, something we do not have information on. Further,
while 39 members (20%) of our baseline behavioral sample do marry during the observation period, we ignore this
possibility in the choice set.

4

Section 2. Model Specification and Solution
Model and Estimation Overview
We model the behavior of males who are working as of a “baseline” time (t=0) which corresponds
to the first wave (1992) of the Health and Retirement Study. The basic behavioral model is a dynamic
programming model in which individuals take into account that current period decisions may have
substantial effects on their future utility. Central to this model is a set of current period utility
equations that allows a person to construct the expected lifetime utility, or value, that he will receive
from each option that he considers in each year that he makes a decision.
The solution of the value functions and the estimation of the parameters of these “behavioral”
equations is complicated by our desire to address two issues. First, those who are working at our
baseline time period are a select group of individuals.

For example, from the standpoint of

understanding the effects of health on behavior, it is possible that the individuals in poor health who
are still working at t=0 have unobserved characteristics and preferences regarding work that are on
average different from those of individuals who are in poor health at time t=0 but are no longer
working. Second, although our model posits that individuals make decisions based on actual health,
as mentioned earlier, it is self-reported health that is observed in our data.
We address the former concern by adding a reduced form initial conditions equation that describes
whether a person is working at our baseline time period. Following Bound (1991) we address the latter
concern by adding a latent health equation that formally describes the relationship between selfreported health, health reporting error, and true health. The presence of these additional equations has
several practical implications that increase the difficulty of the solution and estimation of our model.
First, in order for the additional equations to serve their purpose, our estimation procedure must allow
correlations between certain unobservables that appear in the initial conditions equation, the health
equation, and the behavioral equations. Our use of a multivariate normal distribution, which allows
these correlations, implies that closed form solutions do not exist for integrals that are needed to
compute value functions or for the likelihood contributions that serve as inputs into the Maximum

5

Likelihood algorithm that is used for estimation. Second, our health framework produces a continuous
measure of true health that is serially correlated over time, a well-known challenge for researchers
employing dynamic, discrete choice estimation methods (Stinebrickner 2000). These issues, when
combined with our desire to include unobserved heterogeneity, our use of up to six years of observed
choices in addition to the initial condition, and our need to include a non-trivial number of state
variables other than health, imply that the computational burden of solving and estimating our model
is very high.
In this section we describe the behavioral portion of our model and the methods used to solve value
functions given the presence of the serially correlated health variable. This discussion implicitly
assumes that the true health of each individual is known at each point that a person makes a decision.
In reality, true health is not observed. In Section 3, we describe the modifications that we make to
our model to address this issue and the sample selection/initial conditions issue, and we describe the
estimation method that we implement to deal with the non-standard features of our model.
2.1 Choice Set
Each individual has a finite decision horizon beginning at year t=1 (1993) and ending at year t=T. 4
At each time t, an individual chooses an activity state from a finite set of mutually exclusive
alternatives D t. D t d {C, B, N, A} where C is the option of remaining in the person’s career job (defined
to be the job that the person held at baseline, t=0), B is the option of accepting a bridge job (defined
to be a job other than the job held at baseline), A is the option of leaving the workforce and applying
for Disability Insurance, and N is the option of leaving the workforce without applying for Disability
Insurance (often referred to hereafter as the “non-work” option). Let d j(t)=1 if option j is chosen (j=C,
B, N, A) at time t and zero otherwise.
At any time t<T, a person can choose any of the options in the set {C, B, N, and A} unless it is
ruled out by one or more of the following two assumptions. First, we assume that a person imagines
that he will not return to his career job in the future if he leaves his career job in any year t.
4

With

In practice, we assume that T is the year that the person turns 70 years old. After year T, individuals are assumed to remain
out of the workforce for the remainder of their lives. We assume that all individuals die by the age of 100.

6

respect to this assumption, we allow for both the possibility that a person could leave his career job by
choice and the possibility that a person may get exogenously displaced from his career job for a reason
such as a plant closing. Notationally, we let L(t) be an indicator of whether a person who is working
in a career job at time t-1 gets exogenously displaced before time t. Second, we assume that a person
imagines that, if he applies for Disability Insurance and is approved for benefits, he will remain out of
the workforce (i.e., he will be in option N) and collect his Disability Insurance payments for the
remainder of his life. Notationally, we let DI(t) indicate whether a person has been approved for
disability benefits as of time t. A person can apply for Disability Insurance if he is less than the normal
retirement age for Social Security Retirement Benefits (65 for most of our sample). 5 These assumptions
imply that sufficient to characterize the choice set D t is the person’s age at t, the person’s choice at t-1,
whether the person becomes displaced from his career job between time t-1 and time t if he was
working in his career job at time t-1, and whether the person has been approved for Disability Insurance
at any time in the past.
This choice set implies that we do not formally model an individual’s optimal consumption/savings
decision. Rather, consistent with much previous research in the dynamic, discrete choice literature we
assume that a person consumes all of his “income” in year t. 6 In Appendix E we describe the tradeoff
between approximation quality and model “size” that influenced our decision not to expand the choice
set to model the consumption/savings decision (and other endogenous decisions). Instead we view
pension wealth, non-pension wealth, Social Security earnings, Disability Insurance payments, and other
5

For this and other elements of the choice set, we carefully follow the eligibility and benefit rules of the Social Security OldAge, Survivors and Disability Insurance program. See the Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin (SSA
2007) for details.

6

In recent work, researchers have begun to introduce savings into dynamic programing models of retirement (e.g., French,
2005; van der Klaauw and Wolpin, 2005; Rust, Buchinsky and Benitez-Silva, 2001; French and Jones, 2007). Doing so
requires treating savings as a continuous state variable and consumption as a continuous choice variable which significantly
complicates estimation. In all these cases the authors have treated health as an exogenous discrete state variable. In contrast,
we treat health as a continuous state variable and allow for the potential endogenous reporting of health status, but ignore
savings. While adding savings as a state variable and consumption as a choice variable is possible from a conceptual
standpoint, in practice this change in our specification would make our model intractable at its current level of approximation
quality. Given our interest in the interplay among health, financial resources, and the labor market behavior, we believe our
choice to carefully model health was a reasonable one. In fact, those in poor health tend to have relatively little in the way
of savings. Thus, for example, amongst those that identify themselves as having a limitation that effects their capacity for
work in our sample, median non-housing wealth is under eleven thousand dollars at baseline.

7

entitlements as sources of income and attempt to make reasonable assumptions about the timing of the
income from these sources in cases where the timing is not immediately obvious from institutional
details.
Our specification of the opportunity set implies that an individual applying for Social Security
Disability benefits will incur financial costs. For the year of application he will forgo all earnings.
Further, if his application is rejected, he will not be able to return to his previous job which will tend
to represent a loss of income since earnings on bridge jobs are typically lower than earnings in career
jobs. These costs vary across the population. Those with little in the way of income outside of
earnings will lose a greater proportion of their total income during the year they apply for disability
benefits, and, as a result, will suffer a larger loss in utility if utility is not linear in consumption. In
addition, those in high paying jobs stand to lose more by applying both because disability benefits are
paid on a progressive schedule and because those with high paying jobs are likely to suffer a larger loss
if they give up their career job for a bridge job.
2.2 Current Period Rewards
The current period reward in any year t, R j(t), contains all of the benefits and costs associated with
alternative j; R j(t) is the sum of the utility from consumption,

, and the non-pecuniary utility,

, that the person receives from option j at time t.
2.2.1 Utility from Consumption,
Defining Y j(t) to be the person’s total income net of expenditures on health care if he chooses
option j at time t, the individual’s utility from consumption is assumed to be of the form
(1)

for j 0 {C,B,N,A}

where 2 determines the level of risk aversion and J (along with parameters in the non-pecuniary utility
equation (2) that will be discussed in Section 2.2.2) is used to determine the importance of utility from
consumption relative to non-pecuniary utility.
A benefit of the HRS is that it allows us to capture in detail how expenditures on health care and
income vary across the possible options j. For option j at time t, Y j(t) is the sum of income from

8

earnings, Social Security entitlements, defined benefit and defined contribution pension plans,
Disability Insurance payments, non-pension wealth, food stamps, 7 Supplemental Security Income, and
other exogenous sources of income (such as veteran benefits) minus expenditures on health care. In
Appendix A.2 we discuss in general terms our timing assumptions related to the receipt of income from
these sources and later in Section 2.3.2 (and in Appendix A.3) we provide detail about modelling and
computation issues related to these sources. At this point it is worth noting that the reason that we can
take full advantage of the detail about these incomes sources in the HRS is that, unlike much other
work using the types of models employed here, we solve our model separately for each person in our
sample.
All incomes are converted to 1992 dollars. The concept of income we use is after tax income. To
this end we subtract off from our estimate of gross income both the worker’s share of the payroll tax
and a piecewise linear approximation of the individual’s federal income tax obligations. 8
While the approach we use for modeling the effect of the availability of health insurance is now
common in the literature (Rust and Phelan, 1997; French and Jones, 2007; Blau and Gilleskie, 2006),
using it implies that we are treating health care utilization as exogenous. 9 Indeed, the observed
difference in out of pocket health care expenditures between those that do and do not have health
insurance almost surely represents an underestimate of the value individuals put on the availability of
health insurance benefits. In an attempt to mitigate the bias that this underestimation introduces in the
estimates of our behavioral equations in Section 2.2.2, we allow the availability of employer provided
health insurance benefits to have a direct effect on an individual’s utility.

7

When imputing food stamp benefits, we use our estimate of what the individual would be eligible for. This effectively puts
a floor on income.

8

Using 1992 dollars, we assume the income tax rate is 0 up to $5280, 0.1851 between $5280 and $34600, 0.3354 between
$34600 and $80863, 0.3689 between $80863 and $127600, 0.4215 between $127600 and $214000 and 0.4636 above
$214000. For the purpose of computing taxes we use only a portion of the Social Security Retirement or Disability benefits
a person is receiving.

9

As far as we know the only researchers who have tried to endogenize health care utilization decisions within the context
of retirement models are Blau and Gilleskie (Forthcoming). Similar to what we find, they find that the availability of retiree
health insurance seems to have little effect on retirement behavior.

9

2.2.2. Non-Pecuniary Utility,
We assume that the nonpecuniary utility

associated with an option j is a linear function of

a person’s time t health 0 t, an indicator HI j(t) of whether the person has either private health insurance
or medicare at time t if he chooses option j, exogenous observable characteristics of the individual X(t),
and a set of other transitory factors ( , tj) unobserved by the econometrician (but known to the individual
in the current period) that measure the person’s particular circumstances and outlook in year t. In
addition, we allow individuals to have unobserved, permanent differences in their preferences for work
by including a person-specific, permanent heterogeneity term 6 that enters the non-pecuniary utility
associated with the work options C and B, i.e., κ C=κ B=κ and κ N= κ A=0.
(2)

Thus, in addition to allowing health to have effects on net income, our model allows decisions to have
non-pecuniary costs which depend on a person’s health. 10
We choose N as the base case of our discrete choice model which implies that we normalize the
coefficients

and

to zero and interpret

j relative to option N and interpret

j=C,B,A as the effect of X on the utility of option

j=C,B,A as the effect of 0 t on the utility of option j relative to

option N. To summarize,
(3)
with

and

.

2.3 Discounted Expected Utility - Value Functions
2.3.1 Specification of Value Functions

10
Given the way we have specified a person’s alternatives, a person who applies for DI will receive non-pecuniary utility
of
in the year that he applies. If accepted he is assumed to remain out of the workforce and receive non-pecuniary
utility of
for the remainder of his life. Thus, for example,
indicates, in part, how the cost or stigma of taking part
in the DI application process varies with health.

10

Letting S(t) represent the set of all state variables at time t, the expected present value of lifetime
rewards associated with any option j 0 {C,B,N,A} that is available at time t can be represented by a
standard Bellman equation (Bellman 1957):
V j(t, S(t))=R j(S(t)) + $ (S(t)) @ E[V(t+1,S(t+1))|S(t),d j(t)=1]

(4)
where

.

We have written D t+1 as a function of d j(t) and S(t+1) because, as discussed earlier, a person’s
choice set at time t+1 depends on the person’s choice at t, the person’s age at time t+1, whether the
person becomes displaced from his career job between time t and time t+1 if he was working in his
career job at time t, and whether the person has been approved for Disability Insurance at any time in
the past.
$ is the one period discount factor which varies across people and across time for a particular

person.

Specifically, we assume that for person i at time t, $ depends on a factor $ Common that is

common across people and on the probability that person i will be alive at time t+1:
(5)

$ = $ Common @ Pr(Alive at t+1|Alive at t). 11

We assume that the probability of dying between t and t+1 depends on the respondent’s age and his
health at t, 0 t. This probability is computed using a discrete-time proportional hazard model. The
baseline hazard, which represents the probability of dying at a particular age conditional on not dying
before that age, is computed using life table survival probabilities for U.S. men obtained from the
Social Security Administration. Health shifts the baseline hazard in a proportional fashion. 12
2.3.2 State Variables
The set of state variables at time t, S(t), includes all variables that provide information about the
set of choices that will be available in the current and future periods, the discount factor, or the utility
associated with all choices that may be available in the current and future periods. The information

11

This specification implies that the value of death is zero so that people have no bequest motive.

12

The amount of the shift is estimated outside of our behavioral model using information on the subsequent mortality of our
HRS sample together with a health index that is the same as the one used in our behavioral models. See Appendix A.4 for
details.

11

that influences future choices and the discount factor was described in Sections 2.1 and 2.3.1
respectively. In the next two subsections we focus on the state variables that influence either nonpecuniary or pecuniary utility -

or

.

State variables that influence non-pecuniary utility
Equation (2), indicates that non-pecuniary utility at time t is determined by X(t), , (t), 6 , 0 t, and
HI(t) where , (t) f {

} is the vector of , ’s from all of the current period utility equations that

are relevant in time t given a person’s choice set.

X which includes, for example, a constant and a

person’s educational level, is predetermined and known to the agent and econometrician for all periods.
The permanent, person-specific, unobserved heterogeneity value, 6 , is known to the individual but is
unobserved to the econometrician. We assume that, in the population, 6 - N(0, F 26) where F 6, which
determines the importance of unobserved heterogeneity, is a parameter to be estimated. , (t) is observed
by the individual but not by the econometrician at time t. Both the econometrician and individual know
the distribution of , in future periods. We assume that , tj- N(0,1), j=C,B,A,N and that E( , tj, , rk)=0 if
j … k or t … r. 13
A person’s health, 0 , is exogenously determined but correlated across time. We assume that health
at time t depends on demographic characteristics in X(t), including a person’s age. Based on evidence
in Bound et al. (1999), we assume that the portion of health that remains after removing the effect of
X(t) in each period follows an AR(1) process:
(6)

0 t+1= D ( 0 t - B X t) + B X t+1 + > t+1

where > t+1 - N(0, F 2>) œ t. Given a current period value of health, both the agent and econometrician can
use equation (6) to compute the distribution of health in all future periods. However, while the agent
knows his current health, the econometrician observes only a noisy, self-reported health measure. The
manner in which we deal with this data problem is an estimation issue which we discuss in detail in
Section 3.

13

Normalizing the variance implies that a constant can be estimated as part of

12

in equation (3).

Finally, at time t a person’s beliefs about his health insurance status at time t+1, HI(t+1), is
determined by the health insurance characteristics of his career job (which we denote HI C), the health
insurance characteristics of his bridge job at time t if he is working in a bridge job at time t (which we
denote HI B(t)), and the person’s age at t+1. We identify the health insurance associated with the career
job to be one of three types: HI C =3 if the insurance plan covers the worker while he is working on his
career job and also provides retiree health insurance which covers him after he leaves the job; HI C =2
if the insurance plan covers the worker while he is working on his career job but does not provide
retiree coverage; HI C =1 if the person has no health insurance on his career job.

Primarily for

computational reasons, we assume that bridge jobs do not have retiree health insurance. Thus, there
are only two possible characterizations for HI B(t): HI B(t) =2 if the insurance plan covers the worker
while he is working on his bridge job and HI B(t)=1 if a person does not work in a bridge job in time
t or works in a bridge job that does not have health insurance.
We assume that at time t a person believes he will have health insurance at future time t+1 if any
of the following conditions are true: 1). HI C=3; 2). d C(t+1)=1 and (HI C=2 or HI C=3); 3). d B(t+1)=1
and HI B(t)=2; 4). Age(t+1) $ 65; or 5) DI(t)=1. The first condition indicates that a person with retiree
health insurance on his career job believes that he will always have health insurance. The second
condition identifies a person who is still working in a career job which has health insurance. The third
condition indicates that a person who has health insurance in a bridge job imagines that he will
continue to have health insurance if he remains in a bridge job in the next period. The fourth condition
is present because everyone who has turned 65 years of age receives medicare. The last condition
shows that, if approved for Disability insurance, individuals begin to receive medicare benefits (after
a waiting period). 14 In addition, we assume that a person who is working in a bridge job without health
insurance at time t or has chosen an option other than the bridge option at time t believes that there is

14

This is a rough approximation of the reality that individuals receive Medicare benefits 24 months after starting Disability
Insurance benefits.

13

some probability that the bridge offer he receives in time t+1 will include health insurance.

15

In

addition, we allow any person who has employer provided health insurance at time t but not at time t+1
to buy COBRA insurance at time t+1. 16
Then, to summarize, at time t the state variables that influence non-pecuniary utility are {X(t), , (t),
6 , 0 t , HI C, and HI B(t)}.

State variables that influence income
Some of the variables that influence non-pecuniary utility also provide information about current
and future income levels Y j, j=C, B, N, A. For example, the specification of the health expenditure
equation in Appendix A.3.1 indicates that X(t), 0 t, HI C, HI B(t), and DI(t) all influence health
expenditures at time t.
In addition, some new state variables are needed to represent a person’s information about income.
For example, income calculations depend in part on a set of baseline variables, & , that describe
everything about a person’s financial situation, previous work history, and earnings potential when the
person arrives at t=1. This set of baseline variables describes exogenous sources of income (such as
veterans benefits) and also contains information about a person’s wealth at time t=1. In addition,
because & contains information about a person’s complete SS earnings history as of time t=1 and the
specific details that characterize an individual’s defined benefit and defined contribution pension plans,
it also plays an important role in determining the income that would be received from the remaining
sources of income described in Section 2.2.1: earnings, the SS and DI systems, and DB and DC pension
plans. Below we describe the state variables that are needed (in addition to & ) to characterize what a
person knows about the income from each of these sources. More detail on modelling and computation
issues related to these sources is presented in Appendix A3.
The earnings equations are given in Appendix A.3.2. Earnings in career jobs depend on a fixed
effect (which can be viewed as an element of & ) and a transitory component R Ct. Earnings in bridge

15

We assume that this probability is .20 for a person who is working in a bridge job without health insurance at time t and
is .67 for a person who has chosen an option other than the bridge job option in time t.

16

We assume that the cost of this coverage is $1000.

14

jobs are allowed to vary with a person’s baseline earnings in his career job W CO (which is contained in
& ), a transitory component R Bt, and the age at which a person left his career job. Notationally, we let
R (t) d {

} be the vector of transitory earnings shocks that are relevant at time t given a person’s

choice set. Sufficient for knowing the age at which a person left his career job is the person’s age at
baseline (contained in X) and the number of years of experience that the person worked in his career
job as of time t (which we refer to as EXC(t)). 17
A person’s SS benefits at some future year t* depend on his 35 highest years of labor earnings, the
age when he began receiving SS benefits, and details about any earnings that were received after
beginning benefits. Sufficient for providing this information is the person’s earnings history as of time
one (which is contained in the baseline characteristics & ), and his complete earnings history between
time t=1 and time t*-1. Unfortunately, a specification which requires the agent to keep track of a
complete earnings history is not tractable since it requires that a person’s entire histories of the R C’s
and the R B’s be treated as state variables in the model. Our model is made tractable through an
assumption that an individual considers expected future earnings rather than actual future earnings
when thinking about future SS benefits. 18 In this case, sufficient for computing the SS benefits that a
person will receive in some future year t* is the person’s earnings history as of time t=1 (which is
contained in & ), the number of years that he will work in his career job after time zero and before time
t* (which we denote EXC(t*)), the number of years that he will work in his bridge jobs after time zero
and before time t* (EXB(t*)), and a variable which keeps track of all relevant information about what
years the person worked after age 62 and before time t* (which we denote SSEX(t*) and describe in

17

Because the person cannot return to his career job after leaving, EXC(t) represents the year at which a person who is
working in a bridge job left his career job.
18

While this assumption is made primarily for computational reasons related to the size of the state space, it will only tend
to be restrictive if yearly randomness in career job earnings (associated with the RC’s) generates a large amount of variation
in the defined benefit and defined contribution payments or if yearly randomness in career job or bridge job earnings
(associated with the RC’s and RB’s) generates a large amount of variation in Social Security or DI benefits. There are several
factors which mitigate the influence of this assumption. First, given our fixed effects specification for career job earnings,
the variation of the unobservables RCt in Appendix equation (A.2) is relatively small. Second, over several years, positive
shocks to earnings in some years tend to be offset by negative shocks to earnings in other years and this tends to have an
offsetting effect on pension benefits and SS benefits. Finally, for many people, a large proportion of DB, DC, SS, and DI
benefits are already determined by the time they reach the later parts of their working lives.

15

more detail in Appendix A.3.3). These three state variables are endogenously determined within the
model. 19
As with the SS calculation, we assume that individuals consider expected future earnings when
thinking about payments from DB pensions, DC pensions, and the DI system. In this case, a person
can compute the DB payment he will receive from his career job at some future time t* if he knows the
details of the pension plan and his earnings history as of t=1 (which are both contained in the set of
baseline information & ) and the year that he left his career job, as described by EXC(t*).With respect
to defined contribution plans, future payments will depend on details of the plan, past contributions,
and future contributions. We assume that an individual will continue to contribute to the DC plan at
his career job at the same rate as he has contributed in the past. In this case, as with DB benefits,
sufficient to characterize DC benefits at some future t* is information in & and EXC(t*). Disability
Insurance benefits are a part of the Social Security system and, with the exception of differences that
arise because DI benefits are not age-restricted, are determined in a manner similar to SS payments.
This implies that an individual can compute the DI payment he would receive at some future time t*
if he knew the baseline information & , EXC(t*), EXB(t*), and whether he has been approved for
benefits as of time t*, DI(t*). We assume that a person who applies for Disability Insurance benefits
at some time t is approved for benefits if
(7)

A 1DI +A 2DI0 t + e DI >0

where A 1DI and A 2DI are a constant and slope coefficient and e DI is a random component that is normally
distributed.
Then, to summarize, the time t state variables in the model are

S(t)={ & , X(t), EXC(t), EXB(t),

SSEX(t), DI(t), , (t), R (t), L(t), 6 , 0 t , HI C, and HI B(t)}.

19

Essentially, these variables are sufficient to characterize the entire earnings history that is relevant for the SS calculation
if the person thinks about expected earnings in the future.

16

2.3.3 Solving value functions
The expected value in equation (4) is a multi-dimensional integral over the stochastic elements of
S(t+1) whose realizations are not known at time t given the decision to choose j. For illustration,
consider a person who is working in his career job in time t, d C(t)=1. In this case, the stochastic
elements of the state space whose time t+1 realizations are not known are L(t+1), , (t+1), R (t+1), 0 t+1,
and HI B(t+1).

L(t+1) and HI B(t+1) are discrete random variables so the expected value involves

summing over the probability functions of these variables and integrating over the density functions
of the remaining continuous variables. 20
Researchers have often relied on convenient distributional assumptions to reduce the burden of
evaluating integrals of the type described in the previous paragraph. For example, as shown in Rust
(1987) if one specifies the choice specific transitory shocks (i.e., , (t) in our case) to be iid extreme
value, the expected value in equation (4) has a closed form solution conditional on the values of the
other state variables. 21

However, in this application, the Section 2.3.2 normality assumption for , (t)

is driven by practical considerations related to the importance of allowing certain correlations that will
be discussed in detail in Section 3. This assumption, along with the equation (6) assumption about the
distribution of 0 t+1 given 0 t and the fact that we wish to avoid functional form assumptions related to
earnings by taking advantage of the empirical distribution of R , implies that the expected value in
equation (6) does not have a closed form solution. In Appendix B we describe in detail our method
for approximating the integrals involved in this expectation. This method involves a combination of
Gaussian quadrature and simulation methods.

Of importance from the standpoint of estimation

If the person has chosen a time t option other than his career job, L(t+1) is not relevant and the dimensions of ,(t+1) and
R(t+1) are reduced by one. In addition, if a person is working in a bridge job with health insurance in time t, no uncertainty
20

exists about HIB(t+1) because the person believes that he will have bridge insurance in time t+1. Finally, if a person applies
for disability insurance at time t, uncertainty exists about whether he will be approved in the next period.
21
A recent example that takes advantage of the extreme value assumption is Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2002) who are
able to estimate a dynamic programming model of the decisions of congressional members with a very large state space by
taking advantage of extreme value errors. Keane and Wolpin (1994) explore approximations based on simulation
approaches that are useful in cases where closed form solutions do not exist.

17

feasibility, the derivatives of the expected value “approximator” are continuous with respect to model
parameters.
The recursive formulation of value functions in equation (4) motivates a backwards recursion
solution process of the general type that is standard in finite horizon, dynamic, discrete choice models.
The most basic property of the algorithm is that in order to solve all necessary value functions at time
t, it is necessary to know value functions at time t+1 for each combination of the state variables in
S(t+1) that could arise at time t+1. In Appendix B we discuss computational issues that arise when
implementing the backwards recursion solution process in our particular application, including the
modification that is needed to deal with our continuous, serially correlated health variable.
Section 3. Estimation
Individuals make choices by comparing the values of the various options that are available.
Generally speaking, our estimation approach is to choose parameters that maximize the probability of
observed choices. However, as discussed at the beginning of Section 2, we would like to address two
issues during estimation. First, although our model posits that individuals make decisions based on
actual health, it is self-reported health that is observed in our data. Second, the group of individuals
that are working at baseline is a select group of individuals. In sections 3.1 and 3.2 we discuss these
two issues in turn and then in Section 3.3 and Appendix C we describe our Simulated Maximum
Likelihood estimation approach.
3.1 Health
Because true health is unobserved, we use a latent variable model to construct an index of health
(Bound 1991, Bound et al. 1999). Specifically, we imagine that health in time t is a linear function of
exogenous factors (e.g. age and education), X t; detailed health measures (i.e., physical performance
measures), Z t ; and other unobserved factors
(8)

.

0 t= B X t+ ( Z t+ < t

We assume that < t is uncorrelated with both X t and Z t (this assumption is essentially definitional:
< t is the part of health that is uncorrelated with X t and Z t). While we do not directly observe 0 t, we do

18

observe an indicator variable, h t, of whether a person is work limited.

Letting h t* represent self-

reported health at time t, the latent counterpart to h t, we assume that h t* is a simple function of 0 t and
a term reflecting reporting error
h t*= 0 t+ : t

(9)

We assume that : t and 0 t are uncorrelated. Substituting equation (8) into equation (9), we get
(10)

h t*= B X t+ ( Z t+[ < t+ : t].

If < t+ : t is assumed to be normally distributed with a variance that is normalized to be one, equation
(10) represents a probit model in which h t* is greater than zero if the person reports that he is work
limited. Estimates that use respondents rating of their own health on a five point scale as our measure
of h t* yield very similar results to those reported here. The relative size of var( < t) and var( : t) is not
important for the estimation of B and ( in equation (10) but is important for other parts of the model
because, for example, it is true health (i.e., the portion not including : t) that enters the utility equations.
The composite error term in equation (10), < t+ : t, reflects a number of different factors. The < t
component reflects aspects of health not captured by X t and Z t, while the : t component reflects reporting
errors. These errors reflect differences in reporting behavior across individuals and across time for the
same individual. The presence of : t introduces a number of biases in our estimates if we were to use
h t* directly when estimating the impact of health on labor market outcomes. If : t were completely
random, it would represent classical measurement error, which will attenuate the estimated effect of
health on labor market outcomes. If, however, people use health as a way to rationalize labor market
behavior, then one would expect : t to be correlated with labor market status. In this context, the use of
global self-reported health measures might well exaggerate the effect of health. This consideration
suggests that our specification should allow for the possibility that the reporting error : t is correlated
with each of the shocks , tC, , tB, , tN, , tA in the behavioral equations. For identification reasons similar
to those that require us to set the equation (3) current period utility coefficients

and

in the base

case to zero, we normalize the covariance between the reporting error and the utility unobservable in

19

the base case to be zero (i.e., COV( : t, , tN)=0) and estimate the three covariance parameters COV( : t, , tj),
j=C,B,A.
Essentially, our latent variable model uses the detailed health information available in the HRS (the
Z’s) to instrument the potentially endogenous and error-ridden work limitation measure, h t*. The
validity of this approach for estimating the effects of health on labor force withdrawal depends critically
on the assumptions that the reports on the detailed health information available in the HRS are
exogenous with respect to labor force status. In Bound et al (1998), we test this assumption by
comparing the performance of our preferred health model to health models estimated using a sparser and
arguably more clearly exogenous set of measures from the HRS and find no evidence that the physical
performance measures we are using are endogenous to labor market status. There are a number of
reasons we do not simply use the more detailed performance measures directly in our behavioral
equations. Among these, the measures reflect only a component of health and our latent variable model
substantially reduces the number of parameters we need to estimate. Substituting equation (8) and
equation (3) into equation (4) shows that the value functions at time t can be rewritten as
(11) V j(t,S(t))=
+ $ E[V(t+1,S(t+1))|S(t),d j(t)=1] j=C,B,N,A
3.2 Initial Conditions
Although the choices we have been considering are all conditional on a person being employed at
time t=0, this group will be a non-random sample of the population of people working at time t=0.
To account for this we include in our estimation a reduced form initial conditions equation. In
particular, we imagine a latent variable I* that is greater than 0 if the individual is working as of t=0
where
(12) I*= A 1X 0+ A 2Z 0 + , I.
We assume that , I - N(0,1) in which case equation (12) is a probit model.
In this reduced form specification, , I captures both the portion of true health at baseline and the
portion of preferences for work at baseline that are not captured by observed characteristics (i.e., not

20

captured by demographic characteristics at t=0, X 0, and physical performance measures at t=0, Z 0).
The former suggests that , I may be correlated with the unobserved portions of health < t, t=1,2,....
Equation (6) implies that for t>1, COV( , I, < t) is a function of COV( , I, < 1) and D , and we estimate
COV( , I, < 1). The latter suggests that , I may be correlated with unobserved preferences to work
which influence behavioral decisions in t=1,2,...,T. To allow for this possibility we estimate
COV( , I, 6 ), the covariance between the initial conditions equation and the permanent unobserved
heterogeneity term.
Credible identification of the covariance between the initial condition and the behavioral
equations depends crucially on exclusion restrictions. In particular, some variable or variables must
influence the initial condition, but have no direct effect on subsequent behavior. In our case we
have assumed that, while health at t=0 affects whether or not one works at t=0, it does not have a
direct effect on subsequent behavior after conditioning on health at t=1. We believe this assumption
is a natural one. Current health affects current behavior directly by affecting the utility that a
person derives from work and also affects behavior through the role that is plays in determining
individuals’ expectations about future health. After conditioning on current health, it seems
reasonable to believe that the primary avenue through which past health would influence current
behavior is that decisions made in the past (which are influenced by past health) have an implication
for the set of choices that are available to the person in the current period. In this case, after
conditioning on a person’s opportunity set and his current health, it does not seem that past health
should have much of a direct impact on behavior. In addition, for this exclusion restriction to be
valid, health must be exogenous to retirement and must follow a Markov process. Like much other
research in this area, we maintain these assumptions throughout. In earlier work (Bound,
Schoenbaum, Stinebrickner and Waidmann, 1999 we found the Markov assumption to be a
reasonable one. In current work (Bound and Waidmann, 2007) we test the exogeneity of health to
retirement by testing to see if there are identifiable changes in health in response to exogenous

21

retirements. We found no evidence of such changes and concluded that the assumption that health
is exogenous to retirement to be a reasonable one.
3.3 The Likelihood Function
Estimation proceeds by evaluating the joint probability of the simultaneous conditions that must
be satisfied for a person who is working at our baseline t=0 (i.e., is in our behavioral sample) or is
not working at our baseline period t=0 (i.e., is not in our behavioral sample). The set of
simultaneous conditions that must hold can be written in terms of the simultaneous equations (10),
(11), and (12) that define our model and contain the parameters to be estimated. We describe the
likelihood function and the methods we use to compute the likelihood function in Appendix C.
Section 4. Results
4.1 Data
Data for this research come from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), which contains both the
detailed health data necessary to implement our latent variable framework and the the labor force
and economic data necessary to accurately model the choice sets faced by individuals. The first
wave (wave 1) of the survey was conducted in 1992/93; respondents were re-interviewed in 1994
(wave 2) and at two-year intervals since. The HRS covers a representative national sample of
non-institutionalized men and women born between 1931 and 1941 (inclusive), so that respondents
in the sample frame were aged 50-62 at the time of the first wave. The estimation of our model uses
the public release versions of the first four waves of data, supplemented by confidential matched
data from the Social Security Administration giving earnings histories and from employers giving
details of private pension plans in which respondents are enrolled. Once we limit ourselves to single
men with valid data, we end up with a sample of 328 individuals in our initial conditions sample and
196 (working) individuals in the behavioral sample who contribute a total of 837 person-year
observations. More detail about the HRS and the composition of our sample is presented in
Appendix A.1.

22

4.2 Timing of Behavioral Choices and Health
As described in Section 2.1, the decision periods in our model are one year in length.
Assumptions are required to map the continuous work histories that can be constructed from the data
to a sequence of yearly decision periods, each characterized by a single behavioral decision. A
consideration particularly relevant for making these assumptions is that a person’s economic
incentives tend to vary with the person’s age. For example, changes in the payment amounts that a
person would be eligible to receive from the social security system if he were to retire typically take
place on a persons’ birthdays. This motivates our desire to have each yearly period in our model
correspond to a birthday year (i.e., the period that a person is a particular age). From a practical
standpoint, in order to assign a single behavioral decision to a birthday year it is necessary to choose
the point in time during the birthday year at which the behavioral decision will be determined from
the data. In order to take into account that a person may not always make decisions immediately
after his economic incentives change, we choose the point in time to be close to the end of the
birthday year. 22 In the typical case where there are zero or one transition during a birthday year,
this approach allows the behavioral choice for a particular age to reflect whether a transition has
taken place at any time during which the financial incentives related to that age are relevant.
While a person’s activity status can be ascertained at any point during the sample period, a
person’s health measures are available only at the HRS interview dates. We map the health
information to a decision period using the person’s age at the time of the interview. Given that
interviews take place approximately two years apart, this implies that health information is only
observed for a subset of the yearly decision periods for which we have determined a behavioral
decision. As discussed in Appendix C, we address this issue by integrating over the joint probability
of the missing health values as suggested by the missing data literature.
Figure 1 gives an example of how surveys are used to establish timing of health status
measurements and job status transitions. For a hypothetical individual born on 15 September 1937,
22

The HRS masks the full date of birth information to protect confidentiality. We measure behavioral choices on the first
day of the month preceding the respondent’s birth month.

23

the behavioral year runs from 15 September to 14 September the following year. For such a person,
we will measure work status as of 1 August in each year. We set t=0 at the first such point following
the baseline interview. In this example, the baseline interview took place in July, 1992, making 1
August 1992 correspond to t=0. For this individual, age at the interview (and at t=0) is 54.
Depending on the spacing of the interviews, there may be one, two, or three possible transition
points between survey waves. In the case illustrated, behavior at t=1 is defined using the second
wave survey conducted in June 1994. Behavior at t=2 and t=3 is defined using the third wave survey
from June 1996, and behavior at t=4, 5, and 6 is defined by the fourth wave survey in January 1999.
In this example, health status is observed at t=0,2,4 & 7.
4.3 Descriptive Statistics
We are interested in understanding how the availability of economic resources and health affect
economic behavior. Table 1 presents descriptive information on the incomes sources in 1991 for
age-eligible men in the HRS. Results are stratified according to whether or not the man was working
as of the date of his wave 1 interview and whether or not he identified himself as suffering from
health conditions that might limit his capacity for work. The table is limited to those who report no
change in employment or disability status between January 1991 and the date of their wave 1
interview. This restriction was imposed to ensure that the incomes reported represent incomes
commensurate with the data we use to stratify the sample.
While only 27% of the overall sample report work limitations, more than 75% of those out of
work report work limitations. Focusing on those not working, income sources differ substantially
depending on the respondent’s self-reported work limitation status. For example, while 40% of the
men without work limitations report pension income, less than 14% of those with work limitations
report pension income. In contrast, roughly 68% of those with limitations report receiving income
from one of the major federal disability programs, Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Social

24

Security Disability Insurance (DI). 23 Crudely put, Table 1 suggests that men are not likely to leave
the labor force before the age of 62 unless they have income sources on which they can rely, but that
the composition of the income sources that are used to support an exit from the labor force varies
dramatically with health status. Not surprisingly, those who are working and report work limitations
have lower incomes than those who are working and do not report work limitations. However these
differences may have preceded the work limitation.
Table 2 presents incomes and income sources as of 1991 and 1999 for age-eligible men working
as of wave 1, stratified by behavior as of wave 4. Here we see, for example, that while almost 90%
of those men who continued to work in their career jobs as of wave 4 (1998) had earnings in 1999,
only 70% of those who had changed jobs between wave 1 and wave 4 and only 19% of those who
had applied for disability benefits had earnings in 1999. At the median, household incomes rose by
65% between 1991 and 1999 for those that stayed with the same employer. In contrast, the drop in
median income for those that retired was about 25%, and for those that applied for disability
benefits median income declined by about 7%.
Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for both the behavioral sample (working in 1992) and the
group of individuals who are not working. The first column in this table shows that the average age
at the last survey for individuals in our behavioral sample is 60.6. Approximately 10% report that
they suffer a work limitation. The second column of Table 3 shows that men in our sample who are
not working at baseline tend to be slightly older and are approximately three times as likely than
those working to report having a work limitation.
Recall that the choice data used to identify the behavioral portion of the model come from the
activity status of our behavioral sample at approximately yearly intervals. The third through sixth
columns of table 3 report descriptive statistics on our behavioral sample broken down by whether

23

In Table 1, DI payments and regular SS payments are grouped under the category Social Security. Although not shown
explicitly in Table 1, approximately 44% of those not working and reporting work limitations are receiving income from
the DI program.

25

they chose C, B, A, or N in the final survey. 24 There are several things to note. Those who retire
(i.e., choose option N) are more likely to be eligible for a private defined benefit pension and more
likely to have reached age 62 by wave 4 than those who did not. What is more, those who retire (N)-and especially those who applied for DI benefits (A)--were no more likely to be in poor health or
report a work limitation at their wave 1 interview, but were much more likely to report health
problems as of the final survey. These patterns make considerable sense.
A person in our behavioral sample would receive an average of $12,820 in SS benefits at age 65
(based on the contributions made as of the baseline interview) and would receive DI benefits of the
same amount if he is approved for the program. On average, the expected career earnings and bridge
earnings at the final survey based on estimates of Appendix equations (A.2) and (A.3) are $32,854
and $13,098 respectively.
4.4 Model Estimates and Simulations
The parameters that enter our model are:
1). the parameters of the DI approval equation (7);
2). the parameters B , ( , and F 2< from the health equation (8) and the parameters D and F 2> from
equation (6);
3). the parameters in the earnings equations (A.2 and A.3 in Appendix A);
4). the parameters of the health expenditure equation (A.1 in Appendix A);
5). J , 8 HI, and {

:j=C,B,A} from the current period utility equation (3);

6). the parameters A 1 and A 2 from the initial conditions equation (12);
7). the standard deviation of unobserved heterogeneity F 6;
8). The covariance parameters {COV( : t, , tj), j=C,B,A} discussed after equation (10);
9). the covariance parameters {COV( , I, < 1) and COV( , I , 6 ), j=C,B,A} discussed after equation (12);
10). the parameter $ Common from the discount factor equation (6); and

24

Persons are classified as having applied for disability benefits are those who apply at any time between the 1992 and 1998
surveys. Persons who have not applied for disability benefits and are still working but who have changed jobs since the
baseline survey are classified as “Bridge.” Those alive and not working in the final survey who have not applied for
disability benefits are classified as “Retired.”

26

11). the parameter 2 from the pecuniary utility function in equation (1).
The identification of the DI approval equation (10) is made difficult in practice by the reality that
the DI approval decision is only observed for those who apply for benefits and virtually all DI
applicants have poor or fair self-reported health. While our model has features that in theory can
address this type of problem, the reality that only a relatively small number of individuals apply for
DI during our sample period makes identification difficult in practice. For our structural estimation
we set A 1DI=.08 and A 2DI=Var(e DI)=1 in equation (7). The assumption that A 2DI=Var(e DI)=1 amounts
to assuming that DI award decisions are about as equally reliable indicators of disability status as
are the global self-reported measures available in the HRS, which is consistent with the work of
Benitez-Silva, Buchinsky and Rust (2006). We chose our estimate of A 1DI so that the fraction of
those that apply for benefits who are awarded them implied by our model matches the fraction in the
data, roughly 2/3.
In Appendix D we describe the technical/computing steps used to address a very time-intensive
estimation problem. In part due to the importance of having a likelihood function with certain
properties that make estimation feasible and in part as a concession to the size of the computing task
we reduced the number of parameters in the model by estimating the parameters of the earnings
equations (#3 above with estimates shown in Appendix A.3.2) and health equations (#2 above with
estimates shown in Table 4) outside of the behavioral model. 25 To estimate the health parameters (#
2 above) using Maximum Likelihood, we specify the likelihood contribution for a person in a way
similar to equation (C.7) in Appendix C but we include in the probability expression only the
conditions involving aggregate unobservables of the form < t+ : t which are the terms related to selfreported health (i.e., in illustrative equation (C.7) in Appendix C this would involve the first three
terms in the intersection, < 2+ : 2<- B X 2- ( Z 2 , < 3+ : 3<- B X 3- ( Z 3, < 5+ : 5>- B X 5- ( Z 5). B and ( enter these

25

A primary motivation for estimating the parameters of the earnings equation outside the structural model is that Defined
Benefit pension payments are calculated using a computer program provided by the Health and Retirement Study. The
reality that this program cannot be used interactively with our estimation program implies that all DB payments, which are
a function of individual’s earnings (or, equivalently, years of career experience in our model), must be calculated and stored
prior to estimation. Estimating the health equation outside the model has certain benefits from the standpoint of ensuring
that our likelihood function has properties that are necessary to use derivative-based updating algorithms

27

conditions directly. The remainder of the health parameters (in #2 above) affect the likelihood
contribution through their effect on the covariance matrix of the aggregate unobservables. Given the
discrete nature of the self-reported health variable, once we make the normalization var( < t+ : t)=1 œ t,
it is possible to identify the covariance between each pair of aggregate unobservables. In addition,
the fact that we observe information about h t* at multiple times implies that it is possible to
separately identify var( < t) and var( : t). What allows the separate identification is that fact that : t has
only a transitory effect on measured health, while < t has an effect which dies out over time only
slowly.
An additional concern was the difficulty of credibly identifying and estimating $ Common and 2 . In
response to this concern we take the approach of seeking guidance from recent literature in order to
choose reasonable values of these two parameters, and we estimate the thirty-six remaining
parameters described above. 26 We begin by estimating a “baseline” specification in which
$ Common=0.90 and 2 =1 which implies that Y j(t) 1-2/(1- 2 )=ln(Y). 27

The first column of Table 5 shows the estimates of the behavioral equations for the baseline
specification. 28 The estimate of J indicates that the amount of consumption available from a
particular option plays a statistically significant role in the utility that is derived from that option.
The estimates in the first column of Table 5 also indicate that health plays a statistically significant
role. Given that larger values of health represent worse health, the negative estimates of

and

indicate that individuals in bad health get less utility from the work options (relative to the option N)
than individuals in better health. The positive estimate of

indicates that individuals in bad health

get higher non-pecuniary benefits from applying for Disability Insurance (relative to the option N)
26

See Magnac and Thesmar (2002) for a discussion of the difficulties related to the estimation of the discount factor. Given
these difficulties, researchers often fix the discount factor at a seemingly reasonable number (Berkovec and Stern 1991).
As a concession to the small number of individuals who apply for DI at t=1, we make the assumption that the covariance
terms described above are the same regardless of the reason that a person is out of the workforce. That is, we assume that
COV(:t, ,tA)=COV(:t, ,tN)=0.

27

In a longer version of this paper (Bound, Stinebrickner & Waidmann 2007), we also examine the robustness of our results
to changes in $Common and 2.

28

Although not shown in Table 5, we also included two dummy variables characterizing a person’s education level (less than
high school and more than high school).

28

than individuals in better health. In addition, the estimates imply that individuals, especially those in
decent health, face a very significant non-pecuniary cost associated with applying for DI benefits. 29
Our estimates imply that, over and above the effect of health insurance on disposable income, health
insurance has a positive relationship with well-being in the sample, but the estimated effect is quite
small and not statistically significant. Among the variance/covariance estimates, most striking is the
importance of unobserved heterogeneity; the point estimate (standard error) of the standard
deviation F 6 is 1.423 (.322).
In order to quantify the roles that economic resources and health play in determining labor
decisions we begin by performing simulations using an “illustrative person.” We construct a person
who has a college education and has career earnings, bridge earnings, SS benefits, and potential DI
benefits that are close to the average for people in our sample, but has no private pension wealth or
other sources of wealth. 30 We first assume that the illustrative person has true health 0 1 at time t=1
that is equal to the average true health of the individuals in our sample. The first column of Table 6
shows simulated choice probabilities at t=1 for an illustrative person at 55, 60, 62, 64, and 65 years
of age, respectively. Since the simulated individuals would have been employed at t=0, these
simulated probabilities can be thought of as one year labor force exit rates.
The simulated choice probabilities at age 55 and age 60 are quite similar. At these ages, the
illustrative person’s only economic resources if he leaves the workforce come from assistance
programs such as the food stamp program. This reality, combined with the fact that being in average
health implies that it is not particularly unenjoyable to work and that applying for Disability
Insurance is not particularly worthwhile, implies that the person at age 55 and age 60 has a very low
probability of leaving the workforce for either the non-work option N (0.02) or for the option of

29

In our behavioral sample the mean of health is -0.904, while the standard deviation is 0.802. These numbers, together with
the estimates reported in Table 5 imply that virtually all individuals in our sample face a non-pecuniary cost associated with
apply for DI. These costs hit zero when an individuals health is 4.2 standard deviations worse than the average in the
sample!

30

Our illustrative person would receive $15,588 in SS benefits at age 65 (given amount of contributions as of time t=1), and
would receive DI benefits of $15,588 if approved for the program.

29

applying for Disability Insurance A (0.001). Evidence regarding the effect of economic resources
on behavior can be seen by comparing the choice probabilities at the age of 60 to the choice
probabilities at the age of 62 at which time the person becomes eligible for Social Security
retirement benefits. The consumption increase in the non-work option (N) causes the probability of
choosing this option to increase by a factor of approximately two (from 0.024 to 0.046). The fact
that the probability of applying for DI remains extremely small (0.003) for the average health person
even when SS benefits become available is evidence of the very strong importance of health in the
DI application decision. 31 Delaying retirement past the age of 62 increases a person’s Social
Security benefits. Comparing simulated choice probabilities between the age of 62 and the ages of
64 and 65 reveals that this increase in Social Security benefits has a relatively small effect on
retirement decisions.
The second column of Table 6 shows choice probabilities at different ages for the illustrative
person under the assumption that his health at t=1 is one standard deviation below average. 32 As
before, the choice probabilities are fairly similar at ages 55 and 60 for this person. However,
comparing the choice probabilities for this person at ages 55 and 60 to the choice probabilities for
the person in average health at ages 55 and 60 indicates that health has a very important effect on the
probability that a person will transition out of the workforce at ages 55 and 60. For example, the
total probability of leaving the workforce (N+A) at age 60 is 0.025 for the person in average health
and is 0.106 for the below-average health person with the impact of worse health coming from both
an increase in the probability of choosing the non-work category (N) and an increase in the
probability of applying for DI (A). Comparing these two numbers with the choice probabilities of

31

Before age 62, a person with no outside wealth who applies for DI must rely on social assistance such as food stamps while
waiting for the approval decision. However, at age 62 a person can receive SS benefits while waiting for the DI approval
decision.
32

As is clear from the discussion in Appendix A.1, a large share of those in poor health as of the initial HRS survey year do
not make it into our behavioral sample. Thus, a large share of those in poor health as of t=1, would not have been in poor
health two years earlier and would have suffered a major negative health shock in the interim. Thus, while lagged health
does not enter the behavioral model, it probably still makes sense to interpret the results in terms of the behavioral effects
of the deterioration in health status, rather than the effects of permanently poor health.

30

the individuals in average and below-average health at age 62 indicates that the incentive effect of
economic resources depends to some extent on health. At age 62 when SS benefits become
available, the total probability of leaving the workforce increases by approximately 0.06 (from 0.106
to 0.168) for the person in below-average health but increases by only approximately 0.02 (from
0.025 to 0.049) for the person in average health.
The third column of Table 6 shows choice probabilities at different ages for the illustrative person
under the assumption that his health is 1.5 standard deviations below average. Comparing the
results of the second and third columns indicates that, once a person reaches poor health, an
incremental worsening of health can have large effects on decisions. When compared to the person
who has health 1 standard deviation below average, the person in worse health is at least twice as
likely to apply for Disability Insurance at each age and has a probability of leaving work (N+A) that
is approximately 10 percentage points higher at each age.
In a previous version of this work (Bound, Stinebrickner and Waidmann 2007), we also examined
the robustness of these estimates to the assumptions made about time preferences and risk aversion.
In general, varying these parameters produced results that were consistent with the baseline
specification.
Does the treatment of health matter? - A comparison to a model trusting self-reported health
Our models deal with the measurement error and endogeneity problems that are potentially
present in self-reported, survey health measures. Given that the implementation of the health
portions of our models is non-trivial, and, as a result, has implications for the feasibility of
estimating other aspects of the decision process, it is valuable to examine the extent to which our
findings would differ from a model in which these potential problems were ignored.
To do this, we estimate a new version of our model in which our health framework has been
replaced with a treatment of health that is consistent with the standard in the literature. Specifically,
in the current period utility equation (2) of our baseline specification we replace our continuous
measure of health, 0 t, with a binary health variable that is equal to one if the person is in bad health
and is equal to zero otherwise. We assume that the person’s self-report of this binary health variable

31

is accurate so that, unlike the continuous health measure that enters our models, the binary health
measure that enters this new model is observed directly in the HRS data. 33 In order to compute the
new value functions of the type in equation (4), we make the standard assumption that a person
knows his current period binary health status, and, given this status, knows the probability of each
possible health status arising in period t+1. To be consistent with the self-reported health measure
that we use to estimate equation (10), we characterize a person to be in bad health if he reports that
he has an impairment or health problem that limits the kind or amount of paid work he can do. 34
The second column of Table 5 reports the estimates of this “traditional” model. The estimate of J
is similar to the estimate shown in the first column of Table 5 for the baseline specification of our
continuous-health model. Consistent with the estimates of

,

, and

in the continuous-health

model, the estimated effects of the binary health variables in the traditional model are statistically
significant in each of the current period utility equations. However, the t-statistics associated with
the estimated effects of health are non-trivially different between the models. For example, the tstatistic associated with the effect of health in the option C is greater by a factor of more than three
in the traditional health model than it is in the baseline specification of our baseline continuoushealth model. While these differences in statistical significance raise the possibility that ignoring
the measurement and endogeneity issues related to self-reported health may lead to different
conclusions about the importance of health, knowing whether this is actually the case cannot be
confirmed simply by examining individual coefficients in isolation. Therefore, we take the approach
of comparing the health implications of the two models by examining whether simulated choice
probabilities from our baseline model are different than simulated choice probabilities from the
traditional model.

33

To be more exact, a person’s health status is observed in each survey year but is not observed in non-survey years. We
deal with this issue using standard MLE missing data techniques which involve integrating over the joint probability
function of the non-observed health values.

34

In our sample, the fraction of individuals in good health who transitioned to poor health was .096, while the fraction in poor
health who stayed in poor health was .684. We found no statistically significant evidence that these transition probabilities
varied with the age of the respondent of the years of the survey used. We converted these two year transition rates into one
year transition rates using the assumption that these transitions represented a Markov process.

32

To do this, we again make use of the illustrative person that was used to produce the simulations
in Table 6. For the traditional model there are only two possible health values. In In the first two
columns of Table 7 we show choice probabilities at different ages for the illustrative person who
reports himself to be in good and bad health, respectively. A comparison of these two columns
reveals that changing the self-reported health of the illustrative person from good to bad has very
large effects on behavior. For example, the probability that the illustrative person will be out of the
workforce at age 60 is .094 if the illustrative person reports being in good health and is .426 if the
illustrative person reports being in bad health.
The goal is to compare the numbers from the traditional model to analogous numbers constructed
from our continuous health model. It is not trivial to construct choice probabilities for the
illustrative person who reports being in good or bad health in our continuous health model because
this model is written in terms of true rather than reported health. To construct these probabilities,
we need to account that, in our model, there is a continuum of health values, 0 , with a distribution
that is characterized by equation (8) and that the connection between a particular value of
continuous health, 0 , and the person’s self-reported binary health is provided by equations (9) and
(10) which determine the probability that a person with a particular value of 0 will report himself to
be in bad health or good health. Thus to construct the analog to the first two columns, we integrate
the choice probabilities that can be constructed for the illustrative person for a particular value of 0
over the person’s distribution of 0 , where we weight the choice probabilities in the integral to reflect
the probability that a person would report himself to be in bad health given 0 . The results of this
exercise shown in the third column represent the average choice probabilities of the illustrative
person over all health scenarios in which he would report good health. Similarly, the results in the
fourth column represent the average choice probabilities of the illustrative person over all health
scenarios in which he would report bad health.
A pair-wise comparison across the first four columns provides evidence of substantial differences
between the traditional model and our model. For example, for the traditional health model, we see
the difference between good and bad self-reported health is a .33 difference in the probability of not

33

working at age 60. In our continuous health model, we see a .16 difference in the probability of
working at age 60 between a person who reports himself to be in good health and a person who
reports himself to be in bad health. Thus, our results suggest that dealing with the potential
problems associated with self-reported health is important in this context.
It is not an easy task to pinpoint exactly why these differences exist. Somewhat generically,
the difference between the two models arises to a large extent because our continuous health model
is able to take into account that reported differences in health should be attributed to both true
differences in health and a non-trivial amount of reporting error. More concretely, we find evidence
that a large part of the difference between the traditional model and our model operates through
differences in the importance of unobserved heterogeneity between the models. Specifically, we
find in the last two columns of Table 7 that if we reestimate and resimulate our continuous model
holding the standard deviation of heterogeneity, F 6 , constant at its value from the traditional model,
a little more than half of the aforementioned difference between the traditional model and our model
disappears. For example, we see that there is now a .26 difference in the probability of working at
age 60 between a person who reports himself to be in good health and a person who reports himself
to be in bad health. It is necessary to leave a detailed exploration of why substantial differences exist
in the importance of heterogeneity between the traditional and continuous models to future work.
What we note here is that a stark implication of moving from the traditional model (in which true
health is observed exactly) to the continuous model (which recognizes that only the distribution of
true health can be observed) is that F 6 is estimated less precisely. This finding highlights the
importance of work such as Kasahara and Shimotsu (2007) that focuses on understanding the
identification of finite mixture models in dynamic, discrete choice models.
Potential Changes in Policy
The simulations involving the illustrative person suggest that changes in policy that influence
economic resources may have substantial effects on individual behavior and that these effects may
vary across people with different health. Here we use our baseline model and our behavioral sample
to simulate the effects of several potential changes in policy. Policy 1 examines the effect of

34

removing the option of early SS benefits. Policy 2 examines the effect of a policy that has been
implemented - changing the normal retirement age from 65 to 67. Policy 3 examines the impact of
removing the Disability Insurance program entirely. Policies 4, 5, and 6 examine, respectively, a
25% reduction in SS benefits, a 25% reduction in DI benefits, and a 25% reduction in both SS and
DI benefits.
To quantify the effects of these policy changes, we first perform a baseline simulation in which
no policy change has occurred. For each person in our behavioral sample (i.e., those individuals
working at time t=0), we condition on the person’s information that is available at time t=0 and
simulate a sequence of choices corresponding to the years that a choice is observed for the person in
the data. 35 We then repeat this process 7200 times for each person in our behavioral sample. The
resulting simulations can be used to compute the proportion of individuals that would choose each of
the options in the set {C, B, N, A} at particular ages and the proportion that would choose each of
the options when all of the ages are pooled. The results are shown in the first column of Table 8A.
The first entries in Column 1 represent the choice proportions that are generated if individual
choices at all ages are pooled.

36

Thus, under the baseline specification, our model indicates that

individuals will choose the work option (C+B) in 1-.152=.848 of the periods in the pooled decision
periods, will choose the non-work option (N) in .134 of the pooled decision periods, and will choose
to apply for Disability Insurance (A) in .019 of the pooled decision periods. To get a sense of the fit
of our model, recall from Section 4.3 that the actual proportions in the data are, respectively, .830
(C+B), .153 (N), and .018 (A). The remainder of the entries in Column 1 reflect the choice

35

Thus, we take the approach of simulating choices within the sample period. The likelihood contribution for a person in
Section 3.3 and Appendix C assumes that a person who applies for DI and is accepted makes no subsequent decisions (i.e.,
he remains on DI forever). For these simulations we assume that a person makes choices in all data years (i.e., in essence
for the simulations we assume that individuals who apply for DI benefits (A) in some year t do not get approved and we
simulate choices for the person in years subsequent to the DI application. The motivation for this simulation approach is
that it implies that the set of people making decisions at particular ages is identical across all policies that we simulate even
if the policies influence how many people apply for DI benefits.

36

Thus, we are creating these entries by using all behavioral sample members in all years that choices are observed. Recall
that the youngest age at which any individual in the sample is observed making a choice is 51 and the oldest age at which
any individual in the sample is observed making a choice is 66. Each individual contributes simulated choices at the subset
of these ages which corresponds to the years choices are observed for him in the data.

35

proportions when choices are disaggregated by age (for select ages). We note that, while from an
operational standpoint it would be possible to compare these disaggregated simulated proportions to
the actual disaggregated proportions in the data, in practice the usefulness of a full comparison of
this type is limited due to relatively small sample sizes at individual ages. However, it is certainly
worth noting that the general message from such a comparison is that the age gradient in the
simulations is substantially less steep than the comparable age gradient in the actual data. For
example, while the proportion of men working falls from roughly .89 to .54 between the ages of 55
and 65 in the data, our simulations (using our model which does not allow a person’s age to
influence his non-pecuniary utility) show a decrease from .85 to .78 between these ages. Thus,
roughly speaking, at least in our model, health and economic resources can explain about 20% of the
decline in work between the age of 55 and 65.
For each policy change, the simulation process is repeated after modifying the model
appropriately to reflect the change. Column 2 of Table 8A shows the proportions associated with
Policy 1 in which no benefits are available from the Social Security system until a person reaches
the age of 65. When a person is younger than 62, this policy change influences decisions only
through its influence on future income. Because knowledge that Social Security benefits will not be
available at the ages of 62-64 tends to reduce the value of each option in a somewhat similar fashion,
it is perhaps not surprising that the policy change has little effect before the age of 62. For example,
at age 55, the proportion choosing the non-work option (N) is .123 under the baseline simulation
and .121 under the policy change. The policy change leads to an increase in work at the age of 62
when the amount of current period consumption that a person receives in the non-work and DI
options is reduced relative to the baseline case; at age 62 the proportion choosing the non-work
option falls by approximately 15% (from .155 under the baseline simulation to .132 under the
policy change). A similar effect (.176 versus .158) is shown in the table for age 64. The policy
change leads to little change in the number of DI applicants. Thus, the decrease in the proportion
choosing N is accompanied by an increase of similar size in the proportion choosing C or B. At 65
when Social Security benefits become the same in the baseline simulation and policy change

36

simulation, the proportion choosing option N becomes similar under the baseline and policy change
(.220 vs. .214).
We also construct the analog to Table 8A for individuals with health that is one standard
deviation or more below the average for the sample (hereafter referred to as “bad” health) and for
the remaining individuals in our sample (hereafter referred to as individuals in “good” health) and
show these proportions in Table 8B and Table 8C, respectively. 37 Consistent with our illustrative
person simulations, we find that individuals in bad health are much less likely to be working in all
periods than individuals in good health. Also consistent with our illustrative person simulations, we
find some evidence that the effect of this policy change varies with a person’s health. For example,
a comparison of the first and second columns of Table 8B reveals that, for individuals in our sample
with bad health, the policy causes the proportion choosing N at age 62 to fall by approximately .04
(from .351 under the baseline to .310 under Policy 1), while the proportion applying for DI rises by
0.014. Thus, our model implies that among those in poor health affected by the elimination of early
retirement benefits, roughly one third would apply for DI, while two thirds would continue to work.
A comparison of the first and second columns of Table 8C reveals that, for individuals in our sample
with good health, the policy causes the proportion choosing N at age 62 to fall by approximately .02
(from .137 under the baseline to .116 under Policy 1). For this group, there is essentially no effect
of the policy change on the number of men applying for DI.
The third column in this set of tables (Policy 2) shows the proportions associated with a second
policy which influences Social Security benefits in a less drastic way than the first policy.
Specifically, the policy change involves increasing the normal retirement age from 65 to 67 and
allowing individuals to apply for DI benefits until the age of 67. Under this policy, while
individuals still become eligible for Social Security benefits at the age of 62, the amount of the

37

True health is not observed in our data. However, our model produces the distribution of health for a particular person.
This can be used to compute the probability that a person is in “good” or “bad” health.

37

benefits that is received if one retires at age 62 is reduced by 12.5%. 38 This change in the normal
retirement age is currently being phased in. A comparison of Column 1 and Column 3 of Table 8A
reveals that this policy will have relatively small effects on individual decisions.

The change has

virtually no effect before age 62. At ages 62 and 64, the policy causes a decrease in the proportion
choosing the non-work option (N) of one percentage point or approximately seven percent for people
in our sample. 39
The fourth column of Table 8A (Policy 3) shows the proportions associated with a third policy
change in which the Disability Insurance program is removed entirely. Comparing the “Pooled
Ages” entries in Column 1 to those in Column 4 reveals that, when the DI program is removed,
slightly less than half of the individuals who were DI applicants under the baseline simulation
choose to work. 40

Evidence about the differential effect of the policy change by health status can

be seen in Tables 11B and 11C. The “Pooled Ages” entry in Column 1 of Table 8C shows that,
under the baseline simulation, individuals in good health choose to apply for DI benefits (A) in only
.007 of the pooled decision years. Thus, removing DI benefits has very little effect on individuals in
good health. The “Pooled Ages” entry in Column 1 of Table 8B shows that, under the baseline
simulation, individuals in bad health choose to apply for DI (A) benefits in .104 of the pooled
decision years. For these individuals, comparing the “Pooled Ages” entries under the baseline
(Column 1 of Table 8B) to that under Policy 3 (Column 4 of Table 8B) shows that the removal of the
DI option results in an increase in the proportion choosing N from .296 to .362 and a smaller change
in the proportion choosing C+B (from .600 to .637). Thus, to a large extent, the differential impact
of this policy change by health status comes from the fact that many individuals in bad health who

38

For cohorts born before 1938, for whom the normal retirement age was 65, benefits were reduced by 5/9 of 1% for each
month prior to age 65 a person retired, for a maximum of 20% for a person who retired when they reached the age of 62.
With the rise in the normal retirement age to 67, the reduction will rise to 30% for someone retiring at the age of 62 (SSA
2007).

39

French and Jones find similar small effects of the increase in the Social Security Normal Retirement age.

40

The proportion of DI application in the baseline is .019. When the DI program is removed, C+B increases from .848 to
.856 and N increases from .134 to .144.

38

apply for DI benefits under the baseline remain out of the workforce but no longer receive income
from DI benefits when the program is removed.
The last three columns of Tables 11A, B & C report results from simulating what would happen
if first just DI benefits, then just Retirement benefits, and then both together were reduced by 25%.
Although not shown, the results from simulating what would happen were benefits increased by 25%
were very similar. Our estimates suggest that a 25% reduction in DI benefits would reduce
applications for DI by a little over 20%. 41 The effect of reducing Retirement benefits by 25% varies
by age. For those who have reached the Social Security early retirement age of 62, there is about a
7% reduction in the fraction of men simply leaving the labor force (N). 42 One can also see in this
table a clear evidence of interaction effects between the Social Security retirement and Disability
Programs; when retirement but not disability benefits are reduced, the application for disability
benefits increases, with the reverse being true when disability, but not retirement benefits are
reduced.

41

The implied application elasticity is quite close to Kreider’s (1999b) estimate, but somewhat larger than early estimates
based on time series data. See Bound and Burkhauser (1999) for a discussion of existing estimates.

42

Van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2005) also report only modest effects of a 25% change in benefits.

39

Section 5. Conclusion
In this paper, we report estimates of a dynamic programming model that addresses the interplay
among health, financial resources, and the labor market behavior of men nearing retirement age. A
significant contribution of our work is the use of a latent variable model for health that we believe is
robust to concerns about the endogeneity of self-reported health. Our comparison of results obtained
using this health model to those obtained using a more traditional measure of health suggest that the
manner in which one models health can have a substantial effect on conclusions about the behavioral
effects of poor health.
Our estimates imply that individuals in good health are unlikely to retire unless they have
generous financial resources available to them. On the other hand, our estimates imply that a man in
poor health is quite likely to leave the workforce even when he is not yet eligible for any kind of
pension benefits. In fact, our simulations show that a typical individual in poor health is 10 times
more likely than a similar person in average health to retire before becoming eligible for pension
benefits. These estimates underline the importance that health plays in determining early retirement
behavior.
Strikingly, our estimates imply that changes in the Social Security Retirement Program are likely
to have quite small effects on applications for the Disability Insurance Program. 43 We suspect that
the reason for this has to do with the fact that those potentially eligible for DI are a quite a distinct
population. Our findings have strong predictions about the patterns we might see in the application
for DI benefits as the age for normal retirement under Social Security rises over the next decade.
Despite the fact that this change will substantially increase the financial rewards associated with
receiving DI rather than early retirement benefits, our estimates suggest that the number of
individuals over the age of 62 who apply for DI will not rise by much.

43

As far as we know the only other attempt to estimate the impact of changes in the Social Security Retirement
Program on Disability participation is the work by Mitchell and Phillips (2000). Mitchell and Phillips use a conditional logit
framework to study the effect of financial incentives on the probability that a person will retire early or apply for disability
insurance. In qualitative terms, Mitchell and Phillips results are similar to ours. They estimate that eliminating Social
Security early retirement benefits would have only modest effects on behavior.

40

References
Anderson, K. and R. Burkhauser (1984): “The Importance of the Measure of Health in Empirical
Estimates of the Labor Supply of Older Men,” Economics Letters, 16, 375-380.
Anderson, K.H. and R.V. Burkhauser (1985): “The Retirement-Health Nexus: A New Measure of an
Old Puzzle,” Journal of Human Resources, 20, 315-330.
Angeletos, G-M., D. Laibson, A. Repetto, J. Tobacman, and S. Weinberg (2001): “The Hyperbolic
Buffer Stock Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(3), Summer, 47-68.
Baltes, P.B., and M.M. Baltes (1990): “Psychological Perspectives on Successful Aging: a Model of
Selective Optimization with Compensation,” in Successful Aging: Perspectives from the
Behavioral Sciences , ed. by P.B. Baltes and M.M. Baltes,(pp. 1-34) New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Bellman, R. (1957): Dynamic Programming. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Benitez-Silva, H., M. Buchinsky, and J. Rust (2006): “How Large Are the Classification Errors in
the Social Security Disability Award Process?” Working paper, Department of Economics, Stony
Brook University, http://ms.cc.sunysb.edu/~hbenitezsilv/research.html.
Berkovec, J., and S. Stern (1991): “Job Exit Behavior of Older Men,” Econometrica, 59(1), 189-210.
Blau, D. and D. Gilleskie (2001a): “Retiree Health Insurance and the Labor Force Behavior of Older
Men in the 1990s,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1), 64-80.
Blau, D.M., and D.B. Gilleskie (2001b): “The Effect of Health on Employment Transitions of Older
Men”in Worker Wellbeing in a Changing Labor Market, Research in Labor Economics, 20, ed. by
S. Polachek, Amsterdam:JAI Press.
Blau, D.M., and D.B. Gilleskie, (2006), “Health Insurance and Retirement of Married Couples,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21:935-953.
Blau, D.M., and D.B. Gilleskie (Forthcoming): “The Role of Retiree Health Insurance in the
Employment Behavior of Older Men,” International Economic Review.
Blinder, A.S., R.H. Gordon, and D.E. Wise (1980): “Reconsidering the Work Disincentive Effects of
Social Security,” National Tax Journal, 33(4), 431-442.
Bound, J. (1989): “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants,” American
Economics Review, 79, 482- 503.
Bound, J. (1991): “Self-reported Versus Objective Measures of Health in Retirement Models,” The
Journal of Human Resources, 26, 106-138.
Bound, John and Richard Burkhauser, 1999, “Economic Analysis of Transfer Programs Targeted on
People with Disabilities.” Chapter in the Handbook of Labor Economics, V. 3, eds. D. Card and
O. Ashenfelter, pp. 3417-3528.

41

Bound, J., M. Schoenbaum, T. Stinebrickner, and T. Waidmann (1998): “Modeling the Effect of
Health on Retirement Behavior,” paper presented at the National Bureau of Economics Summer
Institute.
Bound, J., M. Schoenbaum, T. Stinebrickner, and T. Waidmann (1999): “The Dynamic Effects of
Health on the Labor Force Transitions of Older Workers,” Labour Economics, 6(2), 179-202.
Bound, J., M. Schoenbaum, and T. Waidmann (1997). “Health Limitations and Early Retirement,”
HRS-AHEAD Research Brief #004. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research.
Bound, J. and T. Waidmann (1992): “Disability Transfers and the Labor Force Attachment of Older
Men: Evidence from Historical Record,”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 1395-1419.
Bound, J., and T. Waidmann (2002): “Accounting for Recent Declines in Employment Rates among
Working-Aged Men and Women with Disabilities,” Journal of Human Resources; 37(2), 231-50.
Bound, J., and T. Waidmann (2007): “Estimating the Health Effects of Retirement” paper

presented at the , The 9th annual conference of the Retirement Research Consortium
(RRC), Washington DC.
Brim, O.G. (1988): “Losing and Winning,” Psychology Today, 48-52.
Burkhauser, R.V. and J.F. Quinn (1983): “Is mandatory retirement overrated? Evidence from the
1970s,” Journal of Human Resources, 18(3), 337-358.
Chirikos, T.N. (1993): “The Relationship Between Health and Labor Market Status,” Annual Review
of Public Health, 14, 293-312.
Currie J., and B.C. Madrian (1999): “Health, Health Insurance, and the Labor Market,” in Handbook
of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, New York: Elsevier Science Publishing
Company.
Curtin, R.T., J. Lamkin, and R. Peticolas. (1998): “Pension Estimation Program Documentation.”
HRS Documentation Report DR-004 http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/docs/userg/dr-004.pdf.
Diamond, P. A. and Hausman, J. H. (1984): “The Retirement and Unemployment Behavior of Older
Men.” In Retirement and Economic Behavior ed. by H. Aaron and G. Burtless, Washington, D. C.:
The Brookings Institution.
Diermeier, D., M.P. Keane, and A. Merlo (2002): “The Career Decisions of Politicians,”
Unpublished Manuscript.
Disney, R., C. Emmerson and M. Wakefield (2006): “Ill Health and Retirement in Britain: A Panel
Data-based Analysis,” Journal of Health Economics, 25:621-649.
French, E. (2005): “The Effects Of Health, Wealth, And Wages On Labor Supply And Retirement
Behavior,”Review of Economic Studies, 72:395-427.
French, E., and J. B. Jones (2007): “The Effects of Health Insurance and Self-Insurance on
Retirement Behavior,”Chicago Fed WP2001-19.
French, E., and J.B. Jones (2004): “On the Distribution and Dynamics of Health Costs” Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 19:705-721.

42

Geweke, J. (1991): “Efficient Simulation from the Multivariate Normal and Student-t Distributions
Subject to Linear Constraints,” Computer Science and Statistics: Proceedings of the Twenty-Third
Symposium on the Interface, 571-578.
Gordon, R. H. and Blinder, A. S. (1980): “Market Wages, Reservation Wages and Retirement
Decision,” Journal of Public Economics, 14, 277-308.
Gruber, J., and D. Wise (eds.) (1999): Social Security and Retirement Around the World, University
of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Gruber, J., and D. Wise (eds.) (2004): Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World:
Micro Estimation, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. (1986): “A Structural Retirement Model,” Econometrica, 54(3),
555-584.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (1994): “Employer Provided Health Insurance and Retirement
Behavior,” Industrial Labor Relations Review, 48, 124-140.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (2000): “Retirement in Dual-Career Families: A Structural
Model,” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3), 503-545.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (2005): “Social Security Early Entitlement Age in a Structural
Model of Retirement and Wealth,” Journal of Public Economics, 89, 441-463.
Hajivassiliou, V. (1990): “Smooth Simulation Estimation of Panel Data LDV Models,” Unpublished
Manuscript.
Halpern, J., and J.A. Hausman (1986): “Choice under Uncertainty: A Model of Applications for the Social
Security Disability Insurance Program,” Journal of Public Economics; 31(2), 131-161.
Haveman, R., P. de-Jong, and B. Wolfe (1991): “Disability Transfers and the Work Decision of Older Men,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics; 106(3), 939-49.
Hill, D.H. (1993): “Respondent Rules and the Quality of Net Worth Data in the HRS,” PSC Publications. HRS
Working Paper 94-002.
Honig, M. (1985): “Partial Retirement Among Women,” Journal of Human Resources, 20, 613-621.
Honig, M and G. Hanoch (1985): “Partial Retirement as a Separate Mode of Retirement Behavior,” Journal of
Human Resources, 20, 21-46.
Honig, M., and C. Reimers (1987): “Retirement, Re-entry, and Part-time Work,” Eastern Economic Journal,
13, 361-371.
Juster, F.T., and R. Suzman (1995): “An Overview of the Health and Retirement Study,” Journal of Human
Resources, 30 Suppl., S7-S56.
Kasahara, H. and K. Shimotsu. “Nonparametric identification of finite mixture models of dynamic discrete
choices,” revised and resubmit, Econometrica, 2007.

43

Keane, M. P. (1994): “A Computationally Practical Simulation Estimator for Panel Data,” Econometrica,
62(1), 95-116.
Keane, M, and R. Moffitt (1998): “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program Participation and Labor
Supply,” International Economic Review, 39 (3), 553-89.
Keane, M.P., and K.I. Wolpin (1994): “The Solution and Estimation of Discrete Choice Dynamic
Programming Models by Simulation and Interpolation: Monte Carlo Evidence,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 76, 648-672.
Keane, M., and K. Wolpin (1997): “The Career Decisions of Young Men,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
473-522.
Kreider, B. (1999a): “Latent Work Disability and Reporting Bias,” Journal of Human Resources; 34, 734-769.
Kreider, B. (1999b): “Social Security Disability Insurance: Applications, Awards and Life Time Income
Flows,” Journal of Labor Economics, 17:784-827.
Kreider, B., and R. Riphahn (2000): “Explaining Applications to the U.S. Disability Program: A
Semiparametric Approach,” Journal of Human Resources, 82-115.
Lavy, V., M. Palumbo, and S. Stern (1998): “Simulation of Multinomial Probit Probabilities and Imputation,”
in Advances in Econometrics, ed. by T. Fomby and R. Carter Hill, JAI Press.
Lindeboom, M., and M. Kerkhofs, (2004): “Health and Work of the Elderly,” unpublished manuscript, Free
University of Amsterdam.
Lumsdaine R.L., O.S. Mitchell (1999): “Retirement,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter
and D. Card, New York: Elsevier Science Publishing Company.
Magnac, T., and D. Thesmar (2002): “Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision Processes”, Econometrica, 70,
801-816.
Mitchell O. and J.W.R. Phillips (2000): “Retirement Responses to Early Social Security Benefit Reductions,”
NBER Working Paper 7963.
Myers, R.J., (1982): “Why Do People Retire Early from Work?” Aging and Work, 5,83-91.
Olin, G.L. and S.R. Machlin (2004): Chartbook #11: Health Care Expenses in the Community Population,
1999. February 2004. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD.
http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/papers/cb11/cb11.htm.
Parsons, D.O. (1980): “The Decline of Male Labor Force Participation,” Journal of Political Economy, 88,
117-134.
Parsons, D.O. (1982): “The Male Labor Force Participation Decision: Health, Reported Health, and Economic
Incentives,” Economica, 49, 81-91.
Quinn, J. F. (1977): “Microeconomic Determinants of Early Retirement: a Cross-sectional View of White
Married Men,” Journal of Human Resources, 12(3), 329-347.

44

Quinn, J.F. (1997): “The Role of Bridge Jobs in the Retirement Patterns of Older Americans in the 1990s,” in
Retirement Prospects in a Defined Contribution World, ed. by D. Salisbury. Employee Benefit Research
Institute, 25-39.
Quinn, J.F. (2000): “New Paths to Retirement,”in Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth, ed.
by B. Hammond, O. Mitchell, and A. Rappaport, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1332.
Quinn, J.F., and M. Kozy (1996): “The Roles of Bridge Jobs in the Retirement Transition: Gender, Race, and
Ethnicity,” The Gerontologist, 36 (3), 363-372.
Quinn, J.F., R.V. Burkhauser, and D. Myers (1990): Passing the Torch: the Influence of Economic Incentives
on Work and Retirement. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Ruhm, C.J. (1990): “Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement,” Journal of Labor Economics, 8, 482-501.
Rust, J. (1987): “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold Zurcher,”
Econometrica, 55, 999-1033.
Rust, J. (1997): “Using Randomization to Break the Curse of Dimensionality,” Econometrica, 65, 781-832.
Rust, J., and C. Phelan (1997): “How Social Security and Medicare Affect Retirement Behavior in a World of
Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica, 65(4), 781-831.
Rust, J., M. Buchinsky and H. Benitez-Silva (2001): “An Empirical Model of Social Insurance at the End of
the Life Cycle.” ftp://gemini.econ.umd.edu/pub/johnrust/disability/nsfpro.pdf.
Smith, J. P. (1995): “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study,” Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 30, S158-83.
Social Security Administration. (1995): Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical Supplement, 1995.
Washington, DC: Social Security Administration.
Social Security Administration. (2007): Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin, 2006.
Washington, DC: Social Security Administration.
Stinebrickner, T.R (1999): “Using Latent Variables in Dynamic, Discrete Choice Models: The Effects of
School Characteristics on Teacher Decisions,” Research in Labor Economics, 18:141-176.
Stinebrickner, T.R. (2000): “Serially Correlated State Variables in Dynamic, Discrete Choice Models,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 15, 595-624.
Stock, J., and D. Wise (1990): “Pensions, the Option Value of Work and Retirement,” Econometrica, 58,
1151-1180.
Swann, C. (2002): “Maximum Likelihood Estimation Using Parallel Computing: An Introduction to MPI,”
Computational Economics, 19(2), 145-178.
Tauchen, G., and R. Hussey (1991): “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate Solutions to
Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 59, 371-396.

45

van der Klaauw, W. and K. Wolpin, (2005) “Social Security, and the Retirement and Savings Behavior of Low
Income Households,” unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania,
http://www.econ.upenn.edu/pier.
Waidmann, T., J. Bound, and M. Schoenbaum (1995): “The Illusion of Failure: Trends in Self-reported
Health of the U.S. Elderly,” The Milbank Quarterly, 73, 253-87.

46

Figure 1 Example time-line for measurement of health and work status

Birthday
Age

Work status
HRS Interview

15 Sep 1991 15 Sep 1992 15 Sep 1993 15 Sep 1994 15 Sep 1995 15 Sep 1996 15 Sep 1997 15 Sep 1998
55

56

57

58

t=0,
1Aug1992

t=1,
1Aug1993

t=2,
1Aug1994

t=3,
1Aug1995

54

July 1992

June 1994

Health status measured
Health status not measured

47

59

t=4,
1Aug1996
June 1996

60

61

t=5,
1Aug1997

t=6,
1Aug1998
January 1999

Table 1 Income Sources at Baseline
Work Status
Limitation Status
N
Own
Earnings
Unemployment
Insurance
Worker's Comp
Veteran's Benefits
Pensions
Annuities
SSI
Social Security
Welfare
Total
Household
Business/Royalties/Tru
sts
Unearned Income
Alimony
Food Stamps
Total
Total, all sources

Not Working
No Limitation
40

Not Working
Limited
122

Working
No Limitation
377

15.0%
2.5%

1,590
40

3.3%
0.8%

762
25

94.2%
5.3%

33,174
90

90.3%
9.7%

20,555
333

0.0%
12.5%
40.0%
0.0%
7.5%
10.0%
5.0%

1,831
5,894
173
558
85
10,172

2.5%
8.2%
13.9%
3.3%
35.2%
37.7%
12.3%

105
592
1,868
544
1,749
2,462
242
8,350

1.9%
3.7%
2.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.5%

53
420
400
5
34,141

0.0%
9.7%
6.5%
3.2%
0.0%
6.5%
0.0%

1,329
365
258
646
23,485

9.0%

3,325

9.7%

1,355

35.3%
0.3%
1.9%

1,875
3
23
5,226
39,367

41.9%
0.0%
3.2%

1,376
108
2,839
26,324

0.0%
35.0%
2.5%
15.0%

488
98
185
770
10,941

0.0%
9.8%
0.8%
32.0%

216
15
353
583
8,933

48

Working
Limited
31

Table 2 Income Transitions: Percent with each income source and mean among those with any
1992-1998 Choice

Bridge

N

Career

63

86

1991
%
Own
Earnings
Unemployment Ins.
Workers' Comp
Veteran's Benefits
Pensions
Annuities
SSI
Social Security
Welfare
TotalOwn
Spouse
Earnings
Unemployment Ins.
Workers' Comp
Veteran's Benefits
Pensions
Annuities
SSI
Social Security
Welfare
Total Spouse
Household
Business
Unearned Income
Alimony
Food Stamps
Total Household
Total
Distribution
25th Percentile
Median
75th Percentile

1999
mean

%

96.8% $31,469
4.8%
106
1.6%
63
4.8%
629
1.6%
206
3.2%
317
0.0%
1.6%
111
1.6%
38
$32,940

Apply for DI
27

1991
mean

69.8% $29,158
7.9%
297
1.6%
14
4.8%
620
60.3%
7,962
3.2%
143
1.6%
133
36.5%
3,447
0.0%
$41,774

%

1999
mean

%

98.8% $29,936
8.1%
262
1.2%
2
4.7%
497
4.7%
286
0.0%
0.0%
1.2%
82
0.0%
$31,064

Retire
77

1991
mean

89.5% $36,200
4.7%
127
2.3%
264
5.8%
710
44.2%
2,133
2.3%
0.0%
18.6%
1,507
0.0%
$40,940

%

1999
mean

%

100.0% $20,802
7.4%
326
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.7%
370
3.7%
148
0.0%
3.7%
69
$21,715

1991
mean

18.5%
0.0%
3.7%
0.0%
29.6%
0.0%
18.5%
70.4%
0.0%

$2,951
185
1,785
655
6,828
$12,404

%

mean

%

100.0% $30,293
11.7%
182
2.6%
21
6.5%
979
3.9%
676
1.3%
117
0.0%
1.3%
56
0.0%
$32,323

1999
mean

10.4%
1.3%
0.0%
6.5%
79.2%
5.2%
2.6%
64.9%
1.3%

$1,506
104
1,255
15,986
320
17
5,874
8
$25,071

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

-

11.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
4.8%
1.6%
0.0%
3.2%
0.0%

2,333
91
105
136
$2,665

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

-

14.0%
0.0%
1.2%
0.0%
2.3%
0.0%
2.3%
0.0%
0.0%

4,360
47
195
99
$4,701

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

-

11.1%
0.0%
0.0%
3.7%
3.7%
0.0%
0.0%
7.4%
0.0%

3,963
44
281
659
$4,948

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

-

20.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
7.8%
1.3%
1.3%
2.6%
0.0%

4,983
236
192
$5,412

4.8%
39.7%
1.6%
3.2%

249
778
16
4
$1,047
$33,988

22.2%
61.9%
0.0%
0.0%

13,743
7,679
$21,422
$65,862

8.1%
39.5%
0.0%
0.0%

1,430
1,583
$3,013
$34,077

14.0%
62.8%
0.0%
2.3%

3,079
5,575
26
$8,680
$54,322

3.7%
11.1%
0.0%
11.1%

444
5,850
141
$6,436
$28,151

11.1%
37.0%
0.0%
29.6%

2,169
3,365
101
$5,626
$22,978

0.0%
35.1%
0.0%
3.9%

1,327
35
$1,362
$33,686

3.9%
62.3%
0.0%
1.3%

91
4,485
$4,576
$35,059

$18,000
$30,000
$45,000

$17,432
$27,764
$58,460

$15,500
$27,400
$48,000

$22,000
$45,140
$70,200

$9,000
$14,600
$29,000

$6,144
$13,560
$26,400

Note: Columns represent choice in 1998 based on response to the wave 4 survey. All respondents were employed at baseline.

49

$18,000
$34,000
$42,169

$15,320
$25,728
$48,872

Table 3 Descriptive Statistics
Of those working at t=0, behavior last observation
Working at Not working
t=0
at t=0
Age at wave 4
< High School
Some College
College Grad
Work limited at wave 1
Work limited at wave 4
Age 62 or older at wave 4
Normal retirement benefit (assuming no further work)
Eligible for DB pension ever
Eligible for DC pension ever
Expected Career Earnings at last observation
Expected Bridge Earnings at last observation
With no employer health insurance
With only current coverage
With both current & retiree coverage
Median Non-housing wealth
Median Housing wealth
Fraction Choosing

60.6
.222
.170
.193
.097
.188
.369
$12,820
.466
.369
$32,854
$13,098
.176
.290
.534
$18,900
$4,750
.605

50

Career

Bridge

Retired

Disability

61.1
59.8
61.1
62.0
0.261
0.243
0.229
0.188
0.183
0.135
0.114
0.208
0.191
0.243
0.114
0.167
0.296
0.095
0.143
0.083
0.365
0.108
0.057
0.208
0.435
0.243
0.457
0.583
$11,271
$13,136
$12,327
$12,775
0.078
0.419
0.486
0.542
0.122
0.405
0.371
0.375
$6,048
$33,143
$32,904
$34,700
$2,294
$14,647
$12,253
$10,658
0.095
0.314
0.125
0.297
0.286
0.292
0.608
0.400
0.583
$15,000
$20,250
$15,000
$24,000
$250
- $33,500
0.395
0.430
0.204
0.279

59.6
0.267
0.333
0.200
0.067
0.867
0.133
$11,711
0.333
0.267
$23,761
$13,793
0.467
0.200
0.333
$8,000
$10,000
0.087

Table 4 - Estimates of Health Equation and Initial Conditions Equation for Baseline Specification

Health Equation (10)

Initial Conditions
Equation (12)

Constant

-.785 (.105)

.134 (.104)

Less than high school education

-.031 (.190)

.108 (.198)

College education

-.203 (.187)

-.155 (.194)

Age

.008 (.019)

-.059 (.022)

X from equations (10) and (12)

Z’s — Respondent reports difficulty with the specified activity.*
Jog one mile

.202 (.077)

.091 (.091)

Walk several blocks

.325 (.106)

-.0622 (.178)

Walk one block

-.244 (.140)

-.080 (.280)

Sit for about 2 hours

.081 (.100)

.003 (.102)

Get up from a chair after sitting long periods

-.024 (.140)

.045 (.137)

Get in and out of bed without help

.107 (.149)

-.131 (.191)

Go up several flights of stairs

.225 (.073)

-.249 (.134)

Go up one flight of stairs

.230 (.123)

-.207 (.218)

Lift or carry weights over 10 lbs

.307 (.105)

.154 (.164)

Stoop, kneel, or crouch

.157 (.086)

.128 (.131)

Pickup a dime from a table

.152 (.116)

.022 (.199)

Reach or extend your arms above shoulder level

.273 (.102)

.270 (.200)

Pull or push large objects like a living room chair

.200 (.105)

-.347 (.181)

D

.92 (.155)

var(<t)

.82 (.080)

*Activities of Daily Living at time health is observed for first column and t=0 for second column. Coded as 1 if
the man reports difficulty doing the activity, 0 otherwise.

51

Table 5 -Estimates of Model (behavioral equations and covariance terms)
Baseline
Estimate
(Std. Error)

Traditional model
with Binary Health
Estimate
(Std. Error)

.336 (.060)

.325 (.060)

.546 (.338)

.772 (.193)

-.776 (.397)

-1.590 (.242)

.063 (.043)

.131 (.102)

-.908(.486)

.242 (.197)

-1.357(.351)

-2.978 (.394)

.063 (.043)

.131 (.102)

-2.102(.399 )

-3.496 (1.690 )

(Health, 0)

.851 (.212)

2.900 (1.657)

(Has Health Insurance)

.063 (.043)

.131 (.102)

Normalized to zero

Normalized to zero

Normalized to zero

Normalized to zero

.063 (.043)

.129 (.104)

Health Equation

See Table 4

N.A.

Initial Conditions Equation

See Table 4

Not Shown

F6

1.423 (.322)

.824 (.052)

COV(,I, <t)

-.309 (.106)

-.319 (.125)

COV(:t, ,tC)

-.191 (.173)

N.A.

COV(:t, ,tB)

.216 (.128)

N.A.

COV(,I , 6)

-.784 (.412)

.008 (.255)

Pecuniary Utility
J

Non-Pecuniary Utility Career (C)
Constant
(Health, 0)
(Has Health Insurance)
Non-Pecuniary Utility Bridge(B)
Constant
(Health, 0)
(Has Health Insurance)
Non-Pecuniary Utility DI (A)
Constant

Non-Pecuniary Utility Non-Work (N)
Constant
(Health, 0)
(Has Health Insurance)

Covariance Terms

Log Likelihood Function Value

-940.033

Although not shown, each non-pecuniary equation also includes two dummy variables characterizing a person’s education
level (less than high school and more than high school). The effect of health insurance is constrained to be the same across
choices.

52

Table 6 Choice Probabilities of Illustrative Person at Different Ages - Baseline Specification
A. Average
Health

B. Health 1 Std.
Dev. Below
Average

Choice at t=1

C. Health 1.5
Std. Dev. Below
Average

AGE=55
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.019

0.098

0.195

Non-Work (N)

0.018

0.057

0.084

Apply DI (A)

0.001

0.041

0.111

AGE=60
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.025

0.106

0.198

Non-Work (N)

0.024

0.082

0.127

Apply DI (A)

0.001

0.024

0.071

AGE=62
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.049

0.168

0.269

Non-Work (N)

0.046

0.138

0.209

Apply DI (A)

0.003

0.030

0.060

AGE=64
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.053

0.172

0.279

Non-Work (N)

0.050

0.146

0.207

Apply DI (A)

0.003

0.026

0.072

AGE=65
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.053

0.161

0.254

Non-Work (N)

0.053

0.161

0.254

Apply DI (A)

NA*

NA*

NA*

* Person cannot apply for Disability Insurance at age 65 or older.

53

Table 7 Choice Probabilities of Illustrative Person at Different Ages Using Alternate Models of Health
Traditional Model w/
Binary S-R Health
Good
Health

Bad Health

Continuous Health w/ σ κ
Fixed at Binary Value
Bad Health
Good
Bad Health
Health

Continuous Health
Model
Good
Health

AGE=55
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.079

0.452

0.079

0.244

0.071

0.336

Non-Work (N)

0.068

0.111

0.067

0.096

0.061

0.149

Apply DI (A)

0.011

0.341

0.011

0.148

0.010

0.186

AGE=60
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.094

0.426

0.083

0.245

0.082

0.340

Non-Work (N)

0.088

0.183

0.074

0.14

0.074

0.207

Apply DI (A)

0.006

0.243

0.008

0.105

0.008

0.133

AGE=62
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.159

0.513

0.112

0.293

0.120

0.403

Non-Work (N)

0.147

0.286

0.102

0.191

0.110

0.259

Apply DI (A)

0.012

0.227

0.010

0.101

0.010

0.144

AGE=64
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.115

0.515

0.114

0.303

0.125

0.411

Non-Work (N)

0.107

0.158

0.105

0.19

0.114

0.251

Apply DI (A)

0.008

0.356

0.009

0.113

0.010

0.160

AGE=65
Labor Force Exit (N+A)

0.091

0.291

0.111

0.274

0.118

0.359

Non-Work (N)

0.091

0.291

0.111

0.274

0.118

0.359

NA*
NA*
NA*
Apply DI (A)
* person cannot apply for Disability Insurance at age 65 or older.

NA*

NA*

NA*

54

Table 8A Policy Simulations - All Health Combined
Baseline

Policy 1
Remove
SS ERB

Policy 2
SS NRA
to 67

Policy 3
Eliminate
DI

Policy 4
25%
Decrease
DI
Benefits

Policy 5
25%
Decrease
SS
Benefits

Pooled Ages
.152
.148
.151
.144
.150
.150
LF Exit (N+A)
.134
.128
.130
.144
.135
.130
Non-Work (N)
.019
.020
.021
0**
.015
.020
Apply DI (A)
AGE=55
.147
.147
.147
.136
.145
.147
LF Exit (N+A)
.123
.121
.122
.136
.125
.122
Non-Work (N)
.024
.026
.025
0**
.020
.025
Apply DI (A)
AGE=60
.154
.151
.153
.149
.153
.153
LF Exit (N+A)
.142
.137
.140
.149
.143
.140
Non-Work (N)
.012
.014
.013
0**
.010
.013
Apply DI (A)
AGE=62
.170
.147
.163
.163
.168
.162
LF Exit (N+A)
.155
.132
.146
.163
.156
.145
Non-Work (N)
.015
.016
.016
0**
.012
.017
Apply DI (A)
AGE=64
.205
.183
.197
.197
.204
.197
LF Exit (N+A)
.176
.158
.166
.197
.180
.164
Non-Work (N)
.029
.025
.031
0**
.024
.033
Apply DI (A)
AGE=65
.220
.214
.218
.216
.220
.209
LF Exit (N+A)
.220
.214
.181
.216
.220
.209
Non-Work (N)
0*
0*
.037
0*
0*
0*
Apply DI (A)
* Person cannot apply for Disability Insurance at age 65 or older except in Policy 2.
** Policy involves removing Disability Insurance program.
Policy 1 involves removing all SS benefits before age 65.
Policy 2 involves changing the normal retirement age from 65 to 67.
Policy 3 involves removing the DI program.
Policy 4 involves a 25% decrease in DI benefits without changing SS Retirement benefits.
Policy 5 involves a 25% decrease in SS Retirement benefits without changing DI benefits.
Policy 6 involves ad 25% reduction in both SS Retirement and DI benefits.

55

Policy 6
25%
Decrease
DI & SS
Benefits
.148
.132
.017
.144
.123
.021
.151
.140
.011
.160
.146
.014
.195
.167
.028
.208
.208
0*

Table 8B Policy Simulations - Bad Health (1 standard deviation or more below average)
Baseline

Policy 1
Remove
SS ERB

Policy 2
SS
NRA to
67

Policy 3
Eliminate
DI

Policy 4
25%
Decrease
DI
Benefits

Policy 5
25%
Decrease
SS
Benefits

Pooled Ages
.400
.396
.399
.363
.390
.399
LF Exit (N+A)
.296
.283
.283
.363
.307
.286
Non-Work (N)
.104
.112
.117
0**
.084
.113
Apply DI (A)
AGE=55
.405
.406
.405
.359
.393
.406
LF Exit (N+A)
.277
.272
.275
.359
.289
.273
Non-Work (N)
.127
.133
.130
0**
.104
.133
Apply DI (A)
AGE=60
.384
.381
.383
.366
.380
.383
LF Exit (N+A)
.324
.308
.317
.366
.332
.315
Non-Work (N)
.060
.074
.066
0**
.048
.068
Apply DI (A)
AGE=62
.451
.423
.444
.425
.444
.444
LF Exit (N+A)
.351
.310
.333
.425
.367
.326
Non-Work (N)
.100
.114
.111
0**
.078
.118
Apply DI (A)
AGE=64
.481
.455
.472
.446
.473
.473
LF Exit (N+A)
.301
.296
.274
.446
.329
.261
Non-Work (N)
.180
.159
.198
0**
.144
.212
Apply DI (A)
AGE=65
.474
.465
.489
.457
.474
.461
LF Exit (N+A)
.474
.465
.307
.457
.474
.461
Non-Work (N)
0*
0*
.181
0*
0*
0*
Apply DI (A)
* person cannot apply for Disability Insurance at age 65 or older except in Policy 2.
** policy involves removing Disability Insurance program.
Policy 1 involves removing all SS benefits before age 65.
Policy 2 involves changing the normal retirement age from 65 to 67.
Policy 3 involves removing the DI program.
Policy 4 involves a 25% decrease in DI benefits without changing SS Retirement benefits.
Policy 5 involves a 25% decrease in SS Retirement benefits without changing DI benefits.
Policy 6 involves ad 25% reduction in both SS Retirement and DI benefits.

56

Policy 6
25%
Decrease
DI & SS
Benefits
.389
.297
.092
.394
.285
.109
.377
.322
.055
.436
.340
.096
.463
.290
.173
.456
.456
0*

Table 8C Policy Simulations - Good Health (no worse than 1 standard deviation below average)
Baseline

Policy 1
Remove
SS ERB

Policy 2
SS NRA
to 67

Policy 3
Eliminate
DI

Policy 4
25%
Decrease
DI
Benefits

Policy 5
25%
Decrease
SS
Benefits

Pooled Ages
.118
.113
.116
.113
.117
.116
LF Exit (N+A)
.111
.106
.109
.113
.111
.109
Non-Work (N)
.007
.007
.007
0**
.006
.007
Apply DI (A)
AGE=55
.103
.103
.103
.098
.102
.103
LF Exit (N+A)
.097
.095
.096
.098
.097
.096
Non-Work (N)
.007
.007
.007
0**
.006
.007
Apply DI (A)
AGE=60
.125
.122
.123
.122
.124
.123
LF Exit (N+A)
.119
.115
.117
.122
.119
.117
Non-Work (N)
.006
.007
.006
0**
.005
.006
Apply DI (A)
AGE=62
.145
.123
.138
.140
.144
.137
LF Exit (N+A)
.137
.116
.130
.140
.137
.129
Non-Work (N)
.008
.007
.008
0**
.006
.008
Apply DI (A)
AGE=64
.171
.149
.163
.166
.170
.163
LF Exit (N+A)
.161
.141
.152
.166
.161
.151
Non-Work (N)
.010
.008
.010
0**
.009
.011
Apply DI (A)
AGE=65
.178
.172
.208
.175
.178
.167
LF Exit (N+A)
.178
.172
.195
.175
.178
.167
Non-Work (N)
0*
0*
.013
0*
0*
.013
Apply DI (A)
* person cannot apply for Disability Insurance at age 65 or older except in Policy 2.
** policy involves removing Disability Insurance program.
Policy 1 involves removing all SS benefits before age 65.
Policy 2 involves changing the normal retirement age from 65 to 67.
Policy 3 involves removing the DI program.
Policy 4 involves a 25% decrease in DI benefits without changing SS Retirement benefits.
Policy 5 involves a 25% decrease in SS Retirement benefits without changing DI benefits.
Policy 6 involves ad 25% reduction in both SS Retirement and DI benefits.

57

Policy 6
25%
Decrease
DI & SS
Benefits
.114
.108
.006
.102
.096
.006
.122
.117
.006
.136
.129
.007
.161
.151
.010
.166
.166
0*

Appendix A. Data
A.1 Overview of Health and Retirement Study and sample composition
The HRS is described in additional detail in Juster and Suzman (1995). The survey covers a
representative national sample of non-institutionalized men and women born between 1931 and 1941
(inclusive), so that respondents in the sample frame were aged 50-62 at the time of the first wave. The HRS
over-samples Blacks, individuals of Mexican descent, and residents of the state of Florida to permit reliable
analysis of these groups. The first wave of HRS was conducted in person in respondents' homes; the response
rate was 82%. The total sample size of the first wave is 12,654 respondents. The second wave of the HRS was
conducted by telephone in 1994; the second wave re-interviewed 11,317 of the original respondents,
representing 91% of the original sample. The third wave (1996) reinterviewed 10,681 of the original sample,
and the fourth (1998) reinterviewed 10,242, representing 86 percent of the original respondents. By 1998, 805
(6.4%) of the original respondents were deceased.
The HRS includes the spouses/partners of the survey population even if they are not themselves in the age
range of the sample frame; since respondents out of the sample frame do not constitute a representative sample,
they are excluded here. The age-eligible first wave sample consists of 9,824 respondents, of whom 4,522 are
men, of whom 733 are not married/partnered. Table A.1 describes the effects of sample exclusions necessary
for our analysis. From this group, we exclude 206 respondents who did not have a Social Security earnings
history, either because the respondent refused the HRS permission to access their records or because they had
no covered earnings between 1951 and 1991. We exclude 31 respondents who claim to have a private pension
on their current job, but who have no corresponding record provided by their employers. We then exclude 153
respondents who were not eligible to receive both retirement (old age) and disability payments from the Social
Security system if they did not work past 1992 because they lacked the required number of quarters of covered
employment. Finally we excluded 15 respondents who had missing data for any of the variables used in our
models. These exclusions left 328 respondents who were included in the initial conditions sample. Of these,
132 were not employed (or were self employed) at the date of their wave 1 (1992/93) interview. The remaining
196 respondents make up the “behavioral sample.”

Table A.1 Sample Definition
HRS Age-Eligible Single Men

733

...with a social security earnings history available

527

...with valid pension plan data

496

...who were covered for Social Security retirement and disability

343

...with no missing data (Initial Conditions Sample)

328

...employed as of wave 1(Behavioral Sample)

196

A.2 Timing Issues Related to Income Sources
Given our assumption that an individual consumes all of the income that he receives in the same year,
characterizing consumption in a particular year requires that we describe our assumptions related to the timing
of the income from a variety of sources. For some sources of income, institutional details imply that the timing
of receipt is obvious given the labor supply decisions that a person makes. For example, that defined benefit
(DB) pension plans do not typically include an actuarial adjustment for delayed receipt implies that individuals
will begin receiving DB pension payments from a particular job as soon as they become eligible for benefits and
are no longer working in a job. We assume that DB pension wealth is not accrued in bridge jobs. While this
assumption is made largely for computational reasons, the data suggest that it is a reasonable simplifying
assumption. Individuals also have little discretion about the timing of income from food stamps, Supplemental
Security Income, and other exogenous sources of income. In addition, the receipt of Disability insurance
payments starts automatically after one applies and is approved for benefits. We treat defined contribution
pension plans analogously to defined benefit pension plans by assuming that benefits from these plans are only

58

accrued on career jobs and that an individual starts receiving benefits as soon as he becomes eligible and is no
longer working at his career job.
For Social Security, some individual discretion about the timing of benefits remains given a person’s
labor supply choices, and we try to make reasonable assumptions about the timing of benefits. Specifically, we
assume that an individual begins receiving Social Security benefits in the first year he is both eligible (i.e, he is
62 years old or older) and not-working. As noted, the choice-set allows individuals who are younger than 70
years of age the flexibility of returning to work after leaving the workforce. If an individual returns to work
after beginning to collect benefits, earnings are taxed away and actuarial adjustments are made to future
earnings in accordance with the rules of the Social Security system.
Perhaps the most difficult timing issue relates to the manner in which a person spends the wealth that he
has accumulated by the beginning of the sample period. Our approach for dealing with wealth takes into
account the intuitively appealing notion that individuals who are not working are more likely to use portions of
their wealth for consumption. Specifically, we compute the yearly value of a hypothetical annuity that a person
could buy at time t=0 given his wealth. In any year for the remainder of his life that the person does not work,
he is assumed to consume the annuitized value of his wealth. In any year that the person does work, we assume
that the person saves the annuitized amount.44 This additional savings is used to increase consumption when he
Finally, we assume that health expenditures
retires permanently (i.e., takes a year off at age 70 or older).45
are paid out of income in the year that they are incurred. However, consistent with the notion that there exists
government assistance, we assume that a person’s consumption in a period cannot fall below a minimum level
of subsistence.46
A.3. More detailed information related to various sources of income
A.3.1 The health expenditure equation
Following French and Jones (2004), we assume that a person’s health expenditures at time t depends on
the person’s health insurance status k, age, and health:
(A.1) Ln Expenditures(t) = 71k +72 (Age-53) + 73 0t + ek
where we differentiate between four possible health insurance categories - k0{ESI (employer sponsored health
insurance) only, ESI and Medicare, Medicare only, no coverage}. 71 is a constant which depends on a
person’s health insurance status k. 72 and 73 measure the impact of age and health respectively. e is a a random
component which is assumed to be normally distributed with a mean of zero and a variance which depends on a
person’s health insurance status.
To estimate the model of out-of-pocket health care expenditures, we used the 1996 and 1998 waves of the
HRS. The sample we use (n= 4,619) consists of age-eligible men, who had not applied for Disability Insurance,
and who did not have Medicaid between 1995 and 1998. Respondents fall into one of four insurance groups:
those with employer sponsored health insurance (ESI) and Medicare coverage (n=261), those with ESI but no
Medicare (n=2,419), those with Medicare but no ESI (n=527), and those with neither ESI nor Medicare
(n=1,412).
The expenditure variable we use includes out-of-pocket payments for medical care provided during the
two years between interviews plus any insurance premiums paid by the person. As a result, during estimation
we divide the amounts from the expenditure equation by two. Payments included are all those for nursing home
and hospital stays, doctor visits, outpatient surgeries, dental visits, prescriptions drugs, and in-home medical
care. The expenditure model is estimated using a Tobit method with expenditure censored on the left at the

44

The formulation precludes any active savings. As mentioned in footnote 2, the population we are specifically interested
in does not appear to have much in the way of savings at baseline. For this reason, we do not believe our rather ad-hoc way
of dealing with savings and wealth seriously distorts our estimates of the impact of health on labor market behavior.
45

At the time the person retires permanently we compute the yearly value of a second hypothetical annuity that could be
purchased with the savings he has accumulated by not consuming the first annuity (i.e., by working in some years between
t=0 and the time he retires permanently). From the date of permanent retirement until the end of his life, the person receives
both the yearly value of the first annuity and the yearly value of the second annuity.

46

We assume that this consumption floor corresponds to the maximum payment that a person could receive from the food
stamps program. Thus, no individuals in our model receive consumption lower than the maximum food stamp payment.

59

median level of expenditures and on the right at the 99th percentile. The censoring is done, first, for the entire
sample and, then, separately by insurance group. Residual variances are allowed to vary across insurance
groups but are fixed within them. The estimates of the expenditure model are shown in Table A.2.

Table A.2 Estimates of parameters in health expenditure equation
Common Truncation
Variable
Age-55
Health
ESI, Medicare
ESI, no Medicare
no ESI, Medicare
Constant
Insurance Group
ESI, Medicare
ESI, no Medicare
no ESI, Medicare
no ESI, no Medicare

Coefficient
0.015
0.335
0.407
0.214
0.344
6.926

Separate Truncation

Std Error
0.008
0.032
0.119
0.070
0.099
0.102

Coefficient
0.014
0.339
0.382
0.218
0.413
6.926

Variance
1.893
1.659
1.840
2.392

Std Error
0.008
0.032
0.129
0.068
0.099
0.101

Variance
2.042
1.682
1.632
2.421

To see the effect of insurance group on the distribution of expenditures, we produced hypothetical distributions
of expenditure using the 71k and variance estimates while holding age and health constant. Our predictions
imply that a ESI reduces out of pocket expenditures in the upper tail of the distribution, but not at the median.
This finding is similar to that of French and Jones (2004), and is consistent with findings from the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) (Olin & Machlin, 2004) that persons with more comprehensive insurance
coverage receive substantially more care, and as a result may have significant coinsurance expenses.

25th Percentile

Median

75th Percentile

Common Truncation:
ESI, Medicare
ESI, no Medicare
no ESI, Medicare
no ESI, no Medicare

$
$
$
$

284.86
483.76
271.26
168.88

$
$
$
$

715.48
602.89
672.50
475.41

$
$
$
$

1,789.05
749.57
1,659.87
1,331.61

Separate Truncation:
ESI, Medicare
ESI, no Medicare
no ESI, Medicare
no ESI, no Medicare

$
$
$
$

269.60
480.64
307.93
168.94

$
$
$
$

685.78
600.81
709.37
466.89

$
$
$
$

1,809.54
746.96
1,688.58
1,342.89

A.3.2. The earnings equations
We assume that the log of a person’s real earnings in his career job at time t evolves according to the
fixed-effect specification
(A.2) Ln(WCt)=

Y WCt=

60

where "1i is a person-specific fixed-effect that can be estimated given multiple career-job earnings observations
in the Health and Retirement Study and RCt is the stochastic component of career job earnings. The log of a
person’s real earnings in his bridge job option is given by
YWBt=

(A.3) Ln(WBt)=

where RBt is the stochastic component of bridge job earnings, and EXITAGE is the age at which a person left
his career job. Our specification allows for the possibility that the earnings a person received in his career job at
t=0 may contain information more generally about his earnings potential.
We do not make functional form assumptions about the distributions of
and
since our simulation
approach described in Section 3 allows us to use the empirical distributions of these random variables.
Earnings in the career job are estimated using Internal Revenue Service (Form W-2) data linked to HRS
records. The data cover reported wage and salary income and self-employment income from the years 19801991. We estimated the rate of growth in real earnings for the persons in our sample over the period to be
1.93% (s.e.=0.23%) per year. Future real earnings were thus assumed to grow at this rate from the base reported
in 1992. Earnings in bridge jobs were estimated using self-reported data from survey year 1994. Sample
individuals who reported working in a job different from the one reported in the 1992 survey were included in
the estimation sample.

Estimates of parameters in earnings equations

Career Job
Age
Constant
σu (dispersion of fixed effects)
σe (dispersion of residuals)
ρ (fraction of variance due to u)
n
F test that all ui=0:
Bridge Job
Age left career job
1992 log wage
Constant
n
R2

Coefficient

Standard Error

0.019
8.954
0.994
0.396
0.863
4923
F(2142, 2779)=

0.002
0.108

-0.061
0.381
9.429
230
0.107

0.021
0.082
1.358

9.81

A.3.3. Issues related to Social Security Benefits
Recall that the choice set in Section 2.1 allows individuals to leave the workforce and return at a later
time. With respect to bridge job information, in reality the actual SS benefit formula implies that a person’s SS
benefits would depend on not only the number of years that a person works in a bridge job before t and the
wages in those years but also to some extent on the specific ages that the bridge job wages were received. This
is the case because earnings that enter the Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME) which determines SS
benefit amounts are indexed by year-specific factors (that are different than standard rates of inflation) at ages
less than 60 and are not indexed at ages greater than 60. We choose not to use this age information when
computing SS benefits because including it in the model is not computationally feasible since it would require
that the model contain a set of state variables that characterize the specific ages at which the person worked in
bridge jobs (or alternatively state variables that keep track of the years the person was out of the workforce
before time t). This assumption does not seem particularly problematic because the age information tends to
have a relatively small effect on benefits. The SS benefits that we use in our model are those obtained with the
person’s bridge years taking place immediately after a person’s career years.

61

The SS rules imply that, when recomputing the actuarial adjustment factor, one month is added to the
Social Security starting age for each month before the normal retirement age that a person incurs a benefit
reduction (including partial reductions) due to work. Thus, the actuarial adjustment factor typically changes
when a person returns to work before the normal retirement age (after beginning to collect SS benefits) because
a partial benefit reduction occurs in a month for anyone who earns more than the monthly equivalent of
approximately $10,000 a year. However, working after the normal retirement age (after beginning to collect SS
benefits) only leads to a change in the actuarial adjustment factor if the person incurs a full benefit reduction
due to work in a particular month. Thus, the actuarial adjustment factor does not typically change for those
working after the normal retirement age (after beginning to collect SS benefits) because, for example, a person
with $20,000 in yearly SS benefits would only incur a full benefit reduction in a month if he earned more than
the monthly equivalent of approximately $70,000 a year in his bridge job. This implies that the state variable
SSEX in Section 2.3.2 keeps track of the number of years that the person is out of the workforce between the
age of 62 and his normal retirement age, and, if the person is not out of the workforce in any of these years,
SSEX keeps track of the first subsequent age that the person is out of the workforce.
Social security benefits are calculated using SSA data on covered earnings that have been attached to
HRS records and self reported data from 1992 using program rules in effect as of 1992. Earnings histories are
available for persons in covered employment beginning in 1950. Future earnings are assumed to evolve
according to the estimates described above. Individuals who do not give HRS permission to access earnings
histories are excluded from the analysis.
A.3.4 Issues related to Defined Benefit Pensions
In order to be eligible for a defined benefit payment from a particular job at time t$1, a person must have
left this job at this point. In this case, whether a payment is received and the amount of the payment depends on
a person’s earnings history in that job as of time t and the details of the employer’s pension plan. Much
heterogeneity exists in both eligibility ages and payment structures across plans.
For the discussion here it is worthwhile to group the set of jobs that a person holds during his working
lifetime as jobs that the person left before t=0 (referred to hereafter as previously held jobs), the job the worker
held at t=0 (defined above as a career job), and jobs that the worker begins after t=0 (defined above as bridge
jobs). With respect to bridge jobs, for reasons of model tractability we assume that defined benefit pensions are
not accumulated in these jobs.47 Descriptive work shows that this is a reasonable simplifying assumption. With
respect to any previously held job, because the worker has left this job as of t=0, & contains all details of the
pension plan and information about the worker’s earnings history at the job that is necessary for the person at
t=1 to compute the defined benefit payment he will receive at any t$1. With respect to the career job, because
the worker has not left this job at t=0, in order he must know not only the details of the employer’s pension plan
and information about his earnings history at the job that are contained in & but also the endogenously
determined number of years that he will remain in his career job and the wages that he will earn in each of these
years. Letting EXC(t) denote the years of experience that a person has accumulated in his career job as of time
t, the number of years that the person stays in his career job before leaving is EXC(T) and the set of wages
.48 The assumption that an individual considers
relevant to the DB calculation is given by WC1,WC2,...,
expected future earnings when thinking about future DB benefits implies that the information in & and EXC(T)
is sufficient for the person at t=1 to compute the DB that he will receive in some year in the future.
Values for defined benefit pension income are computed by the HRS Pension Benefit Calculator. In 1992
the HRS asked respondents who were working for the name and address of their current employer as well as
their previous employer. Using this information, the HRS contacted the employers to obtain summary plan
descriptions. These descriptions, supplemented with data on pension plans maintained by the U. S. Department
of Labor were used to produce formulas for the calculation of individual pension benefits based on the
individual’s wage history for any given date of retirement. See Curtin et al. (1998) for details on the pension

47

Allowing DB pensions to be accumulated in jobs that are started after time t=0 is difficult because it requires a person to
think about the types of pension plans that could arrive with all possible future job offers. In this case, variables that are
capable of describing all pension plans that arise in the future would have to be included in the model as state variables.

48

EXC(T), the number of years of career job experience as of the end of his decision horizon, is the relevant number because
the person cannot return to his career job after leaving.

62

calculator program. For each sample member with a pension plan recorded in the plan database we generated
annual pension benefit values for every future age of retirement from the current job beginning in the current
year through the year in which the respondent reaches age 70.
A.3.5 Issues related to Defined Contribution Pensions
Defined contribution pensions are treated analogously to defined benefit pensions. To be consistent with
our DB assumption regarding bridge jobs, we assume that DC benefits are not accumulated in jobs that begin
after t=0. The defined contribution benefits at future time t associated with jobs that ended before t=0 are
entirely characterized by information about the total amount of contributions that have been made to the plan
and the plan’s age of eligibility that is contained in our baseline financial characteristics &.49 With respect to the
career job, because the worker has not left this job at t=0, in order for the person at t=0 to compute the DC that
he will receive in some year in the future he must know not only information about previous contributions and
the plan’s age of eligibility that is contained in & but also the endogenously determined number years he will
remain in his career job and how much he will contribute to his DC plan in each of these years. We abstract
from the endogeneity of the contribution decision by assuming that each individual continues to contribute the
same percentage of his income to the DC plan at his career job in the future as he has in the past. In this case,
given the past rate of contribution which is information contained in &, the information needed to compute
future DC benefits is very similar to that of the DB case. In particular, in addition to knowing the information
in &, the person must know how many years EXC(T) that he will remain in his career job and the wages
that he will earn in each of these years. The assumption that an individual considers
WC1,WC2,...,
expected future earnings when thinking about future DC benefits implies that the information in & and EXC(T)
is sufficient for the person at t=1 to compute the DC that he will receive in some year in the future.
Values for defined contribution pension income are derived as an actuarially fair annuity based on the
accumulated value in the DC pension account at the time of retirement from the career job, according to the
formula

W (a ) =

119

li ( x )

A(a )

∑ l (a) (1 + r )
x=a i

x−a

where W(a) is the accumulated value of the pension fund at age a, li(x) is the adjusted (see above) life table
probability of survival to age x, A(a) is the annuity payment for an individual who begins receiving it at age a,
and r is the (real) interest rate, assumed here to be 3.29%. Pension wealth is self-reported at baseline, and it is
assumed to accumulate with annual contributions from either or both employers and employees calculated as
percentages of wage and salary income from the career job until retirement. Interest is accrued on these pension
assets until they are converted to an annuity.
A.3.6. Non-pension wealth
Our general approach for dealing with wealth is described in Appendix A.2. The HRS respondents are
asked to value a wide variety of assets and debts (see Smith, 1995, and Hill, 1993, for details). We calculate the
total net value of non-pension sources of wealth available at baseline (1992).
A.4 Survival Probabilities
We calculate health-adjusted survival probabilities at each future age for the purposes of discounting future
utility and converting stocks of wealth into annuity income estimates. The relationship between current health
and survival is estimated using a discrete time hazard model of mortality and the longitudinal data from the
HRS. In particular, for persons who are interviewed (taken as an objective measure of survival) in successive
waves, we record the date of each interview, and include in the likelihood function an expression for the
probability that the individual survives to that date. For those who die between waves, we include in the
likelihood function the cumulative probability that the individual dies sometime in the two-year period
following their last interview. The survival function is assumed to be exponential. Thus , the probability of
survival from year t-1 to year t is next is

49

We assume an anticipated real growth rate of 3.29% on all investments.

63

where single year of age dummies and a health index (the predicted latent variable from an ordered probit
estimate of self-assessed health status) are included in X. The probability of surviving from one survey (t-2) to
the next (t) is then S(t-1)S(t) and the probability of dying during the interval is just 1 - S(t-1)S(t). Health as of t2 and age as of t-1 and t are included in the model. The coefficient on the health index was 0.623 (0.071). Our
estimate of the coefficient on health in the survival model implies that a one standard deviation increase in the
latent health index (worse health) increases the mortality hazard by a factor of 1.86. Using this coefficient
estimate and individual values of the latent health index, individual survival probabilities to future ages are
increased or decreased relative to the national probabilities obtained from Social Security life tables (SSA,
1995).
A.5 Characterizing a person’s decisions
An individual in the behavioral sample is classified as having applied for disability benefits at time t if he
reported applying for Social Security Disability or Supplemental Security Income sometime between the target
dates t-1 and t, regardless of his work status as of time t. Among those not classified as disability applicants,
those who report that they are doing no work for pay as of time t are classified as “non-workers.” Note that this
classification can include respondents who had applied for disability benefits but did so more than a year before
time t-1. At each survey, workers are asked if they work for the same employer, named by the interviewer, they
reported in the previous wave. If not (or if they reported being self-employed), they are asked the dates at which
the previous job ended and the current job began. This information is used to classify individuals as working in
a career job or a bridge job. Finally, respondents who either denied working for the employer given in a
previous interview or didn’t know if they worked for the same employer were excluded from the behavioral
sample. Persons who were working but self-employed at wave 1 were also excluded from the behavioral
sample.

64

Appendix B. Computing Value Functions
For illustrative purposes, consider the calculation of the expected future utility associated with the
option of staying in one’s career job. For clarity below, it will be useful to separate the stochastic components
in S(t+1) from the components in S(t+1) that are deterministic given S(t) and the decision to choose j at time
t. Denoting the vector of non-stochastic components SNS(t+1), S(t+1)=SNS(t+1)c{DI(t+1), 0t+1, ,(t+1),
R(t+1), HIB(t+1), L(t+1)},
(B.1) E[V(t+1, S(t+1)|S(t),dC(t)=1]
=PR(L(t+1)=1)@ PR(HIB(t+1)=1)AIII [V(t+1,SNS(t+1),L(t+1)=1,R(t+1),,(t+1),0t+1,HIB(t+1)=1]
dG(,(t+1)) dF(R(t+1)) d H(0t+1|0t)
+PR(L(t+1)=0)APR(HIB(t+1)=1)@III [V(t+1,SNS(t+1),L(t+1)=0,R(t+1),,(t+1),0t+1, HIB(t=1)=1]
dG(,(t+1)) dF(R(t+1)) d H(0t+1|0t)
+PR(L(t+1)=0)APR(HIB(t+1)=2)@III [V(t+1,SNS(t+1),L(t+1)=0,R(t+1),,(t+1),0t+1, HIB(t=1)=2]
dG(,(t+1)) dF(R(t+1)) d H(0t+1|0t)
+PR(L(t+1)=1)APR(HIB(t+1)=2)@III [V(t+1,SNS(t+1),L(t+1)=1,R(t+1),,(t+1),0t+1, HIB(t=1)=2]
dG(,(t+1)) dF(R(t+1)) d H(0t+1|0t)
where H, G, and F are the distribution functions of 0t+1 given 0t, ,, and R respectively.50
The normality assumption for , described in Section 2.3.2 is made primarily for practical reasons
related to the necessity of allowing certain correlations in our model that are discussed in detail in Section 3.
Unfortunately, this distributional assumption, along with the equation (8) assumption about 0t+1 given 0t and
our use of the empirical distribution of R, implies that equation (B.1) does not have a closed form solution.
Simulation approaches have been found to be useful in such contexts. For illustration, considering the first of
the three-dimensional integrals in equation (B.1), our approximation approach has its foundations in the
“naive” simulator given by
D

(B.2)

1
D

∑

[V(t+1,SNS(t+1),L(t+1)=1,Rd(t+1),,d(t+1),0dt+1,HIB(t+1)=1]

d =1

where 0 t+1, ,d(t+1), and Rd(t+1) and represent the dth of D draws from the distributions of 0t+1 given 0t,
,(t+1), and the empirical distribution of R(t+1) respectively.
d

We deviate from this naive simulator in two ways. The first deviation is that, motivated by findings in
Stinebrickner (2000), we choose to approximate the outer integral in each of the three-dimensional integrals
in equation (B.1) by Hermite Gaussian Quadrature rather than by simulation51. The second deviation is
motivated by the reality that the naive simulator in equation (B.2) does not have continuous derivatives with
respect to the parameters of our model.52 This causes problems with the derivative-based optimization
50

L(t+1) is relevant for only the choice C and DI(t+1) is not relevant for the choice C or B since we assume that individuals
do not imagine returning to work if they are approved for DI.. Uncertainty about HIB(t+1) exists in all cases except when
a person is working in a bridge job with health insurance at time t. In this case, the individual assumes that he will have
health insurance if he remains in a bridge job in time t+1. The future utility associated with applying for DI depends on
whether the person is approved or not. If not approved the person has multiple options in the next period. If approved, the
individual receives the utility from remaining out of the workforce and collecting DI benefits for the remainder of his life.
Thus, the expected value is a weighted average of the utility from these sources with the weights coming from a person’s
belief about the probability that his DI application will be approved.
51

Stinebrickner(2000) found that Gaussian Quadrature methods performed well relative to simulation methods in a similar
context with a serially correlated variable. We have no strong evidence (or strong beliefs) that the quadrature method is a
better choice than simulation in this specific context, especially since we are also simulating other dimensions of the integral.

52

A slight change in a particular parameter can potentially change the option that is the maximum, and, therefore, lead to
a discrete change in the derivative of V(A) with respect to the parameter.

algorithms that are a necessity given the computational demands of our model. We address this issue in a
manner similar to Keane and Moffitt (1998) by adding an additional extreme value smoothing random
variable to each of the current period utility equations (4). The additional parameter produces a smooth
simulator which approaches the value in equation (B.1) as the variance of the extreme value smoothing
random variables approaches zero. In practice, we set the variance to be a small number.
Specifically, these two deviations from the naive simulator lead to an analog of equation (B.2) that is
given by
Q

(B.3)

1
π

D

∑ w ∑ E[V (t + 1), S
q =1

1
q D

d =1

NS

(t + 1), L(t + 1) = 1,ψ d (t + 1), ε d (t + 1), ηt +1 = ρ(ηt − πX t ) + πX t +1 + 2σ ξ mq , HI B (t + 1) = 1]

where, as described in detail in Stinebrickner (2000), mq and wq, q=1,...,Q are the Q quadrature points and
weights respectively from the Hermite quadrature method and the term

1

π

arises from a change of variables

that is necessary to use the Hermite Quadrature method. The expected value is over the extreme value
smoothing random variables that have been added to each current period utility equation. The benefit of
adding the smoothing variable is that E[C] has a closed form solution that has continuous derivatives with
respect to all of the parameters that are being estimated (Keane and Moffitt, 1998).
The expectations of the type in B.1 are calculated as part of the backwards recursion solution process.
In order to solve all necessary value functions at each time t of the backwards recursion process, it is
necessary to know value functions at time t+1 for each combination of the state variables in S(t+1)={&,
X(t+1), EXC(t+1), EXB(t+1), SSEX(t+1), DI(t+1), ,(t+1), R(t+1), L(t+1), 6, 0t , HIC, and HIB(t)} that could
arise at time t+1.
The variables &, X(t+1), HIC, ,(t+1), and R(t+1) are not computationally burdensome from the
standpoint of solving value functions. The first three of these variables are not computationally burdensome
because they are assumed to be exogenous and predetermined. This implies that value functions at time t+1
need to be solved only for the known value of these variables. The last two of these variables are not
computationally burdensome because they are assumed to be serially independent, and, as a result, influence
t+1 value functions only through the current period utility.53
The computational burden of the DP model arises primarily from the variables EXC(t+1), EXB(t+1),
SSEX(t+1), DI(t+1), HIB(t+1), 0t+1, and 6. For each of these variables, the computational burden arises
because 1) there are multiple values for which value functions are needed at time t+1 and 2) the current
period value of the variable provides information about both current and future utility.54 It is worth noting
that the reasons that multiple values need to be solved varies somewhat across the variables. For the first six
variables, the agent needs to solve for the multiple values as part of his decision process. However, this is not
the case for 6 since each person is assumed to know his person-specific value. Instead, the necessity of
solving value functions for multiple values arises as an estimation issue because the econometrician does not
observe the person-specific value. The method for dealing with this “missing data” problem is an estimation
which, as described in Section 3, implies that the econometrician needs to solve value functions for different
values of 6.

Thus, the implication that the time t+1 value functions need to be known for many values of ,(t+1) and R(t+1) is not
problematic since, for any j, knowledge of Vj(t+1,S(t+1))= Rj(S(t+1))+$(S(t+1))@E[V(t+2,S(t+2))|S(t+1),dj(t+1)=1] for any
values of ,j(t+1) and Rj(t+1) implies that Vj(S(t+1),t+1) can be found for any other values of ,j(t+1) and Rj(t+1) by simply
recalculating the current period reward Rj(S(t+1)). This calculation is not computationally demanding.
53

54

The latter characteristic of these variables implies that, for any option j, computing a time t+1 value function for any
particular combination of these variables requires that one recompute the computationally demanding
$E[V(t+2,S(t+2))|S(t+1),dj(t+1)=1].

66

The first five of the variables in the previous paragraph are discrete variables that are determined
endogenously by individual decisions, and the possible combinations of these variables at any time t+1 can
be easily characterized.55 The simulation approach for dealing with unobserved heterogeneity which is
described in Section 3 determines a finite number of values for 6 for which value functions need to be solved.
However, 0t+1 is a serially correlated continuous variable and this causes well-known difficulties for the
backwards recursion solution method. As discussed in detail in Keane and Wolpin (1994), Rust (1997), and
Stinebrickner (2000), quadrature or simulation methods such as those mentioned earlier in this section are a
useful tool for addressing the difficulties of serially correlated, continuous variables because, in effect, they
serve to discretize the state space - an obvious necessity given that the backwards recursion process requires
that value functions be solved for all combinations of state variables. Unfortunately, while finite, the number
of possible values of 0t+1 for which value functions need to be solved at time t+1 is very large for all but the
smallest values of t+1.56 As a result, for all but the smallest values of t+1 it is infeasible to solve value
functions using standard methods for all possible combinations of EXC(t+1), EXB(t+1), SSEX(t+1), DI,
HIB(t+1), 6 and 0t+1 that could arise. We address this issue by implementing a modified version of the
standard backwards solution process. The first step in the modified backwards recursion approach, which
takes place before the backwards recursion process begins, involves determining the range of possible values
that 0t could have in t=1,2,...,T. The set of possible values of 01 are determined by the simulation process
(described in Section 3) that is needed to compute the likelihood contribution of the person given the reality
that true health in t=1, 01, is not observed. Given the range of possible values of 01, equation (B.3) can be
used to determine the possible values for 02 that are needed to compute the future component of time value
t=1 functions associated with these values. Additional values of 02 are generated by the simulation process
associated with the likelihood contribution which takes into account that 01 is not observed. The range of
possible values of 02 can be constructed from the set of all possible values of 02, and this process can be
repeated one period at a time to determine the possible range of values of 03,...,0T.
Once the range of values for 01,...,0T have been determined, the modified backwards recursion process
can take place. At each time t in the backwards recursion process, rather than solving value functions for all
possible values of 0t, value functions are solved for the largest possible value of 0t, the smallest possible
value of 0t, and some subset of the possible values in between. We refer to these values of 0t for which value
functions are solved at time t as the time t grid points and denote them
where N0 is the total
number of grid points at time t .57 Equation (B.3) indicates that solving the value functions associated with
the grid points at time t requires knowledge of value functions at time t+1 for various values of 0t+1. The
reality that these values of 0t+1 will not correspond to the time t+1 grid points (for which value functions were

55

If a person leaves the workforce at an age of 70 or older or if a person successfully applies for Disability Insurance he
enters a terminal state in which he remains out of the workforce for the remainder of his lifetime. These terminal state
assumptions reduce computational burden. For example, the latter implies that value functions C, B, and A do not need
to be solved at time t unless DI(t)=0. The former implies that value functions C, B, and A do not need to be solved for any
combinations of state variables that indicate that a person left the workforce at any year when he was age 70 or older.

To see this note that Equation (B.3) in appendix B indicates that solving value functions for a particular value of 01 would
q=1,...,Q.
require that value functions be computed at time t=2 for the Q values of 02 given by D(01 -BX1) +BX2 +
Similarly, solving each of these time t=2 value functions would require that time t=3 value functions be computed for Q
values of 03. Thus, solving value functions for a particular value of 01 would require that we compute value functions at
any time t+1 for Qt values of 0t+1. Further, as described below, our methods for dealing with the reality that true health in
period 1, 01, is unobserved requires that we solve value functions at t=1 for multiple values of 01.
56

57

The number of grid points can change with t. In practice, to reduce computational expense slightly we allowed the spacing
between grid point to increase as t increases and for values of 0 that are a long way from the mean of 0 for the sample. The
spacing we choose between grid points is .35 for the years in which choices are observed which is approximately .30 of a
health standard deviation. Stinebrickner (2000) suggests that the methods perform well even when grid points are spaced
substantially further apart than this. Consistent with this, we find that reducing spacing further had virtually no effect on
parameter estimates.

67

solved at time t+1) necessitates a value function approximation. Specifically, we interpolate the t+1 value
function associated with a particular value of 0t+1 as the weighted average of the value function associated
with the smallest grid point at time t+1 which is larger than 0t+1 and the value function associated with the
largest t+1 grid point which is smaller than 0t+1. This nonparametric linear interpolation approach based on
“surrounding” grid points has the virtue that the interpolated value function for 0t+1 converges to the true
value function as the number of grid points is increases (i.e., as the grid points used in the weighted average
become close to the value of 0t+1 for which value functions are being approximated).58

58

Keane and Wolpin (1994) describe a value function approximation technique based in Ordinary Least Squares and
demonstrate the usefulness of this in several applications including Keane and Wolpin (1997). An alternative for solving
value functions in the presence of serially correlated state variables that does not require value function approximation is
the self-interpolating approach suggested by Tauchen and Hussey (1991) and Rust (1997). Stinebrickner (2000) provides
some intuition about cases in which one might expect the interpolating method to perform better and cases in which one
might expect the self-interpolating method to perform better. Stinebrickner (2000) suggests that the interpolating method
has an advantage in cases such as this where the degree of serial correlation is high.

68

Appendix C. The Likelihood function
In either the case of a person who is in our behavioral sample or a person who is not in our behavioral
sample, the first conditions that must be satisfied come from the fact that, in each year that a person reports
his work limitation status, this report dictates an interval in which the latent health index ht* from equation
(12) must lie. While individuals make decisions annually in our behavioral model, health is only reported at
survey dates. Thus, given that we are using three waves of HRS data after the baseline wave, we observe up
to three health observations per person after the baseline period. In Section 4.2 we discuss the timing of
survey dates in more detail. For concreteness at this point, assume that the person’s health status is reported
three times at t=2, t=3, and t=5, and that the reports indicate that the person’s work is not limited at t=2 and
t=3 but is limited at t=5. Then, health equation (12) implies the three conditions that must be satisfied:

h2* = πX 2 + γZ 2 + [ν 2 + μ 2 ] < 0 ⇒ ν 2 + μ 2 < − πX 2 − γZ 2 ,
*
(C.1) h3 = πX 3 + γZ 3 + [ν 3 + μ 3 ] < 0 ⇒ ν 3 + μ 3 < − πX 3 − γZ 3 ,
h5* = πX 5 + γZ5 + [ν 5 + μ5 ] < 0 ⇒ ν 5 + μ5 < − πX 5 − γZ5
For each person, an additional condition that must be satisfied comes from the initial conditions
equation. For a person who is working at baseline, equation (14) implies that
(C.2)

,I>-A1X0 -A2Z0.

The direction of the inequality is reversed for individuals who are not working at baseline.
The likelihood contribution for an individual who is not in the behavioral sample, comes exclusively
from the health and initial conditions observations. For an individual who is in our behavioral sample,
additional conditions come from the expression for the behavioral choice that a person makes in each year a
choice is observed. For concreteness assume that the person is younger than 61 years of age at t=1, five
behavioral decisions are observed and the decisions are to work in his career job in years t=1,2,3, to work in a
bridge job in year t=4 and to be out of the workforce in year t=5.59 In Section 4.2 we describe how we map
the continuous work histories that can be constructed from the data to the sequence of yearly decision periods
that are each characterized by a single activity status.
Starting with t=1, the fact that the person chooses the Career option implies that the value of this option
is greater than the value of each of the other options for this individual at time t=1,
(C.3)

VC(1,S(1))>VB(1,S(1)), VC(1,S(1))>VA(1,S(1)), and VC(1,S(1))>VN(1,S(1)).

Define V*j(t,S(t),Rt,0t)=Vj(t,S(t),Rt,0t)-6j- <t -,tj for j=C,B,A,N, where for expositional reasons we
have included Rt and 0t explicitly in V* even though they are both elements of S(t). Then, the three
conditions in equation (C.3) can be rewritten as
(C.4)

6 +80C<1+,1C - 6j- 80j<1-,1j >V*j(1,S(1),R1,01)-V*C(1,S(1),R1,01),

j=B, A, N.

For t=2 and for t=3, three conditions of identical form exist with the exception that all variables would be
indexed by time t=2 and t=3 respectively rather than t=1.
At t=4, the person chooses the bridge option and the three conditions analogous to those in equation
(C.4) indicate that the value of the bridge option at t=4 is greater than the value of the three other options at
t=4:

59

The reason to specify the age of the example person is that a person’s age has an effect on his choice set. Given the
specified age, the example person can apply for DI (option A) in all periods t=1,2,3,4,5..

69

(C.5)

6+ 80B<4+,4B -6j- 80j<4-,4j >V*j(4,S(4),R4,04)-V*B(4,S(4),R4,04) j=C,A,N.

Finally, at t=5, the person no longer has the option to work in his career job because he left his career
job at time t=4. The two conditions analogous to those in equation (C.4) indicate that the value of not
working (N) at t=5 is greater than the value of the two other available options at t=4:
(C.6)

80N<5+,5N -6j- 80j<5-,5j >V*j(5,S(5),R5,05)-V*N(5,S(5),R5,05) j=B, A

Thus, the likelihood contribution Li for our example person i is given by the joint probability that the
eighteen conditions (3 health conditions, 1 initial condition, and 14 behavioral conditions) in equations
(C.1), (C.2), (C.4), (C.5), and (C.6) are jointly true. The Rt’s are independent of all other stochastic elements
that enter these equations so that the likelihood contribution of person i can be written as
(C.7) Li= IPR(<2+:2<-BX2-(Z2 1 <3+:3<-BX3-(Z3 1 <5+:5>-BX5-(Z5 1 ,I>-A1X0-A2Z0 1
6 +80C<1+,1C - 6 - 80B<1-,1B >V*B(1,S(1),R1,01)-V*C(1,S(1),R1,01) 1 . . . 1
80N<5+,5N - 80A<5-,5A >V*A(5,S(5),R5,05)-V*N(5,S(5),R5,05) dF(R1, R2, R3 R4 ,R5).
The integral in equation (C.7) can be simulated in a straightforward manner given the empirical
distribution of R1,...,R5. What remains is to show how to compute the probability expression in (C.7) given
values of the R’s. The joint probability is the area under the joint density of Q={ <2+:2, <3+:3, <5+:5, ,I, 6+
80C<1+,1C -6 - 80B<1-,1B, 6+ 80C<1+,1C - 80A<1-,1A , . . . , 80N<5+,5N -6- 80 B<5-,5B, 80N<5+,5N -80 A<5-,5A} where
the conditions that appear in the probability expression (i.e., the conditions in equations C.1, C.2, C.4, C.5,
and C.6) are all true.
The eighteen elements of Q have a joint normal distribution. The diagonal elements of the covariance
matrix are determined by the previously discussed normalizations var(<t+:t) = var(,I) = var(,tC) = var(,tB) =
var(,tN) = var( ,tA) = 1, by F6 and var(<t), and by the coefficients 80C, 80B, 80N, 80A. The non-diagonal
elements of the covariance matrix are determined by D, by the covariance terms COV(,I, <1), COV(,I, 6),
{COV(:t, ,tj), j=C,B,A}, by the normalization of COV(:t, ,tN) to zero, and by the fact that <t, t=1,2,3,4,5
enters multiple elements of Q.
Given the covariance matrix that can be computed given the model parameters at a given iteration of
our updating algorithm, we use the GHK simulator of Geweke (1991), Hajivassiliou (1990), and Keane
(1994) to approximate the probability expression in equation (C.7). Roughly speaking, this approach centers
around the rewriting of the joint probability in equation (C.7) as a product of conditional probabilities and
approximating this product by repeatedly computing marginal probabilities, drawing values of random
variables consistent with conditions that must be satisfied, and updating conditional distributions. It is worth
noting that the GHK simulation approach provides a very natural way to deal formally with important
missing data issues that arise in this context (see Stinebrickner, 1999, and Lavy et al., 1998). Consider the
likelihood contribution for our example person. The person’s true health 0t in t=1,2,3,4,5 enters the
likelihood contribution. However, 0t is never observed since, even when a self-report of health occurs at time
t, the self-report represents only a noisy measure of true health. In essence, our approach allows us to deal
with the missing data problem by “integrating out” over the joint distribution of 01, 02, 03, 04, ..., 05 that is
appropriate given a person’s self-reported health in t=2, t=3, and t=5.
Specifically, he likelihood in equation (C.7) can be approximated as

70

D

(C.8)

1
D

∑{
d =1

PR(<2+:2<-BX2-(Z2 )C
PR(<3+:3<-BX3-(Z3 |(<2+:2)d)C
PR(<5+:5<-BX5-(Z5 |(<2+:2)d, (<3+:3)d)C
PR(,I>-A1X0-A2Z0|(<2+:2)d,(<3+:3)d,(<5+:5)d, <1d, <2d, <3d,<4d,<5d,6d)C
PR(6d +80C<1d+,1C - 6d - 80B<1d-,1B >V*B(1,S(1),R1d,01d)-V*C(1,S(1),R1d,01d|
(<2+:2)d,(<3+:3)d,(<5+:5)d, <1d, <2d,<3d,<4d,<5d,6d,,Id)
C
C
C
PR(80N<5d+,5N - 80A<5d-,5A >V*A(5,S(5),R5d,05d)-V*N(5,S(5),R5d,05d|C) }
where the superscript d denotes the dth of D total draws of a particular variable. Rtd t=1,2,3,4,5 is a draw of Rt
from its empirical distribution as part of the simulation of the integral in equation (C.7), (<2+:2)d <0 is drawn
from the marginal distribution of <2+:2 given the joint density of the eighteen elements in Q. (<3+:3)d <0 is
drawn from the marginal distribution of <3+:3 given (<2+:2)d. (<5+:5)d >0 is drawn from the marginal
distribution of <5+:5 given (<2+:2)d and (<3+:3)d . <1d,...,<15 are drawn unconditionally from the marginal
distribution of (<1d,...,<15) given (<2+:2)d, (<3+:3)d, and (<5+:5)d. Given <1d,...,<15, the values of 01d,...,05d can
be constructed using equation (10).60 6d is drawn from its unconditional distribution (it is not correlated with
any of the previously simulated values). ,Id >-A1X0-A2Z0 is drawn from the marginal distribution of ,Id given
(<2+:2)d,(<3+:3)d,(<5+:5)d, <1d, <2d, <3d,<4d,<5d,6d. This process continues until all eighteen conditional
probabilities that appear in equations (C.7) and (C.8) are computed. The probability expression on the last
line of equation (C.8) is conditioned on all of the unobservables that have been simulated in order to compute
the previous seventeen conditional probabilities.
One adjustment is needed to make the likelihood calculation in equation (C.8) feasible. Recall from
Appendix B that our adjustment to the backwards recursion method implies that V*j(A,01) j=C,B,N,A will be
solved for only a set of grid points
which will not be the same as 01d, d=1,...,D. This implies that
d
we must use an approximated value of V*j(A,01 ), j=C,B,N,A for each d=1,...,D in equation (C.8). Consistent
with what is done in Appendix B we interpolate V*j(A,01d) as the weighted average of the values of V*j
associated with the largest grid point less than 01d and the smallest grid point greater than 01d.

60

One minor complication is that the health conditions Zt from equation (10) are not observed in the data in non-survey years
(in our example, years 1 and 4). We simulate the missing (Zt’s (in our example,we would simulate (Z1 and (Z2).

71

Appendix D. Computational Time Issues
In order to make estimation feasible we paid close attention to certain properties of the likelihood
function - specifically we made sure to specify our model in a way such that the derivatives of the likelihood
function with respect to the parameters above are continuous and smooth. This has substantial benefits
because it allows the use of a derivative-based Newton-Raphson parameter updating algorithm which
requires many fewer likelihood function evaluations (and are therefore many times faster) than algorithms
that do not take advantage of derivatives (e.g., simplex methods). Nonetheless, even with an updating
algorithm that does not require large number of likelihood function evaluations, estimation of our specified
model would not be feasible if we were to estimate the model on the fastest single windows-based CPU that
is currently available using numerically computed derivatives of the likelihood function with respect to model
parameters. Specifically, we found that using this approach would require between 100 and 200 days to
compute a single iteration of the Newton-Raphson algorithm.
In order to make estimation feasible we took several steps. First, rather than relying on numerical
derivatives (of the likelihood function with respect to model parameters) which require a likelihood function
evaluation for each parameter in the model we took the painstaking approach of programming analytic
derivatives for all parameters that enter the model.61 Second, rather than relying on a single processor we
took advantage of the parallel processing capabilities of one of the fastest academic supercomputers in North
America which provided us with exclusive access to 48 Compaq Alpha CPU’s for an extended period of
time.62 Finally, as described in Section 4.4, we estimated certain parameters separately from the structural
model. These efforts reduced the time necessary to compute one iteration of the likelihood function to
approximately 9 hours which made estimation time-consuming but feasible given our Newton-Raphson
updating algorithm.

61

The amount of time needed to compute an analytic derivative is much smaller than that needed to compute a numerical
derivative (which requires at least 1 additional likelihood function evaluation for each parameter). One reason for this is
that the analytic derivatives can typically be written as functions of information that has already been computed when
evaluating the likelihood function.

62

See Swann (2002) for a user-friendly description of how to use parallel processing techniques with Maximum Likelihood
estimation algorithms. For some preliminary explorations we used as many as 160 CPU’s. The final numbers in this paper
were generated using 48 CPU’s.

72

Appendix E. The Tradeoff Between Model “Size” and Approximation Quality
It is worth noting that, while the choice set in our model allows individuals to consider a set of work
and non-work activity statuses that is more detailed than that which has typically been allowed in the
retirement literature, it is somewhat parsimonious in the sense that we do not model other types of individual
decisions that take place during the later part of a person’s working life. As one example, as discussed in
Section 2.1, we do not formally model the savings decisions of individuals.
While we recognize that there is a cost to this parsimony, the specification of the choice set was
motivated by the potentially significant cost to expanding the choice set to allow for more endogenous
choices. As discussed in detail in Appendix D, even after taking very substantial steps to reduce
computational time as much as possible, we are currently at the computational edge. As a result, the
computational increase associated with the most obvious expansions of the choice set and the change in the
number of state variables that would accompany such an expansion would imply the necessity of adopting an
approximation method in which value functions are solved for only a small subset of the state points in the
model. While other researchers have recently chosen to take this route, in practice evaluating the quality of
approximation methods that are available when value functions can be solved for only a very small subset of
the state space is extremely difficult for a particular application, and very little evidence exists in the
literature about this issue more generally.63 It was the virtue of avoiding uncertainty about approximation
quality that led to the specification of a parsimonious choice set.64 Nonetheless, while we think our choices
are reasonable, we stress that we have no evidence (or overly strong feelings) about the benefits of our
decision relative to the alternative.

63

While other work also relates to approximation quality (Rust, 1997, Stinebrickner, 2000), the most relevant evidence and
most used methods related to the case of a very large state space is Keane and Wolpin (1994). The majority of the discussion
and evidence in that paper relates to a case where the state space is not very large, but functional form assumptions imply
that closed form solutions do not exist for the value function in a model. As detailed in that paper, when the state space is
very large (so that it is not possible to solve or interpolate value functions for all points in the state space), it is not possible
to use the specification of the interpolating function that was found to be desirable in the case where the state space is not
very large. The two tested interpolating functions that are available in the case of a very large state space lead to biases of
“substantial economic magnitude” in certain parameters.

64

Given our specification which includes a continuous health measure it is not possible to avoid the issues of approximation
quality altogether. However, given the nature of the approximations in our specification, we feel much more comfortable
about our ability to specify a model in which little approximation error exists than we would be if we expanded our choice
set and dealt with the case of a very state space. As one example, as described in Section 3 and appendix B, our
approximation method for dealing with the serially correlated health variable involves interpolating in only a single
dimension and we are able to use a straightforward nonparametric approach with desirable properties.

73

