NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERSONNEL ECONOMICS:
THE ECONOMIST'S VIEW OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Edward P. Lazear
Kathryn L. Shaw
Working Paper 13653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13653

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007

Forthcoming, 2007, Journal of Economic Perspectives. Edward P. Lazear is on leave as Chairman
of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, Washington, D.C. We thank Tim Taylor and Ann
Norman, of the Journal of Economic Perspectives, for their detailed suggestions and editorial assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L. Shaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Personnel Economics: The Economist's View of Human Resources
Edward P. Lazear and Kathryn L. Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 13653
November 2007
JEL No. J01,J24,J3,J31,J32,J33
ABSTRACT
Personnel economics drills deeply into the firm to study human resource management practices like
compensation, hiring practices, training, and teamwork. Many questions are asked. Why should pay
vary across workers within firms--and how "compressed" should pay be within firms? Should firms
pay workers for their performance on the job or for their skills or hours of work? How are pay and
promotions structured across jobs to induce optimal effort from employees? Why do firms use teams
and how are teams used most effectively? How should all these human resource management practices,
from incentive pay to teamwork, be combined within firms? Personnel economics offers new tools
and new answers to these questions.
In this paper, we display the tools and principles of personnel economics through a series of models
aimed at addressing the questions posed above. We focus on the building blocks that form the foundation
of personnel economics: the assumptions that both the worker and the firm are rational maximizing
agents; that labor markets and product markets must reach some price-quantity equilibrium; that markets
are efficient or that market failures have introduced inefficiencies; and that the use of econometrics
and experimental techniques has advanced our ability to identify underlying causal relationships.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
and Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
(on leave)
and NBER
lazear@gsb.stanford.edu
Kathryn L. Shaw
GSB, Littlefield 339
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu

Personnel economics drills deeply into the firm to study human resource management
practices like compensation, hiring practices, training, and teamwork. Many questions are asked.
Why should pay vary across workers within firms—and how “compressed” should pay be within
firms? Should firms pay workers for their performance on the job or for their skills or hours of
work?

How are pay and promotions structured across jobs to induce optimal effort from

employees? Why do firms use teams and how are teams used most effectively? How should all
these human resource management practices, from incentive pay to teamwork, be combined
within firms?

Personnel economists offer new tools to analyze these questions—and new

answers as well.
In the not-too-distant past, the typical textbook on human resources management would
often eschew generalization, arguing that each situation is different. The economist’s approach is
the opposite. Rather than thinking of each human resources event as separate and institutionally
driven, economists place a premium on identifying the underlying general principles, and on
using specific institutional details to identify the causal sources of the general principles. Four
primary building blocks from economics form the foundation of personnel economics: First,
personnel economics assumes that both the worker and the firm are rational maximizing agents,
seeking utility and profits.

Of course, the economic approach allows for constraints or

imperfections, such as imperfect information and transaction costs, and permits an individual’s
utility to be influenced by a variety of factors such as personal identity, competition, and peer
pressure. Second, personnel economists assume that labor markets and product markets must
reach some price–quantity equilibrium, which provides discipline for our models. Third,
efficiency is a central concept of personnel economics. In the many circumstances in which
inefficiencies arise, the economist pushes the analysis to another level by asking where
equilibrating market forces might have failed, and asking what actions firms and/or workers
might take to reduce the inefficiency. Fourth, personnel economists emphasize the use of
econometrics and experimental design to identify underlying causal relationships. For example,
some firms observe that if the firm moves to piece rate pay, productivity rises. However, it turns
out that piece rate pay induces the most productive workers to join the firm, as well as changing
the productivity of existing workers.

3

During the last 25 years, as personnel economics has emerged as a field, human resources
practices have systematically changed. For example, compensation now varies much more
highly across individuals. In 1974, the 90th percentile of wage earners received about 1.9 times
the hourly wage of the 50th percentile, but this multiple has risen steadily over the last three
decades and has now reached about 2.3. Meanwhile the ratio of the hourly wage paid to the 50th
percentile of wage earners compared to the 10th percentile rose somewhat from about 1.9 in 1974
to 2.1 over the next three decades, but since then has sagged back to a ratio of about 2.0. In other
words, wage inequality has risen markedly mainly because the upper tail of high earners has
grown (Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2006, forthcoming). This rising variance of pay has occurred
within occupations and across occupations. The variance of pay has also risen within firms and
across firms.
The rising variance of pay across individuals surely reflects changing demand for skills,
but also is likely to reflect changes in human resource practices. Compensation has shifted
towards pay-for-performance. The proportion of employee’s pay that comes from bonuses rather
than from base salary has increased. Table 1A shows that the share of large firms that have more
than 20 percent of their workforce working with some form of individual incentives, like a
performance bonus, has grown from 38 percent to 67 percent. The percent of firms using any
form of “gain-sharing” or group-based incentives has grown from 26 percent to 53 percent.
Teamwork has become prevalent in many firms. Firms reported pronounced increases in
teamwork since the 1980s, as shown in Table 1B. From 1987 to 1996, the share of large firms
that have more than 20 percent of their workers in problem-solving teams rose from 37 percent
to 66 percent. The percent of large firms with workers in self-managed work teams rose from 27
percent to 78 percent. Team use seems to have reached a plateau in the later 1990s, but it’s a
high-level plateau.
Personnel economics is aimed at modeling firms’ use of optimal management practices
that have contributed to these trends. In what follows, we examine topics that have become
fixtures of personnel economics and attempt to demonstrate how the notions of maximization,
equilibrium, efficiency, and econometric modeling have enabled economists to further the
understanding of human resources management.

4

Promotions and Raises

In many large corporations with hierarchical management structures, wages show
discrete jumps between levels of the hierarchy, rather than continuous increases. For example,
Jack Welch left General Electric in 2001, when he earned $4 million in base pay as chief
executive officer. He was succeeded by Jeffrey Immelt, who earned $2.75 million in base pay in
his first year as chief executive office. But in the previous year, Immelt had been a vice president
earning $1 million (General Electric Corporation, 2001). Why did Immelt’s value to the
company more than double from one day to the next? The annual reports of public companies are
rife with comparable examples in which a job promotion at the upper executive levels brings a
very large salary increase.
In standard human capital theory, wages are determined by skills, and no conceivable
story would allow Immelt’s skills to increase dramatically a few minutes before he was promoted.
Yet this flies in the face of common patterns of managerial compensation. It appears that jobs
themselves—particularly high-level management jobs—play a large role in determining the
wages of the jobholder. When Immelt took the top job at General Electric, reports stated that “the
Welch protégé won a valuable prize” and Welch agreed that “He got a hellava raise, I’ll tell you
that” (“GE’s Talent Agency,” Time, December 3, 2000). Analogously standard notions of
competition do not seem to work in this context either. Why didn’t the other strong candidates
for the chief executive officer job offer to work for wages much lower than those currently being
paid to Immelt, bidding down his wage to close to his previous level?
Something else must be going on. Tournament theory, as it has come to be called,
provides an integrated theory of compensation at different levels of the hierarchy (Lazear and
Rosen, 1981; Green and Stokey, 1983; Nalebuff and Stiglitz, 1983). It addresses how pay raises
are associated with promotions and argues that these compensation levels are not necessarily
linked with a naive notion of productivity. However, productivity in a broader sense does
influence compensation and is in part determined by it, through an incentive structure. At its
heart, tournament theory makes the point that promotions are a relative gain. Individuals are
promoted not on the basis of their absolute performance, but on the basis of their relative
position in the organization. Furthermore, the compensation at one level does not necessarily
serve to motivate individuals currently working at that level, but instead motivates all of those
5

below that level who strive to be promoted. The theory reconciles directly the initial puzzle that
individuals are promoted to jobs and then receive wages associated with those jobs that seem out
of line with their previously recognized skill levels.
Tournament theory begins with the notion that prizes are fixed in advance. In other words,
wages are associated, to a first approximation, with jobs rather than with the individual who
holds the job. A vice president who is promoted to president receives the salary of a president—
even when that salary is considerably different from the salary previously received. Winning that
salary depends on relative performance. Individuals are promoted not because they are good, but
because they are better than others within the relevant group. Promotion is a statement about
relative position within the firm, not necessarily about absolute performance. The best worker
receives the promotion even if many of the other workers are excellent.
The larger the pay spread between promotions, the larger the incentive to put forth effort.
Consider a tennis match where winner and loser both receive the same prize. There is no doubt
that individuals generally prefer to win, because pride and other factors may be involved. But
winning becomes more important if the winner’s prize is significantly larger than the loser’s
prize. In tennis, players may practice harder, forego other competitions, or just focus more on
winning when the prize difference is greater. Similarly, in a corporate hierarchy, a large
difference between the salary of the president and the vice president makes vice presidents more
interested in becoming president, and they put forth considerable effort to get to that job.
Similarly, at lower levels of the hierarchy, newly minted MBAs, lawyers, and assistant
professors work extremely hard so that they can be promoted, or make partner, or obtain tenure.
Accounting firms, law firms, and large corporations all motivate their managerial employees at
least in part by the hope of promotion.
The tournament model also sets limits on the size of pay spreads. Very large pay spreads
induce high effort, but they also create a work environment in the firm that is not very pleasant.
If individuals are working at a very high level of intensity—say, 80–90 hours a week—it will be
necessary to compensate those employees at a very high level. At some point, the additional cost
to sustain that level of effort will not be justified by the output. In addition, individuals who are
competing with one another can either seek to outperform others, or they can contribute to the
failure of others. Such incentives can result in collusion (Dye, 1984) or in sabotage (Lazear,
6

1989). Thus, pay structure must strike a balance between providing incentives for effort and
reducing the adverse consequences associated with this kind of industrial politics.
Outsiders can change the nature of internal tournaments. If workers must compete not
only with their coworkers, but also potentially with those employed in other firms, incentives are
diluted. Chan (1996) argues that this is why firms tend to give preference to insiders over
outsiders.

Outsiders are hired only when they are substantially better than insiders.

The

evidence is that those hired from the outside move on a faster track than the typical insider at the
same position.
Of course, chief executive officers currently receive a significant portion of their
compensation in the form of bonuses or stock and stock options. When Jack Welch retired as
chief executive office of General Electric in 2001, his annual bonus was $12.5 million. During
Immelt’s first year as chief executive officer, his bonus was $3.5 million. This pattern is
consistent with tournament theory because for chief executive officers who are already at the top
rung of the hierarchical ladder, relative compensation cannot serve as their motivation. Because
the output of a chief executive officer is the profitability of the firm, stock and stock options are
a reasonable metric of their output: in effect, chief executive officers switch from tournamentlike pay to piece rate pay (Rosen, 1986).
Tournament theory has significant empirical support. The structure of wages within firms
and their patterns of promotion are generally consistent with tournament theory (DeVaro, 2006;
Eriksson, 1999). The structure of prizes does seem to have a direct effect on the level of effort or
resources devoted to an activity. For example, Knoeber and Thurman (1994) show that the size
of the spread affects output in the broiler chicken industry. Ehrenberg and Bognanno (1990)
were among the first to show that effort was responsive to prizes by looking at the scores that
golfers obtained in contests. In experimental work, subjects behave almost exactly as tournament
theory would suggest (Falk and Fehr, 2006). Drago and Garvey (1998) use a sample of
Australian firms to show that when promotion incentives are strong, individuals put more effort
into their jobs (as measured by absenteeism), but are also less likely to work cooperatively.
For explaining the large discrete jumps in compensation that accompany major
promotions, tournament theory is pretty much the only game in town. It has stood the test of
empirical evidence, it has not been displaced by other theories, and it is consistent with common
sense and standard business vernacular. Indeed, the competition for the job of chief executive
7

officer at General Electric largely came down to three individuals: Jeffrey Immelt, Bob Nardelli,
and Jim McNerney. When Immelt got the job, Nardelli went to Home Depot and McNerney to
3M. When asked later about the competition for the General Electric top job, Bob Nardelli said
“Look, you don’t get to these jobs without being competitive. Any CEO will harbor that
competitive spirit. It’s not against Jeff [Immelt] or Jim [McNerney]. You want to win. You
don’t want to win at their expense, you just want to win” (USA Today, 2007). This language
certainly sounds like someone who recognizes his own participation in a competitive tournament.

Choice of Compensation Structure and the Hiring and Retention of Employees

In some firms, most workers are paid a salary. In other firms, bonuses or performance
pay are a big portion of compensation. A survey done by Payscale.com looked at median salary
and bonuses for a sample of occupations in a major metropolitan area. The median bonus for
administrative assistants, social workers, and nurses is a small percentage of total
compensation—less than 2 percent. The median bonus of a salesperson is $30,000 for
nonpharmaceutical sales and almost $40,000 for pharmaceutical sales. The median salaries of
these types of salespersons are $44,000 and $58,500, respectively, roughly on par with the
median registered nurse’s salary. For salespersons, bonuses make up over 40 percent of total
compensation. Pay on the basis of output also extends to much more highly paid jobs, such as
investment bankers, who are paid for the performance of the merger they just achieved, or hedge
fund managers, who are paid for the performance of the fund they manage. For executive-level
positions such as senior vice presidents and chief executive officers, the portion of compensation
paid in bonuses is even larger, and in fact bonuses often far exceed base salary.
Why do some jobs pay workers an hourly wage or salary and other jobs pay based on the
workers’ performance?

Clearly, part of the answer lies in our examples: it is easier, or less

costly, to measure the output of salespeople than nurses. While the cost of measuring output is
important in our model, we will tie it to other key features of employment that build on the
concepts of equilibrating markets and rational decision makers. We will also suggest answers to
8

some important broader questions: How should firms structure pay for optimal retention of
workers? How should firms avoid losing “star” workers?
Assume that workers in an occupation, such as a portfolio manager at a hedge fund, have
output, q, that varies across workers in the occupation in a typical bell-curve-shaped distribution
shown in Figure 1. Each individual’s output is initially unknown to the firm, because output is
costly to measure. However, the firm can measure each individual’s output at some cost. The
firm has two options. First, the firm can forego measurement, in which case no measurement cost
is incurred and no information about worker ability is ever revealed. A firm of this sort pays a
straight salary, which must equal the average output. Second, the firm can measure the output of
the employees and pay workers according to their individual output, which is “pay for
performance.” In this case, the distribution of pay matches the distribution of output, minus the
measurement costs.
The question is whether the firm should pay a straight salary—pay all workers on the
basis of input and ignore individual variations in output—or pay on the basis of measured
individual output. Thus, workers will be willing to come to a piece rate firm if and only if their
expected pay in a setting of piece rates with measurement exceeds their pay in a setting of salary
without measurement. The key is for a firm to choose the human resources practices—pay-forperformance versus salary—based on the firm’s ability to attract the “right” workers for the firm.
This model provides several important results.
A first implication of this model is that firms will pay for performance when it is cheaper
to measure performance. When measurement costs are low, good workers will demand that their
output be measured. For example, hedge fund trading is cheap to measure—success is readily
quantifiable and relatively near term—so if one firm pays all traders the same mean wage, the
best traders will leave to work for a firm that does pay for their performance (or will start their
own firm). In Figure 1, the best workers, in area A, will leave the hedge fund firm if the firm
pays an average wage rather than using pay for performance. In contrast, in commercial banking,
it takes years for portfolios to mature, so firms pay average wages for input, such as hours at the
loan desk.1 This model is about self-selection, or “fit.” Those people who have the skills for

1

There are other dimensions of output, such as client relations and business development. Sometimes,
compensation schemes build in bonuses for superior performance along these dimensions. Furthermore, revenue is
9

hedge fund trading, such as working under pressure to perform, will gravitate towards this
occupation when it does pay for performance. In contrast, individuals who excel at working with
loan customers will head towards commercial banking. In this case, the firm pays a salary, and
then must screen using interviews, experience, and education, as signals of talent. Alternatively,
if the costs of firing are low, firms will hire a range of workers in the full distribution of Figure 1,
then fire for poor performance (Lazear, 1986). Ultimately, one advantage of pay based on
measured output is that individuals who are not well suited to the required tasks are provided
information that allows them to engage in an alternative activity.
The lower the cost of measuring output, the greater the likelihood that pay is a function of
output. If we look at pay by occupation, we see that pay for output does rise with our general
notion of the ease of measuring output. Empirical research confirms this: Brown (1990) and
Drago and Heywood (1995) show that piece rates are less common when monitoring costs are
higher, a finding in line with the theoretical prediction. (However, Brown (1992) shows that
salaried workers whose salaries are tied to supervisor ratings, do not earn more than their
unsupervised colleagues, in contrast to the theoretical prediction.) We would also expect that, if
the cost of measuring output is decreasing over time—due to information technologies, for
example—then more firms should pay for performance. Anecdotal evidence suggests that these
patterns hold true, although more systematic analysis remains to be done (Andersson, Freedman,
Haltiwanger, Lane, and Shaw, 2006).
A second implication of this model is that firms are more likely to pay for performance as
the worker’s alternative wage offers approach the value at the current firm. When a worker has
alternative high-paying jobs, it is important for the firm to pay the worker for what they produce
or the firm will lose the worker. One example is job-hopping in Silicon Valley (Fallick,
Fleischman, and Rebitzer, forthcoming). In the earlier years, computer programming skills
would often be firm-specific (as for Oracle or Microsoft). As Silicon Valley developed, and
markets thickened, many firms could now make use of what were once firm-specific skills, and
mobility rose. More mobility is consistent with fewer firm-specific skills. It also implies that
wages should be more variable across workers in the new environment.

not profit, so incentives are sometimes made product-specific to prevent salespeople from selling high-price, lowmargin goods.
10

This insight has implications for attracting and retaining workers. Workers with firmspecific human capital will find that current productivity is likely to be much greater than their
alternative productivity in another job, and so they are less likely to be paid on the basis of
output. Being paid for individual performance is also more likely to occur when a worker is
young, before a great deal of specific human capital is acquired. Thus, the best time to sort
workers is when they are young. As a corollary, senior people in the firm are less likely to be
measured. Tenure reviews and decisions to promote to partner take place early in careers for this
reason.
Third, as the lower tail in the distribution of worker quality like Figure 1 gets larger,
performance pay is more likely to be optimal. A larger lower tail means that the value of
weeding out low quality workers rises.
Thus far, we have emphasized how the choice between pay for performance and salary
leads to selection and sorting among workers. Conversely, we have ignored the possibility that
paying for performance can induce people to work harder. Naturally, economists have also
emphasized that some people are likely to work harder when there are tangible rewards. Workers
with a high disutility of effort relative to their output will avoid firms that pay for performance.
Workers are heterogeneous—those who value intrinsic internal motivation more than extrinsic
rewards will gravitate towards jobs with salary or wage-based pay: not everyone would enjoy
the risk and rewards and work environment of being a hedge fund manager. This feature could
be added to the model above, and it would introduce additional issues that we will not expand
upon here. Nonetheless, we can look in the data to see if pay-for-performance raises output.
The likelihood that pay-for-performance will encourage more effort raises some
questions about identifying causal relationships carefully. For example, hedge fund managers
earn more than do commercial bankers. Since hedge fund managers have a larger portion of
income paid in incentive pay, an unwary human resources person might conclude that paying for
output makes workers more productive. However, putting in place an output-based pay plan for
commercial bankers might well provide only very limited results.
Why might this be the case? First, it takes time for those who are best at selling loans to
switch to those jobs. Thus, productivity gains from moving to a commission-based system for
loan officers may be smaller in the short run than in the long run. Second, measuring the
performance of commercial bankers may prove tricky. For example, a bank that sets pay based
11

on the number of loans may find that the rate of loan defaults increases. If a number of those
defaults happen only several years into the future, the commercial bank may find itself better off
just paying salary. Third, loan officers may never be as productive as investment bankers,
because successful investment bankers produce a higher dollar value-added (or productivity) per
unit of effort than do commercial bankers. In keeping with the higher productivity of investment
banking, the firm must hire more highly talented people as investment bankers, and pay them
more. If a human resources manager does not consider such selection effects, the gains from
implementing an incentive pay program may be much lower than expected.
What do the data tell us? Performance pay is used to induce selection by workers into the
right jobs. For example, Lazear (2000) provides an example of a firm that installs windshields:
individual workers drive their trucks to customers with damaged windshields and install new
windshields. When the firm switches from hourly pay to piece rate pay, the average daily
productivity goes from two windshields to three. Some of the increase would be due to the
rewards for performance. About half probably comes from selecting workers who can respond
to those incentives (by exerting more effort) and about half from selecting workers who can
respond to those incentives with high effort or talent.
Numerous other studies find performance gains and selection effects from performance
pay. Other evidence exists on how workers respond when presented with varying compensation
schemes. Asch (1990) presents evidence that Navy recruiters vary their recruitment effort in
response to incentives. Using data on jockeys, Fernie and Metcalf (1999) show that incentive
contracts generate superior performance to other, noncontingent payment systems. Using an
experiment in a tree-planting firm, Shearer (2004) shows a productivity gain of around 20
percent when worker compensation was switched from a fixed wage to a piece rate system.
Freeman and Kleiner (2005) do find that productivity falls when switching from piece rates to
salary pay, but profitability rises because performance pay undermines other goals, such as
lowering inventories. Similarly, Lo, Ghosh, and Lafontaine (2006) show that salesmen of
industrial products are offered contracts with piece rate pay in part to increase personal
performance and in part to induce the selection of salespeople who respond well to that type of
contract. In a survey of firms across industries, Parent (1999) documents the existence of an
incentive effect whereby men who are paid a piece rate are induced to work harder/more
efficiently.
12

Thus, personnel economics provides implications for the structure of pay across
occupations and experience levels. The choice between pay-for-performance and salary is
determined by concerns of economic efficiency in different employment settings, including the
level of measurement costs and the value of screening out workers to specific employers.

Pay Compression

Another element of the choice of compensation is whether, within a firm, the firm’s
pattern of pay for individuals should have less variance than does individual performance. No
systematic data exists on individual output, so no one knows whether pay is generally more
compressed than output within firms.

2

Nevertheless, managers and human resource

professionals within firms do have a sense that pay is more compressed than output, and often
ask the question, how compressed should pay be?
The often-stated objective of a more compressed pay structure is to make pay more
equitable. People do seem to value equity or fairness in pay (Baron and Kreps, 1999). However,
fairness is a slippery concept. Is it fair to pay all workers the same amount, or does fairness
require that workers are paid in proportion to their output? What if output results from inherent
differences in ability rather than choice about effort? If endowed ability is viewed as luck,
should firms ignore these differences? If some firms did ignore differences in innate ability,
what would happen in a competitive market where other firms that do pay on the basis of ability
attract the most able workers and thereby lower costs relative to the compressed wage firms?
There are a number of reasons to believe that some degree of pay compression is an
efficient market outcome. For example, perhaps a greater degree of equity or fairness produces
higher productivity, perhaps through greater teamwork. This trade-off will vary across firms.
For example, in firms with more team-based work, pay should be more compressed for

2

The evidence on this is sketchy because pay and productivity are rarely measured in the same data set. The theory
and popular literature on this are somewhat schizophrenic. In one paper, Frank (1985) argues that pay is compressed
relative to productivity. Years later, Frank (1996) argues that pay is spread out too much because of the winnertake-all nature of pay in some occupations. In one dataset that has productivity and wage data, the variance in
productivity is smaller than the variance in pay (Lazear, 1999b).
13

numerous reasons: equity is more relevant in close comparisons, and individual output that
would attract an outside wage offer is more difficult to disentangle from group results.
In the tournaments model above, workers may distinguish themselves not only by making
themselves look good, but also by making their rivals look bad. When pay or other forms of
rewards are based on relative performance, cooperation is discouraged as workers try to outshine
their competition. To reduce the incentives to undermine coworkers, pay compression becomes
part of optimal contracts. In general, pay compression reduces the incentives to engage in
sabotage or other noncooperative behavior that is induced by the prisoner’s-dilemma-style
payoff structure (Lazear, 1989).
A related idea involves pay compression that results because workers try to influence
their superiors (Milgrom, 1988; Prendergast, 1993). As the gains from appearing better than
another in the firm increase, the incentives to lobby one’s boss become greater. Pay compression
serves to mitigate these effects.
Finally, pay may be compressed because it is efficient to have the firm insure workers
against uncertain outcomes, like bad luck on the job or bad luck when sales fall due to market
conditions. One difficulty with this kind of insurance is that it is subject to severe moral hazard
problems.

If workers know that they will be insured against low productivity outcomes,

incentives to put forth effort are reduced.
It is difficult to test whether firms are compressing pay relative to output. If some firms
compress pay, high-ability workers should leave those firms. Eventually, firms with compressed
pay will be comprised entirely of “average” or below-average workers. In Lazear and Shaw
(forthcoming), we don’t find that that mobility rates are higher for high-wage people in firms
with more compressed pay. But again, the data we have does not measure ability, so firms with
compressed pay may already lack high-ability workers.

Hedonic Wage Analysis and Nonmonetary Job Attributes

Money isn’t everything. Employees care about more than pay. When asked, employees
state that they care about flexible hours of work, comfortable working conditions, colleagues
whom they enjoy, projects on which they enjoy working, and bosses who provide recognition
14

and mentoring. Employees also care about the nonwage benefits, such as health insurance and
pensions. However, preferences for these benefits vary across workers: older workers are more
likely to care about pension benefits or high-quality health insurance than younger ones. The
question is, should the firm offer more pensions, or more health insurance, or flexible hours?
How do benefits affect the amount of base pay offered? The hedonic model of compensation
provides a structure for firms to use in answering these questions.
Benefits are often costly.

This fact is obvious in the case of pensions and health

insurance, but even nonmonetary benefits, such as flexible work hours, can increase coordination
costs for the firm. These benefits can also have productivity-enhancing effects: for example,
pensions may cause productivity to rise as workers invest in more human capital and have a
longer time horizon at the firm (Lazear, 1979), or flexibility may increase productivity as
workers choose when best to work. However, the hedonic model tends to focus on the cost side
of benefits, or at least to assume that productivity enhancements from benefits do not totally
outweigh the costs. In this setting, a trade-off arises—if the firm offers more benefits, it must
offer less pay. How should a firm strike the right balance between wages and benefits?
The key insight of the hedonic model is that a firm should offer the package of pay and
benefits that will attract the workers it desires. The interaction between workers’ preferences, the
firm’s cost structure, and the firm’s desire to attract employees will determine how many
benefits to offer.
The first and perhaps most obvious prediction of the hedonic model is that there is a
negative trade-off between wages and “positive” job attributes, attributes like status or flexibility
in hours of work.
A second key prediction of the hedonic model is that each firm offers the benefits that
will attract the types of workers that the firm values the most. Consider an example from the
software industry. SAS is a firm that produces statistical software licensed to big corporations,
and their product’s value comes from its very high re-licensing rate from its existing customers.
Therefore, SAS wants software programmers who serve customers well by designing product
upgrades that suit customer needs. To attract such programmers, SAS offers pension benefits and
other family-friendly benefits. In contrast, the typical firm in Silicon Valley is less likely to
provide pension benefits. These other software firms value software programmers who are
younger and have the latest programming skills in new technologies. In turn, these young
15

workers prefer high pay (and risky stock options) and state-of-the art programming projects over
pensions.
A market equilibrium sorts workers to their optimal match or “fit” with firms. The firms
that value loyalty among workers, like SAS, will offer pension benefits, and the workers who
want stable long-term jobs will choose these firms and will give up some base salary to get the
pension. The firms that value the skills of a young mobile workforce will not offer pensions, and
the young workers will choose the high pay and stock options of these firms. The model tells us
both how much the firm should offer in benefits and why they should offer particular benefits to
attract certain types of workers.
Does the data support these two predictions of the model? At first glance, the data does
not support the prediction that wages and benefits are negatively correlated. In fact, if we look
at typical job attributes, such as pensions, health insurance, or safe working conditions, there is a
positive correlation between these benefits and pay. As shown in Table 2, the percentage of
individuals covered by employment-based health insurance rises with family income. However,
simple correlations are not a fair test of the hedonic model. Simple correlations always produce
an upward bias (or positive trade-off) because in the cross-sectional sample underlying these
correlations a person’s ability is not observed. People of higher ability will get both higher base
pay and higher benefits than people of lower ability. A college-educated worker typically has
both higher pay and benefits than a high-school educated worker, so as base pay rises, benefits
rise. Since worker ability differences cannot be measured solely by education, cross-sectional
regressions always suffer from an omitted ability bias that produces the positive pay–benefit
correlation.
As a thought exercise, consider the sort of data needed to test for a negative trade-off
between benefits and pay. Collect data on one person’s job offers after they have gone to a
broad range of firms that offer different pay packages, and see if a negative trade-off exists in
their job offers. The closest we can come to this thought experiment is to follow individuals over
time as they change jobs and see if there is a negative trade-off in pay packages. Studies of this
type do find a small negative trade-off (Brown, 1980). However, this approach does not fully
solve the selection problem: after all, individuals do not choose their new jobs randomly. The
average software programmer in Silicon Valley who knows his pay–benefits preferences will not
16

move to SAS; thus, we never estimate the true trade-off. Of course, that is the point of the
model: benefits are used to cause workers to select the firm that values them the most.
This point leads to the test of our second prediction: do firms use benefits to encourage
workers to sort to the firm that values them the most? The evidence shows workers sorting to
firms based on benefits. Oyer (forthcoming) shows that workers match to the firms that offer the
benefits each worker values. Stern (2004) looks at the pay of scientists and finds support for
both predictions of the model. High-quality scientists often take cuts in pay in order to work on
good projects, and firms offer them the projects and pay packages they desire.
After the basic theory of the hedonic model was developed by Rosen (1974; see also
Thaler and Rosen, 1976), empirical methods essential for addressing selection issues evolved,
allowing for new tests of the model.

Methods for thinking experimentally using

nonexperimental data improved our understanding of the hedonic model itself as well as the tests
of it (Epple, 1987).
Viewing seeming nonmonetary attributes of the job as having trade-offs that can be
monetized is a major breakthrough, because it means that any model in personnel economics can
be applied to nonmonetary rewards just as well as to monetary incentives. For example, the
tournaments model above, which discusses motivation in terms of prizes that take the form of
higher salaries, can also be interpreted to refer to prizes that take the form of status or prestige,
not money.
Hedonic analysis as done by economists is very different from approaches taken by other
human resources scholars. The hedonic notion that everything can be monetized is anathema to
the approach taken by industrial psychologists. Instead, those fields tend not to think in terms of
trade-offs, but in terms of status or identity associated with positions (March, 1999). In these
status or identity models, an individual may demand a particular feature of a job because it is
consistent with his identity.

Economists certainly introduce concepts of identity as well, but

identity is added to an equilibrium model of rational decision making (see the next subsection on
teams below).
Personnel economists explicitly think in terms of substitution and trade-offs, and firms
have begun to do so as well. For example, for many years, most firms have had a benefits
department that is distinct from the compensation department. Firms had thought in terms of
providing some market level of each job attribute, rather than thinking in terms of a total package
17

of utility for pay and for benefits. As firms have moved towards an emphasis on human
resources as a strategic decision, these trade-offs are increasingly recognized. Simple evidence
of this change is that workers are now given choices: flex benefits plans allow them to purchase
different amounts of health care versus pay. The hedonic model also tells us that employees will
not be offered the full range of choices. If the firm feels it has the right range of pension–pay
packages to attract the workers it desires, it will not give workers additional choices.
In the personnel economics model, the provision of benefits and nonmonetary job
attributes has little to do with identity or other external factors; instead, it is motivated by rational
behavior and efficiency as firms seek out the kinds of workers they desire.

Team Production

Teamwork has increasingly become a way of life in many firms. From 1987 to 1996, for
example, the share of large firms that have more than 20 percent of their workers in problemsolving teams rose from 37 percent to 66 percent, as shown earlier in Table 1. The percent of
large firms with workers in self-managed work teams rose from 27 percent to 78 percent. Team
use seems to have hit a plateau in the 1990s; but it’s a high plateau.
Why do so many workplaces now use teams? Teams can be time consuming to organize
and coordinate, and the apparent slow progress of teams is nearly proverbial.

Moreover,

managers and team members always worry about the free-rider problem—that indolent
individuals will free-ride on the effort of a few team members. So why do firms use teams?
How should teams be managed? And what types of firms are likely to gain the most from teams?
One reason firms use teams is that team production can be more productive than
individuals working alone. For example, suppose that the goal is to develop a new product.
How should workers be organized to achieve this objective? In Figure 2, two different situations
are depicted. Suppose that two skills, design and operations, are needed to produce a product.
A point in the space reflects the amount of knowledge that an individual has in each of the two
required skills.
In Figure 2A (the left-hand panel), individual 2 is strong on operation skills, but relatively
weak on design skills. Individual 3 is strong on design, but weak on operations. If person 2
needs to think about design, person 3 is a good person to ask. If person 3 needs to think about
18

operations, then person 2 is a good person to ask. If skills are distributed as in the left-hand
panel, then team communication seems best because each person has an absolute advantage in
one of the two skills. With teams, it is as if each member has access the good operations skills of
person 2 and the good design skills of person 3, rather than only their own individual endowment
of these skills. Note also that individual 1 has no area of greatest expertise, but may be
sufficiently cheap to make hiring this person worthwhile.
Suppose instead that the situation is that shown in Figure 2B. Now, person 4 has an
absolute advantage in both design and operations. If person 2 has a question about design,
person 4 is a better resource than person 3. If person 3 has a question about operations, person 4
is a better resource than person 2. This setting is better-suited to a hierarchical organization,
where person 4 is the supervisor to whom all go to consult.
When does the firm choose the Team versus Hierarchy? If individuals like type 4, who
possess an absolute advantage in both skills, are more expensive because they are rare, firms will
choose teams. Which firm types are likely to be willing to pay for the one-dimensional experts
shown in the left-hand panel? Maybe new technologies would be more likely be associated with
firms consisting of teams of experts, because in new technologies, rapid evolution of information
makes it difficult for any one person to have an absolute advantage in everything.

As

technologies mature, very talented individuals may, over time, acquire knowledge in a multitude
of skills, making a hierarchical structure more natural. It is also true that new technologies are
associated with firms that introduce teamwork (Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw, forthcoming;
Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007).
The model of teamwork introduces the importance of complementarity between the skills
of different workers. When the design expert works with the operations expert, they produce a
new product design that is better than the two individuals could have produced working
independently. In other words, workers’ inputs interact multiplicatively, so that each worker’s
marginal product is enhanced by combining effort with another worker who has different skills.
The figure emphasizes several features of team interaction that may be central to creating
value in teamwork: Lazear (1999a) provides more detail. The first feature, which is especially
clear in Figure2A, is “disjointness:” that is, the gains from team interaction are greater when
individuals have different skills or different information. The second feature is relevance: that is,
the skills of team members should not only be nonoverlapping, but also relevant.
19

Third,

teamwork requires communication, which can involve both common jargon and personal
knowledge of each other. Communication costs are likely reduced over time as individuals learn
to speak each others’ languages.
Fourth, firms that need to solve complex problems quickly should use teams; firms that
need to check decisions should be more hierarchical. Consider an example. Coke has invested
heavily in its brand value and the shape of its traditional bottle. Any design alteration by a
product design team should be checked very carefully, by many bosses up the hierarchy, before
any new design could be launched. The example illustrates that team-based decision making is
too costly when the bad decisions of team members can have very negative consequences for the
firm. A generalist, such as person 4, will typically cost more than individual experts. Generalists,
who can check the designs of experts, should be hired as well when the value to the firm is high.
In contrast, a new firm, with no brand value, can risk letting the team of experts decide, because
the risk of making a poor decision is less costly to the firm.
A variety of empirical evidence shows that teamwork can be more productive, for reasons
based in the sources of productivity described above.

The model of worker complementarity

within teams is supported in Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan (2003), which found that adoption
of teams in a garment factory increased productivity on average by 14 percent and that more
heterogeneous teams were more productive than teams of the same ability. Communication is
also very important in teams. In a study of 700 workers in steel mills, workers in the mills with a
team-based environment reported much higher levels of communication with all peers and
supervisors than in the hierarchical mills (Ichniowski and Shaw, 2003). Given the increased
communication required for teamwork, teams are more productive when communication costs
are low. The firms that use teams the most are those that have complex problems to solve. For
example, in a study of steel production, Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw (forthcoming) show that
team systems produce the greatest gains and are more likely to be adopted in steel mills that have
complicated problems to solve because their products are complex.
The economic approach to team configuration is motivated primarily by an emphasis on
complementarity of skills.

Although other disciplines have loosely defined notions of

complementary skills, the rigorous definitions of absolute and comparative advantage in
economics provide specific implications. For example, it is not sufficient that one member has
absolute advantage in a certain skill.

It is necessary to understand the equilibrium wage
20

differentials across individuals of different types to know whether one form of organization like
hierarchy dominates another form like team production.
The U.S. economy has seen pronounced changes in the pricing of skills coinciding with
the rise of teamwork. Since 1987, as discussed earlier, wage inequality has risen markedly,
specifically the gap between the pay of workers at the 90th percentile of the wage distribution and
the median worker has grown yearly (Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2006). In short, the wages of
highly skilled “star” workers have grown relative to the typical employee (Anderson, Freedman,
Halhwanger, Lane, and Shaw, 2006). Are these stars experts, like persons 2 and 3 in Figure 2, or
generalists, like person 4? Perhaps both. Experts are highly valued: the inequality of wages has
risen within very narrowly defined occupations. General skills are also valued: the underlying
skill that is rising in demand (and pay) is “cognitive nonroutine problem solving skills” across all
occupations (Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2003). We do not have national data that combines
information on firms’ use of teams and the skills and wages of their employees. The data does
suggest that firms are increasingly comprised of problem-solving experts, and firms are
increasingly team-based.

The Complementarity of Human Resource Management Practices and Organizational
Transformation

Firms are changing their human resources practices toward more incentive pay and more
teamwork. Yet some managers report that their experiments with new practices have failed (for
examples in the steel industry, see Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1997). Are there general
principles that managers can follow that are more likely to produce successful results when they
implement these practices?
When a new practice is introduced, it often requires supporting practices to be
successful. For example, teams are more productive when workers are better trained, or are
given team-based incentive pay, or are selected carefully for skills that are complementary. If
the firm does not introduce all practices, the teams may well fail to produce higher output.
Human resources practices can be complements, in the sense that doing more of one of them
increases the returns to doing more of the others.
21

Economists and noneconomists both

emphasize the value of complementary practices (for example, Baron and Kreps, 1999; Pfeffer,
1994). Thus, when firms consider alternative human resource management practices, such as
teamwork or incentive pay, they would be wise to consider the value of the collective set of
practices rather than the value of individual practices.
Empirical evidence supports the claim that greater value can be obtained from
introducing a set of complementary practices than from introducing individual human resources
practices. Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997) gather data from four systems of human
resource practices that are used in 35 steel mills. The mills that introduce a complete system of
innovative practices—such as group-based incentive pay, teamwork, careful hiring, high
communications with workers, implicit job security, extensive training, and job flexibility—are
substantially more productive than the mills that introduce a very limited set of teams.
Many other examples of the importance of complementary practices prevail (Roberts,
2004). Southwest Airlines uses a set of labor practices that focus on teamwork, training, and
careful hiring that seem to result in a set of satisfied customers and fast turnaround time for
planes. When traditional airlines attempt to compete with Southwest and fail, it is most likely
because large airlines cannot introduce the entire set of practices that would mimic Southwest
(O’Reilly, 1995).
Because human resources practices form complementary sets, in optimizing production,
the choices firms have before them look like a mountain range—there are local peaks in output
with valleys between them. In a traditional production function, firms increase labor to move up
the peak towards the highest output, then hit diminishing returns to labor and slide down the side
of the mountain.

Instead of choosing amounts of labor, firms are choosing sets of

complementary labor practices (Roberts, 2004).

One peak in output arises when the firm

chooses the complementary set of traditional labor practices: close monitoring of workers, little
problem-solving, and workers doing their jobs alone. If the firm then introduces teams, output
may fall, as this takes time away from production but does not raise output. The firm enters a
valley, and does not get to another, perhaps higher, peak until it combines the entire set of
practices that support teams. In the real world with adjustment costs, firms can’t always make
leaps from peak to peak, and may get trapped in a valley in the short run. Therefore, when firms
change their human resource practices, they must know their ultimate goal and take the risk of a
22

short-term fall in output. Moreover, individual managers cannot be given the power to make
marginal changes in human resources practices.
Returning to the evidence from the steel industry, Ichniowski and Shaw (1995) show that
steel mills rarely make big leaps to highly innovative practices, despite the evidence that the sets
of innovative practices are ultimately successful. More broadly, Baron and Hannan (2002)
follow about 200 start-up companies as they choose their human resources practices and change
their practices over time. The evidence showing that firms form sets of complementary practices
is strong and furthermore confirms that firms have difficulty leaping between these sets (Roberts,
2004).

Conclusion

For most of the last century, personnel, later called human resources management, was
the territory of industrial psychologists and those who studied organizational behavior. But in
the 1970s, economists began to bring the formalism and rigor of economic thinking to human
resources. The model for personnel economics, the field that grew out of that endeavor, was
modern finance. Finance was historically an institutional field without much theoretical or even
empirical underpinning until the modern developments of scholars like Merton Miller, Harry
Markowitz, William Sharpe, Eugene Fama, Fischer Black, Myron Scholes, Robert Merton, and
many others who followed in their footsteps. These scholars transformed the field of finance
into a branch of economics in large part by recognizing that a few basic principles, such as
arbitrage, governed financial markets. Personnel economics has followed a similar path and is
beginning to gain the prominence that modern finance has enjoyed.
What does personnel economics add to traditional methods of studying human resources
management?

Most labor economists who taught in business schools have traditionally

encountered a disinterested audience. Traditional topics of labor supply and demand,
unemployment, and investment in education, which are of primary concern to labor economists,
are almost irrelevant to their business students. The issues studied by human resources specialists
were of interest to economists, but the approach taken by the noneconomists lacked the formal
framework to which economists have grown accustomed. The entry of economists into the field
of human resources management was assisted by breakthroughs in agency and contract theory,
23

which enabled economists to tackle problems that had evaded them in the past. Entry was further
assisted by advancements in econometrics, including ways of addressing sample selection bias,
omitted variable bias, and endogeneity, as well as by the use of panel data, which allowed
economists to formulate and test models in a way that closely approximated experiments in the
use of alternative human resource management practices.
In providing guidance to firms in the choice of their human resource management
practices, several themes have emerged. Many of the models emphasize the importance of “fit.”
Firms and workers achieve fit when a worker’s skill set, broadly understood, is matched to the
firm that values it the most. Workers, or potential employees, have very heterogeneous skills and
preferences. Because measuring the output of individual workers is often difficult, it becomes
especially important to think about the incentives workers face. Pay for performance may not
just induce the higher effort levels, but may also induce workers to select the firm that is the best
fit for their skills, effort, and tastes. Personnel economics emphasizes the importance of human
resources practices for inducing workers’ self-sorting to firms.
Better fit or performance is achieved when complementary people are matched to each
other within the firm, or when complementary human resources practices are matched to each
other. People are complements when the skills of one enhance those of another within their team.
Human resources practices are complements when one practice—such as teamwork—is
combined with another practice—such as group-based incentive pay—such that together they
raise output more than would either practice independently
Alfred Marshall’s ([1890] 1961) famous statement that it is not the economist’s business
to tell the brewer how to brew beer has not been adhered to when it comes to personnel
economics.

Personnel economists, at least in their interactions with business students and

practitioners, are attempting to use the tools of economics to understand, and even sometimes to
guide, practices.

24

References

Akerlof, George, and Kranton, Rachel. 2000. “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115 (August): 715–53.
Alchian, Armen A., and Demsetz, Harold. 1972. “Production, Information Costs, and
Economic Organization.” The American Economic Review, 62(5): 777–95.
Andersson, Fredrik, Matthew Freedman, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kathryn
Shaw. 2006. “Reaching for the Stars: Who Pays for Talent in Innovative Industries?” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12435.
Asch, Beth J. 1990. “Do Incentives Matter? The Case of Navy Recruiters.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, February, 43(special issue): s89–s106.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2005. “Rising Wage Inequality:
The Role of Composition and Prices.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
11628.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2006. “The Polarization of the
U.S. Labor Market.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11986.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. Forthcoming. “Trends in U.S.
Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Autor, David H, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of
Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration”. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4):
1279–1333.
Baily, Martin N. 1977. “On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment.” Econometrica
45(5): 1043–63. .
Baron, James, and Michael Hannan. 2002. “Organizational Blueprints for Success in
High-Tech Start-Ups: Lessons from the Stanford Project.” California Management Review,
Spring, 44(3): 8–36.
Baron, Jim, and David Kreps. 1999. Strategic Human Resources: Frameworks for
General Managers. New York: John Wiley.
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. Forthcoming(November). “How
Does Information Technology affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product
Innovation, Process Improvement and Worker Skills,”. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
25

Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. Forthcoming. “Measuring and
Explaining Management Practices across Firms and Countries.”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
November.
Boning, Brent, Ichniowski, Casey, and Shaw, Kathryn. Forthcoming. “Opportunity
Counts: Teams and the Effectiveness of Production Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics.
Brown, Charles. 1980. “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 94(February): 113–34.
Brown, Charles. 1990. “Firms’ Choice of Method of Pay.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, February, 43(1): 165S–182S.
Brown, Charles. 1992. “Wage Levels and Methods of Pay.” RAND Journal of
Economics, 23(Autumn): 366–75.
Chan, William. 1996. “External Recruitment versus Internal Promotion.” Journal of
Labor Economics, October, 14(4): 555–70.
Cheung, Steven N. S. 1969. The Theory of Share Tenancy: With Special Application to
Asian Agriculture and the First Phase of Taiwan Land Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
DeVaro, Jed. 2006. “Internal Promotion Competitions in Firms.” The Rand Journal of
Economics, 37(3), 521–42.

the

Drago Robert, and Gerald T. Garvey. 1998. “Incentives for Helping on
Job: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(1):1–25.

Drago, R., and Heywood, J. S. 1995. “The Choice of Payment Schemes: Australian
Establishment Data.” Industrial Relations, October, 34(4): 507–31.
Dye, Ronald A. 1984.”The Trouble with Tournaments.” Economic Inquiry, 22(1), 147–
49.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Michael L. Bognanno. 1990. “Do Tournaments Have
Incentive
Effects?”
Journal
of
Political
Economy,
98(6):
1307–24.
Epple, Dennis. 1987. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and
Supply Functions for Differentiated Products.” Journal of Political Economy, 95(February): 59–
80.
Eriksson, Tor. 1999. “Executive Compensation and Tournament Theory: Empirical
Tests on Danish Data.” Journal of Labor Economics, April, 17(2): 262–80.
26

Falk, Armin, and Ernst Fehr. 2006. “The Power and Limits of Tournament Incentives
the Impact of Sabotage, Social Norms and Loss Aversion.” Unpublished paper.
Fallick, Bruce, Charles A. Fleischmann, and James B. Rebitzer. Forthcoming. “Job
Hopping in Silicon Valley: The Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster.” Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Fernie, Sue, and David Metcalf. 1999. “It’s Not What You Pay It’s the Way That You
Pay It and That’s What Gets Results: Jockeys’ Pay and Performance.” Labour: Review of Labour
Economics and Industrial Relations, June 13(2): 385–411.
Frank, Robert H. 1984. “Interdependent Preferences and the Competitive Wage
Structure.” RAND Journal of Economics, 15(Winter): 510–20.
Frank, Robert H. 1985. Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for
Status. New York: Oxford University Press.
Frank, Robert H1996. The Winner-Take-All Society. New York: Penguin Books.
Freeman, Richard, and Morris Kleiner. 2005. “The Last American Shoe
Manufacturer: Decreasing Productivity and Increasing Profits in the Shift from Piece Rates to
Continuous flow production”. Industrial Relations, April, 44(2): 307–30.
General Electric Corporation. 2001. Annual Report.
Gordon, Donald F. 1974. “A Neoclassical Theory of Keynesian Unemployment.”
Economic Inquiry, 12(December): 431–59.
Green, Jerry R. and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. “A Comparison of Tournaments and
Contracts.” The
Journal
of
Political
Economy, 91(3), 349–64.
Griliches, Zvi. 1977. “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric
Problems.” Econometrica, 45(January): 1–22.
Hamilton, Barton, Jack Nickerson, and Hideo Owan. 2003. “Team Incentives and
Worker Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and
Participation.” Journal of Political Economy, June, 111(3): 465–97.
Hausman, Jerry A., and William E. Taylor. 1981. “Panel Data and Unobservable
Individual Effects.” Econometrica, 49(November): 1377–98.
Heckman, James. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica,
47(January): 153–61.

27

Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn Shaw. 1995. “Old Dogs and New Tricks:
Determinants of the Adoption of Productivity-Enhancing Work Practices.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1995, . 1–65.
Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn Shaw. 2003. “Connective Capital: Building Problemsolving Networks within Firms.” Unpublished paper.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. “The Effects of
Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines.” The
American Economic Review, 86(3): 291–313.
Johnson, D. Gale. 1950. “Resource Allocation under Share Contracts.” Journal of
Political Economy, 58(2): 111–23.
Kandel, Eugene, and Edward Lazear. “Peer Pressure and Partnerships.” 1992. Journal
of Political Economy, 100(August): 801–817.
Knoeber, Charles R., and Walter N. Thurman. 1994. “Testing the Theory of
Tournaments: An Empirical Analysis of Broiler Production.” Journal of Labor Economics, April,
12(2): 155–79.
Lawler, Edward E., III, Susan Albers Mohrman, and George Benson. 2001.
Organizing for High Performance: Employee Involvement, TQM, Reengineering, and
Knowledge Management in the Fortune 1000. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lawler, Edward E., III, Susan Albers Mohrman, and Gerald E. Ledford Jr. 1995.
Creating High Performance Organizations: Practices and Results of Employee Involvement and
TQM in Fortune 1000 Companies. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lazear, Edward P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political
Economy,
87(6),
1261–84.
Lazear, Edward P. 1986. “Salaries and Piece Rates.” Journal of Business, 59(July):
405–31.
Lazear, Edward P. 1989. “Pay Equality and Industrial Politics.” Journal of Political
Economy, 97(June): 561–80.
Lazear, Edward P. 1999a. “Globalization and the Market for Teammates.” The
Economic Journal, 109(March): C15–C40.
Lazear, Edward P. 1999b. “Personnel Economics: Past Lessons and Future Directions.”
Presidential Address to the Society of Labor Economists, San Francisco, May 1, 1998. Journal of
Labor Economics, April, 17(2): 199–236.

28

Lazear, Edward P. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” American Economic
Review, December, 90(5): 1346–61.
Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum
Labor Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy, October, 89(5): 841–64.
Lazear, Edward, and Kathryn Shaw. Forthcoming. “Wage Structure, Wages, and
Mobility.” In An International Comparison of the Structure of Wages, ed. Edward Lazear and
Kathryn Shaw. University of Chicago.
Lo, Desmond, Mrinal Ghosh, and Francine Lafontaine. 2006. “The Role of Risk,
Incentives, and Selection in Salesforce Compensation Contracts.” Unpublished paper, Ross
School of Business, University of Michigan, May.
Main, Brian G. M., Charles A. O’Reilly III, and James Wade. 1993. “Top Executive
Pay: Tournament or Teamwork?” Journal of Labor Economics, October, 11(4): 606–28.
March, James. 1999. The Pursuit of Organizational Intelligence. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishers Inc.
Marshall, Alfred P. [1890] 1961. Principles of Economics. New York: Macmillan.
Milgrom, Paul R. 1988. “Employment Contracts, Influence Activities, and Efficient
Organization Design.'' Journal of Political Economy, 96(February): 42–60.
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts. 1990. “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing:
Technology, Strategy, and Organizations.” American Economic Review, June, 80(3): 511–28.
Nalebuff, Barry J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1983. “Prizes and Incentives: Towards a
General Theory of Compensation and Competition.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 14(1), 21–
43.
O'Reilly III, Charles A. 1995. “Southwest Airlines: Using Human Resources for
Competitive Advantage (A).” Stanford Case No. HR-1A. Stanford, CA: Stanford Graduate
School of Business.
Oyer, Paul. 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Non-Linear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on
Business Seasonality.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(February): 149–85.
Oyer, Paul. Forthcoming. “Salary or Benefits?” Research in Labor Economics.
Parent, Daniel. 1999. “Methods of Pay and Earnings: A Longitudinal Analysis.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October, 53(1): 71–86.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1994. Competitive Advantage through People. Harvard Business School
Press.
29

Prendergast, Canice. 1993. “The Role of Promotion in Inducing Specific Human
Capital Acquisition.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2): 523–534.
Prendergast, Canice, and Robert H. Topel. 1996. “Favoritism in Organizations.”
Journal of Political Economy, October, 104(5): 958–78.
Roberts, John. 2004. The Modern Firm: Organizational Design for Performance and
Growth. Oxford University Press.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in
Pure Competition.” Journal of Political Economy, 82(January/February): 34–55.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments.” American
Economic Review, September, 76(4): 701–715.
Ross, Stephen A. 1973. “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem.”
American Economic Review, 63(2): 134–39.
Shearer, Bruce. 2004. “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence from a Field
Experiment.” Review of Economic Studies, 71(April): 513–34.
Stern, Scott. 2004. “Do Scientists Pay to be Scientists?” Management Science, 50(June):
835–53.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1975. “Incentives, Risk, and Information: Notes toward a Theory of
Hierarchy.” Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, 6(August): 552–79.
Time. 2000. “GE’s Talent Agency.” December 3.
Thaler, Richard, and Sherwin Rosen. 1976. “The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence
from the Labor Market.” In Household Production and Consumption, ed. Nestor E. Terlecky.
Studies in Income and Wealth 40. New York: Columbia University Press (for NBER), pp. 412–
42.
USA Today. 2007. “Home Depot’s new CEO is also a GE alum.” January 13.

30

Figure 1
Paying for Input versus Paying for Output

Wage rate

Note: Without measuring individual output (q), the firm pays wage1, which is the mean of output
across all workers. After incurring fixed measurement costs, the firm pays all individuals the
distribution of wages labeled wage2. If the firm does not bear these measurement costs, the best
workers in area A will leave the firm for other firms that do measure their individual output.

31

Figure 2
When to Use Teams

A: Team of Experts

B: Hierarchy of Generalists

32

Table 1
Human Resource Management Practices in Large Firms
A: Incentive Pay
% of firms with . . .

1987
1990
1993
1996
1999

individual
incentives,
like
performance
bonuses
83
90
90
91
93

more than
20% of
employees
having
individual
incentives
38
45
50
57
67

gainsharing
26
39
42
45
53

more than
20% of
employees
having
gainsharing
7
11
16
19
24

more than
20% of
employees
skill-based having skillbased pay
pay
40
15
51
17
60
23
72
22
72
26

B: Teamwork
% of firms with . . .

1987
1990
1993
1996
1999

teams
70
86
91
94
84

20% or more
employees in
teams
37
51
65
66
61

self-managed
teams
27
47
62
78
72

20% or more
in selfmanaged teams
7
10
20
32
28

more than 20%
given teambuilding skills
54
55
75
78
76

Source: Lawler, Mohrman, and Benson, (2001), Lawler, Mohrman, and Ledford (1995).

33

Table 2
Percentage of Individuals Covered by Employment-Based Health Insurance
(by family income)

Family Income

Total

Covered by
employment-based
health care

As a
percent of
total

Whites
All Whites
<$25,000
$25,000–$49,000
$50,000–$74,999
$75,000 or more

240,909
52,424
59,753
46,360
82,372

147,367
11,996
32,561
34,111
68,699

0.61
0.23
0.54
0.74
0.83

Blacks
All Blacks
<$25,000
$25,000–$49,000
$50,000–$74,999
$75,000 or more

36,965
14,578
9,944
5,844
6,599

18,003
3,156
5,483
4,042
5,322

0.49
0.22
0.55
0.69
0.81

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2006, Annual Social and
Economic Supplement.

34

