                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EVALUATING ASSET PRICING MODELS WITH LIMITED COMMITMENT USING
                   HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION DATA

                                           Dirk Krueger
                                           Hanno Lustig
                                           Fabrizio Perri

                                       Working Paper 13650
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13650


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We thank seminar participants at the 2006 EEA Meetings in Vienna and the 2007 AEA Meetings in
Chicago for helpful comments and the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Dirk Krueger, Hanno Lustig, and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating Asset Pricing Models with Limited Commitment using Household Consumption
Data
Dirk Krueger, Hanno Lustig, and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 13650
November 2007
JEL No. D52,D53,E44,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

We evaluate the asset pricing implications of a class of models in which risk sharing is imperfect because
of limited enforcement of intertemporal contracts. Lustig (2004) has shown that in such a model the
asset pricing kernel can be written as a simple function of the aggregate consumption growth rate and
the growth rate of consumption of the set of households that do not face binding enforcement constraints.
These unconstrained households have lower consumption growth rates than all other households in
the economy. We use household data on consumption growth from the U.S. Consumer Expenditure
Survey to identify unconstrained households, to estimate the pricing kernel implied by these models
and evaluate their performance in pricing aggregate risk. We find that for high values of the relative
risk aversion coefficient, the limited enforcement pricing kernel generates a market price of risk that
is substantially closer to the data than the one obtained using the standard complete markets asset pricing
kernel.


Dirk Krueger                                         Fabrizio Perri
Department of Economics                              University of Minnesota
University of Pennsylvania                           Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk                                     1169 Heller Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104                               Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER                                             and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu                              fperri@umn.edu

Hanno Lustig
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
hlustig@econ.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

Consumption-based asset pricing kernels derived under the complete risk sharing, repre-
sentative agent (RA) assumption have a hard time explaining the observed large equity
premium (see e.g. Mehra and Prescott, 1985). Models in which the sharing of idiosyncratic
risk is limited have the potential to solve the puzzle (see for example Constantinides and
Duffie, 1996). In these models, the asset pricing kernel, in general, does not only depend
on aggregate consumption but also on the entire distribution of consumption across agents.
Different models provide different links between the distribution of consumption and as-
set pricing kernels. An important task is to evaluate whether these models are useful in
solving the equity premium puzzle. Recently some studies have done work along this line,
either evaluating several types of incomplete risk sharing models (see for example Attanasio,
Banks and Tanner, 2002, Brav, Constantinides and Geczy, 2002, Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002
and Kocherlakota and Pistaferri, 2006) or exploring the empirical link between asset prices
and higher moments of the consumption growth distribution (Cogley, 2002).
    This paper contributes to this research agenda. It evaluates the asset pricing implica-
tions of a class of models in which risk sharing is imperfect because of the limited enforce-
ment (henceforth LE) of intertemporal contracts, as in Thomas and Worrall (1988) or Kehoe
and Levine (1993). No restrictions are imposed on the menu of traded assets. Alvarez and
Jermann (2001) have explored the asset pricing implications of LE in a two agent economy,
but they have not evaluated its empirical implications for the cross-sectional distribution of
consumption and asset prices. Lustig (2004) has shown that in a version of this model with
a continuum of agents the asset pricing kernel can be written as a simple function of the
growth rate of consumption of the set of households that do not face binding enforcement
constraints in the current state of the world. These unconstrained households have lower
consumption growth rates than households that face binding enforcement constraints. This
implication of the model allows us to identify unconstrained households as those in the



                                              1
lower tail of the cross-sectional consumption growth distribution.
    We construct the LE pricing kernel using data on household consumption expenditures
from the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) and evaluate its performance in pric-
ing aggregate risk. We show that the LE pricing kernel can be estimated using a simple
modification of the standard RA pricing kernel. As documented in previous studies, the
RA pricing kernel only explains a small part of the equity premium. The power of the
LE pricing kernel depends crucially on how we identify unconstrained households but, in
general, it explains a larger fraction of the equity premium than the RA pricing kernel.


2     The Model

We consider a pure exchange economy with a continuum of agents that face aggregate and
idiosyncratic endowment shocks, trade state-contingent claims to consumption on compet-
itive markets and face solvency constraints that limit the extent to which agents can go
short in these consumption claims. In this section we first describe the underlying physical
environment and the market structure, then we define a competitive equilibrium and finally
we provide a characterization of the asset pricing kernel implied by this model.


2.1    Physical Environment

We denote the current aggregate shock by zt ∈ Z and the current idiosyncratic shock by
yt ∈ Y , with Z and Y finite. Let z t = (z0 , . . . , zt ) and y t = (y0 , . . . , yt ) denote the history
of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. We use the notation st = (yt , zt ) and st = (y t , z t )
and let the economy start at initial node z0 . Conditional on idiosyncratic shock y0 and thus
s0 = (y0 , z0 ), the probability of a history st is given by π t (st |s0 ). Individual endowments
are given by et (st ).
    At time 0 households are indexed by their idiosyncratic income shock y0 and their initial
asset position a0 . We denote by Θ0 (y0 , a0 ) the initial distribution of agents over (y0 , a0 ); this


                                                    2
initial distribution, together with the initial aggregate shock z0 serves as initial condition
for our economy.
       Consumers rank stochastic consumption streams ct (a0 , st ) according to
                                                    


                                                  ∞ X                                       1−γ
                                                  X
                                                                 t     t    ct (a0 , st )
                              U (c)(s0 ) =                      β π(s |s0 )                                  (1)
                                                                              1−γ
                                                  t=0 st ≥s   0




where γ > 0 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion and β ∈ (0, 1) is the constant time
discount factor.


2.2      Market Structure

Households can trade a complete set of contingent consumption claims at (a0 , st , st+1 ) at
                                                                    

prices qt (st , st+1 ). Thus their budget constraints read as

                                   X
                 ct (a0 , st ) +          qt (st , st+1 )at (a0 , st , st+1 ) = et (st ) + at−1 (a0 , st )   (2)
                                   st+1


These trades are subject to solvency constraints J(a0 , st , st+1 ) such that
                                                



                                          −at (a0 , st , st+1 ) ≤ J(a0 , st , st+1 )                         (3)


The solvency constraints, precisely spelled out below, are not too tight, in the sense of
Alvarez and Jermann (2000): a household that has borrowed exactly up to the constraint
(that is −at (a0 , st , st+1 ) = J(a0 , , st , st+1 )) is indifferent between defaulting on her debt
(and suffering the corresponding consequences spelled out below) and repaying (and thus
avoiding these consequences). In the standard complete markets model J(a0 , st , st+1 ) = ∞,
since in that model households can fully commit to repay any debt they take on.2
       Denote by V (a, st ) the maximized continuation expected lifetime utility an agent can
   2
    Of course, even in this model an appropriately chosen no-Ponzi constraint is needed to make the house-
hold decision problem well-defined.


                                                                3
attain, if she comes into the current period with assets at−1 (a0 , st ) = a and faces constraints
(2) and (3). Furthermore let V Aut (st ) denote the expected lifetime utility of an agent from
consuming the autarkic allocation ct (a0 , st ) = et (st ) from node st on.3 Finally let cat denote
aggregate consumption (equal to the aggregate endowment). The market clearing condition
reads as

           XZ                                   XZ
                           t     t
                   ct (a0 , s )π(s |s0 )dΘ0 =           et (st )π(st |s0 )dΘ0 ≡ cat (z t ) for all z t .   (4)
            st                                   st


2.3    Equilibrium

We are now ready to define an equilibrium for this economy.

Definition 1 Given z0 and an initial distribution Θ0 (y0 , a0 ), an equilibrium with solvency
constraints J(a0 , st , st+1 ) that are not to tight are consumption and asset allocations
                  

  ct (a0 , st ), at (a0 , st , st+1 ) and prices qt (st , st+1 ) such that
                                               


   1. Given prices qt (st , st+1 ) and constraints J(a0 , st , st+1 ) , for all (y0 , a0 ) allocation
                                                          

        ct (a0 , st ), at (a0 , st , st+1 ) maximizes (1) subject to (2) and (3).
      


   2. The solvency constraints are not too tight, that is, satisfy, for all (y0 , a0 ) and all st+1 ,


                                     V (J(a0 , st , st+1 ), st+1 ) = V Aut (st+1 ).


   3. Market clearing: Equation (4) holds.


2.4    Characterization of Equilibria

Let (y0 , a0 ) denote the characteristics of a generic household. In order to characterize
equilibrium consumption allocations and the pricing kernel we make use of cumulative
   3
     The specification of the outside option as autarky is done for simplicity. Any other specification of the
outside option that is only a function of (a, st ) gives rise to the same characterization of the asset pricing
kernel derived below.


                                                       4
Lagrange multipliers {ξ t (y0 , a0 )}, in the spirit of Marcet and Marimon (1998). In period
0 there is a one to one map between Lagrange multipliers ξ 0 and initial wealth a0 . Thus
let the initial distribution of Lagrange multipliers associated with the distribution of initial
wealth Θ0 (y0 , a0 ) be denoted by Φ0 (y0 , ξ 0 ). Henceforth we will use the notation ξ t (y0 , a0 )
and ξ t (y0 , ξ 0 ) interchangeably. Over time these Lagrange multipliers increase whenever
the solvency constraint of a household binds, and remains unchanged otherwise. Crucially,
this implies that for all agents that are unconstrained in a current state, their Lagrange
multipliers all remain unchanged.
    As shown by Lustig (2004) the consumption process of a given household is related to
aggregate consumption (endowment) by the risk sharing rule

                                                                           1/γ cat (z t )
                                           ct (ξ 0 , st ) = ξ t (ξ 0 , st )
                                                           
                                                                                                 (5)
                                                                                ht (z t )

where
                                                          Z
                                                   t
                                                                              1/γ
                                                               ξ t (ξ 0 , st )
                                                              
                                             ht (z ) =                             dΦt

and Φt is the cross-sectional measure over consumption weights (Lagrange multipliers)
ξ t (ξ 0 , st ) in period t, state z t .
    To rule out arbitrage opportunities, payoffs in state z t+1 are priced off the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution (IMRS) of those agents who do not face any binding constraints
in transferring resources to and from that state (see Alvarez and Jermann, 2000). Let
U C(st , st+1 ) denote the set of these agents. The stochastic discount factor is the IMRS of
those agents with labels ξ ∗0 ∈ U C(st , st+1 ), who are unconstrained in state st in their sale
of securities that deliver goods in state st+1 :
                                                                                          −γ
                                                                    ct+1 (ξ ∗0 , st+1 )
                                                                
                                     mLE
                                      t+1 (z
                                             t+1
                                                 )       =β
                                                                      ct (ξ ∗0 , st )

The risk sharing rule in (5) and the fact that for all unconstrained agents the consumption


                                                                 5
weights do not change ξ t+1 (ξ ∗0 , st+1 ) = ξ t (ξ ∗0 , st ) then immediately imply that the pricing
kernel is given by:
                                                                         −γ
                                                        cat+1 (z t+1 )
                                                    
                                                                                t+1 γ
                             mLE
                              t+1 (z
                                     t+1
                                         )    =β                                g(z )            (6)
                                                           cat (z t )
                    ht+1 (z t+1 )
where g(z t+1 ) =     ht (z t ) .   Note that in the standard complete markets model the solvency
constraints are never binding, thus the distribution of consumption weights (Lagrange mul-
tipliers) is never changing, and consequently ht+1 (z t+1 ) = ht (z t ) and g(z t+1 ) = 1 for all
z t+1 . Therefore, we recover the well-known stochastic discount factor of the RA model

                                                                                 −γ
                                                                cat+1 (z t+1 )
                                                            
                                     mRA
                                      t+1 (z
                                             t+1
                                                 )    =β                                         (7)
                                                                   cat (z t )

The only effect of LE on asset prices is the component contributed by the shocks to the
cross-sectional distribution of consumption weights ht+1 (z t+1 )/ht (z t ).


2.5    Implementation

In order to generate an empirical time series for the LE stochastic discount factor in (6)
from cross-sectional consumption data we need to estimate the aggregate consumption
growth rate (readily available from NIPA) and the growth rate of the consumption weight
distribution:
                                                            ht+1 (z t+1 )
                                             g(z t+1 ) =                  .
                                                              ht (z t )

From the risk sharing rule in (5) we know that this moment of the consumption weight
distribution satisfies:
                                                                 1/γ cat (z t )
                                      ht (z t ) = ξ t (ξ 0 , st )
                                                 
                                                                     ct (ξ 0 , st )




                                                            6
For all unconstrained households the consumption weight does not change in state st+1 , i.e.
ξ t+1 (ξ 0 , st+1 ) = ξ t (ξ 0 , st ), and hence their consumption growth rate satisfies:

                                      ht+1 (z t+1 )   cat+1 (z t+1 )     ct (ξ 0 , st )
                        g(z t+1 ) =                 =                ∗
                                        ht (z t )        cat (z t )    ct+1 (ξ 0 , st+1 )

All unconstrained households have the same growth rate of consumption

                               cat+1 (z t+1 )/ht+1 (z t+1 )
               ct+1 (ξ 0 , st+1 )
                                    =                             := g U C (z t+1 ) or
                 ct (ξ 0 , st )      cat (z t )/ht (z t )
                                                                      −1
                                  ct+1 (ξ 0 , st+1 )/cat+1 (z t+1 )              g a (z t+1 )
                               
                          t+1
                       g(z ) =                                              =                  ,   (8)
                                        ct (ξ 0 , st )/cat (z t )               g U C (z t+1 )

where g a (z t+1 ) is the growth rate of aggregate consumption and g U C (z t+1 ) is the common
consumption growth rate of currently unconstrained households. Expression (8) suggests
that the term g(z t+1 ) can be measured using the consumption growth of unconstrained
households g U C (z t+1 ) relative to the growth rate of aggregate consumption. The key ques-
tion we deal with in the next section is how to identify unconstrained households in the
data.


3     Testing the Empirical Asset Pricing Implications

3.1     Data

The crucial difference between the RA and the LE pricing kernel is that the former can be
estimated using aggregate consumption data while for the latter we need to measure the
consumption growth rate of a specific group of households (the unconstrained). Therefore
household level consumption growth data is needed. The U.S. Consumer Expenditure
Survey provides such data since the majority of households sampled in this data set reports
consumption expenditures for at least two subsequent quarters.
    We use quarterly data from 1980.1 to 2006.1. For each quarter t we select all house-


                                                        7
holds which are complete income respondents and which report positive expenditures on
nondurable goods and services for quarters t and t + 1. For each household we then com-
pute quarterly growth rates of real (each component is deflated with specific CPI’s), per-
adult equivalent expenditures on nondurables (this includes nondurable goods and services,
excluding services from housing). We have a total of 307778 consumption growth rate
observations.4
       The return data comes from the CRSP (the Center for Research on Securities Prices).
As stock returns we use the quarterly value-weighted return on the entire US market
(NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ), deflated by the inflation rate computed from the Consumer
Price Index by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Bond returns are based on the average yield
of a 3-month US T-bill, again deflated by the CPI.


3.2      Empirical Construction of the Asset Pricing Kernels

The model predicts that in each period all unconstrained agents share the same consump-
tion growth rate, and that this growth rate is the lowest growth rate across all households.
So, interpreting the model literally, one could obtain ĝ(z t+1 ), the empirical estimate of
g(z t+1 ) over the period 1980.1-2005.4, as simply the ratio between the average consump-
tion growth rate and the minimum (across households) consumption growth rate in a given
quarter. Obviously in the data there is significant measurement error in consumption. Also,
consumption growth in the data is likely to depend on idiosyncratic events (for example
changes in personal health, or educational expenses) which are not explicitly considered
in our model. For these reasons this procedure would not be a very robust way of se-
lecting the relative consumption growth of unconstrained households. Instead we identify
unconstrained households as all households having consumption growth lower than a certain
   4
    Due to a change in the household sample there are no observations in the last quarter of 1985. For more
details on the deflation method and on the categories included in nondurable consumption expenditures see
appendix A in Krueger and Perri (2006)




                                                    8
treshold ḡ(z t+1 ) and then we obtain the following estimate for g(z t+1 )

                                                                                       t+1 )
                                                                             P
                                                                               i ci (z
                                                     ĝ a (z t+1 )            P          t
                                                                                 i ci (z )
                                  ĝ(z t+1 ) =                        =     P            t+1 )
                                                  ĝ U C (z t+1 )            i∈U ci (z
                                                                                           t)
                                                                             P
                                                                              i∈U i  c  (z

                                                           ci (z t+1 )
                         where U (z t+1 ) = {i :                       ≤ ḡ(z t+1 )}
                                                            ci (z t )

    An important issue is how to set the threshold ḡ(z t+1 ). We start with a natural initial
guess which is ḡ(z t+1 ) = ĝ a (z t+1 ) (so that unconstrained households in a given quarter
are all households who report consumption growth lower than aggregate growth in that
quarter); we also experiment with other possibilities. Once ĝ(z t+1 ) has been constructed
using CE household data and deseasonalized, it is easy to construct a time series for the
LE pricing kernel according to (6). For a given risk aversion γ, time discount factor β and
                                             ca
                                              t+1 (z
                                                     t+1 )
aggregate growth rate of consumption             a
                                                ct (z t )    the LE pricing kernel is given by

                                                                      −γ
                                                     cat+1 (z t+1 )
                                                 
                             m̂LE
                               t+1 (γ, β) = β                                  gt+1 )γ
                                                                              (b                     (9)
                                                        cat (z t )

where the aggregate growth rate of consumption is constructed using deseasonalized NIPA
consumption data.5
    Below we discuss the asset pricing properties of m̂LE
                                                       t+1 (γ, β) together with those of the

stochastic discount factor of the standard representative agent model, m̂RA
                                                                         t+1 (γ, β), which

can be estimated using only NIPA data and is given by

                                                                            −γ
                                                           cat+1 (z t+1 )
                                                      
                                 m̂RA
                                   t+1 (γ, β)   =β                                 .
                                                              cat (z t )
   5
     The definition of NIPA consumption used to compute the aggregate consumption growth rate includes
real expenditures on nondurable goods and services (excluding housing). It therefore includes the same
categories of consumption expenditures used to estimate the relative growth rate of consumption of uncon-
strained households.




                                                       9
3.3      Results

In this section we evaluate the performance of the two stochastic discount factors discussed
above in explaining the equity premium for different values of the risk aversion parameter
γ and under different assumptions for the identification of unconstrained agents. For each
specification (including the representative agent stochastic discount factor) we set the time
discount factor β so that the sample mean of the estimated stochastic discount factor E(m̂)
is equal to 1. With this normalization6 we can write f e(m̂), the fraction of the equity
premium that is being explained by the stochastic discount factor m̂, as

                         E m̂ RS − RB
                                       
           f e(m̂) = 1 −                   = −Corr(m̂, RS − RB )cv(m̂)cv(RS − RB )
                           E [RS − RB ]

       S
where Rt+1      B
           and Rt+1 denote the gross real return on equity and a risk-free bond, and
Corr denotes the correlation coefficient, and cv denotes the coefficient of variation. Thus
to explain a large fraction of the equity premium we need a stochastic discount factor that
is negatively correlated with the equity premium and which has high percentage volatility.
The first panel of figure 1 plots the realized excess return on equity RS − RB and the
representative agent stochastic discount factor m̂RA
                                                  t+1 (γ, β) (in percentage deviations from

its mean) for a value of γ = 1.
       The stochastic discount factor is indeed negatively correlated with the realized equity
premium but its percentage volatility is very low and hence the resulting fraction of the
equity premium it can explain is low. The second panel plots again the realized excess
equity return together with the limited enforcement stochastic discount factor m̂LE
                                                                                 t+1 (γ, β)

for a value of γ = 1. Note how m̂LE
                                 t+1 (γ, β) is also negatively correlated (albeit less than

m̂RA
  t+1 (γ, β) ) with the realized equity premium but at the same time it is significantly

more volatile than m̂RA                                                           RA
                     t+1 (γ, β). With low risk aversion the higher (relative to m̂t+1 (γ, β) )
   6
    This normalization essentially guarantees that all stochastic discount factors we consider are consistent
with the empirically observed risk-free interest rate.



                                                     10
0.3                                                                      0.3
                            mRA (% deviations from mean)                                        mLE (% deviations from mean)
                            Realized quarterly equity premium                                   Realized quarterly equity premium
0.2                                                                      0.2


0.1                                                                      0.1


  0                                                                        0


-0.1                                                                     -0.1

                       Corr(mRA, Premium) = -0.31                                          Corr(mLE, Premium) = -0.08
-0.2                                                                     -0.2
                       Cv(mRA) = .5%                                                       Cv(mLE) = 1.4%
                       Fraction of premium explained =0.5%                                 Fraction of premium explained =0.5%


  1980      1985     1990      1995           2000           2005          1980   1985   1990      1995           2000           2005
                        Quarters                                                            Quarters


               Figure 1: Stochastic discount factors (γ = 1) and realized equity premium


       volatility of m̂LE
                       t+1 (γ, β) is offset by the lower absolute value of its correlation with the equity

       premium so roughly the 2 discount factors have the same (low) explanatory power. With
       high risk aversion though the differences in volatilities between m̂LE               RA
                                                                           t+1 (γ, β) and m̂t+1 (γ, β)

       are amplified and the limited enforcement discount factor can explain a significantly larger
       fraction of the observed equity premium.
          Figure 2 plots the equity premium explained by LE stochastic discount factors estimated
       in three different ways and by the standard RA stochastic discount factor, as we vary
       the coefficient of risk aversion from 1 to 80. The differences among the three LE curves
       lie in how we identify unconstrained agents. The curve labeled baseline is constructed
       defining unconstrained households in a given quarter as those with consumption growth is
       below average consumption growth in that quarter. The other two LE curves (labeled 95%
       and 105%) are constructed defining unconstrained households as those whose consumption
       growth is below 95% of aggregate consumption growth rate or below 105% of the aggregate
       consumption growth rate. The figure also displays the average equity premium in the data,
       which for our sample is around 1.8% per quarter. Notice how for low and moderate levels


                                                                    11
            3




           2.5




            2                                                                                 LE baseline
                       Average observed equity premium
 Percent




           1.5
                                                                    LE 105%                         LE 95%




            1

                                                                                         RA model


           0.5




            0
                 0     10         20         30             40            50             60         70       80
                                          Coefficient of relative risk aversion γ



                     Figure 2: Quarterly equity premium: observed and predicted by models


of risk aversion all discount factors fail to account for a substantial fraction of the premium.
However, for higher risk aversion the LE model can explain a significantly larger fraction of
the observed equity premium than the RA model: for example with a relative risk aversion
of around 60 the LE model can explain all the premium while the RA model only explains
half of it.


4                Conclusion

The consumption-based asset pricing model relying on the representative agent construct
has a hard time accounting for the observed equity premium. In this paper we assess how
introducing limited enforcement of inter-temporal contracts improves the empirical perfor-
mance of the consumption-based asset pricing model. In a LE model with a continuum
of households the standard stochastic discount factor is augmented by an additional term


                                                                                    12
which depends on the consumption growth of households in the left tail of the cross-sectional
consumption growth distribution. The reason for this is that agents with low consumption
growth are unconstrained and thus it is their consumption growth, as opposed to the ag-
gregate consumption growth, which should price equity. We put forth a first attempt of
measuring this extra term using household consumption data and find that the LE pricing
kernels can account for a larger share of the empirically observed equity premium, relative
to the RA model. However, in order to account for the entire premium the LE model still
needs a coefficient of risk aversion of around 60, which many would view as implausibly
large.
   We interpret our results as mixed news for the asset pricing properties of the LE model.
On one hand they suggest that when one uses micro consumption data to evaluate the asset
pricing properties of the LE model results are not as satisfactory as, say, those obtained
by Alvarez and Jermann (2001) using a calibrated version of the model with two agents.
On the other hand the fact that the LE model performs better, along certain dimensions,
than the standard RA model suggests that making use of individual consumption data, as
opposed to just aggregates, might give us a better understanding of how aggregate risk is
priced.
   Future work is needed to assess how a careful modelling of measurement error in indi-
vidual consumption growth would affect the empirical estimation and performance of the
proposed asset pricing kernel, and to investigate whether the LE model can shed further
light on other well-documented asset pricing puzzles (such as the value premium puzzle).




                                             13
References
 [1] Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann (2000), “Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset
        Pricing with Risk of Default,” Econometrica, 68, 775-798
 [2] Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann (2001), “Quantitative Asset Pricing Implica-
        tions of Endogenous Solvency Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 14, 1117-
        1151
 [3] Attanasio, Orazio, James Banks and Sarah Tanner (2002), Assets Holding and Con-
        sumption Volatility,Journal of Political Economy,110, 771-792.
 [4] Brav, Alon, George Constantinides and Christopher Geczy (2002), “Asset Pricing with
        Heterogeneous Consumers,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 793-824.
 [5] Cogley, Tim (2002), “Idiosyncratic Risk and the Equity Premium: Evidence from the
        Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 309-334.
 [6] Constantinides, George and Darrell Duffie, “Asset pricing with heterogeneous con-
        sumers” (1996), Journal of Political Economy, 104, 219-240.
 [7] Kehoe, Tim and David Levine (1993), “Debt Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of
        Economic Studies, 60, 865–888.
 [8] Kocherlakota, Narayana and Luigi Pistaferri (2005), “Asset Pricing Implications of
       Pareto Optimality with Private Information,” Working paper, University of Min-
       nesota.
 [9] Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri (2006), “Does Income Inequality lead to Consumption
        Inequality? Evidence and Theory” Review of Economic Studies, 73, 163-193.
[10] Lustig, Hanno (2004), “The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distribu-
        tion,” Working paper, UCLA.
[11] Marcet, Albert and Ramon Marimon (1998), “Recursive Contracts,” Working paper,
       Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
[12] Mehra, Rajnish and Edward Prescott (1985), “The equity premium: A puzzle” Journal
       of Monetary Economics 15, 145-61
[13] Thomas, Jonathan and Tim Worrall (1988), “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts,” Review
       of Economic Studies, 55, 541-554.
[14] Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2002), “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elas-
        ticity of Intertemporal Substitution”, Journal of Political Economy, 110, 825–53.



                                           14
