                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HOW SOVEREIGN IS SOVEREIGN CREDIT RISK?

                                         Francis A. Longstaff
                                               Jun Pan
                                          Lasse H. Pedersen
                                         Kenneth J. Singleton

                                         Working Paper 13658
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13658


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions received from Andrew Atkeson, Engelbert
Dockner, Sebastian Edwards, Robert Engle, Don Morrison, Alex Reyfman, Walter Torous, and seminar
participants at Barclays Global Investors, the Moody's and Copenhagen Business School Credit Conference,
UCLA, and the University of Vienna. We are also grateful for the research assistance of Xiaolong
Cheng, Priyank Gandhi, Brent Longstaff, and Scott Longstaff. All errors are our responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Francis A. Longstaff, Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Sovereign is Sovereign Credit Risk?
Francis A. Longstaff, Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton
NBER Working Paper No. 13658
December 2007
JEL No. G12,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the nature of sovereign credit risk using an extensive sample of CDS spreads for 26 developed
and emerging-market countries. Sovereign credit spreads are surprisingly highly correlated, with just
three principal components accounting for more than 50 percent of their variation. Sovereign credit
spreads are generally more related to the U.S. stock and high-yield bond markets, global risk premia,
and capital flows than they are to their own local economic measures. We find that the excess returns
from investing in sovereign credit are largely compensation for bearing global risk, and that there is
little or no country-specific credit risk premium. A significant amount of the variation in sovereign
credit returns can be forecast using U.S. equity, volatility, and bond market risk premia.¸


Francis A. Longstaff                              Lasse H. Pedersen
UCLA                                              Two Greenwich Plaza, 3rd Floor
Anderson Graduate School of Management            AQR
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481                    Greenwich CT 06830
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                        and NBER
and NBER                                          lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                  Kenneth J. Singleton
Jun Pan                                           Graduate School of Business
MIT Sloan School of Management                    Stanford University
50 Memorial Drive                                 Stanford, CA 94305
Rm E52-435                                        and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02142                               ken@future.stanford.edu
and NBER
junpan@mit.edu
        Sovereignty:       Supreme power . . .
                           Freedom from external control . . .
                           Autonomy.

                                                   — Miriam-Webster Dictionary.



                               1. INTRODUCTION

Is sovereign credit risk primarily an idiosyncratic or country-speciﬁc risk? Or is
sovereign credit more systematic and driven primarily by regional and global economic
forces external to the country?
     This issue is of key importance since the nature of sovereign credit risk determines
the characteristics of returns in sovereign debt markets and directly aﬀects the ability
of investors, banks, and other ﬁnancial institutions to diversify the risk of global debt
portfolios. Portfolio theory implies that the correlation structure of sovereign credit
risk should play a central role in determining global portfolio positions and inﬂuencing
the ﬂow of capital across countries. Furthermore, the nature of a sovereign’s credit
risk may aﬀect both its ability to access global debt markets and the risk premium
it must then pay to obtain capital. Also, this issue has fundamental implications for
how the international lending community should deal with distressed debtor nations.
     Despite its importance, relatively little research on this topic has appeared in
the literature. Previous theoretical work focuses primarily on the incentives faced by
sovereign debtors to repay their debt. Examples include Eaton and Gersovitz (1981),
Grossman and Van Huyck (1988), Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1989a, b), Atkeson (1991),
Dooley and Svenson (1994), Cole and Kehoe (1996, 2000), Dooley (2000), and many
others. A number of empirical studies focus on the factors that determine individual
sovereign credit spreads. These include Edwards (1984, 1986, 2002), Berg and Sachs
(1988), Boehmer and Megginson (1990), Duﬃe, Pedersen, and Singleton (2003), and
Zhang (2003). Other important empirical work focuses on the investment returns asso-
ciated with Brady bonds and emerging market debt, such as Erb, Harvey, and Viskanta
(1996, 1997, 1999), and Dahiya (1997). Some recent research provides evidence that
sovereign credit spreads are related to common global factors.1 In particular, Pan and
Singleton (2007) show that the credit spreads for Mexico, Turkey, and Korea share a
strong common relation to U.S. stock market volatility as measured by the VIX index.
1
 For example, see Kamin and von Kleist (1999), Eichengreen and Mody (2000), Geyer,
Kossmeier, and Pichler (2004), Rozada and Yeyati (2005), and Remolona, Scatigna,
and Wu (2007).


                                           1
This result is important since it demonstrates how common dependence of this type
could induce signiﬁcant correlations among sovereign credit spreads.
     To shed light on the underlying nature of sovereign credit risk, we begin by
examining the correlation structure of credit spreads for an extensive set of sovereigns
and investigating the underlying sources of commonality. The data for the study
consist of market quotations for sovereign credit default swap (CDS) contracts on the
external debt of 26 developed and less-developed countries. Sovereign credit default
swaps function as insurance contracts that allow investors to buy protection against
the event that a sovereign defaults on or restructures its debt.2 As such, sovereign
CDS spreads directly reﬂect the market’s assessment of the sovereign’s credit risk.
An important advantage of using sovereign CDS data is that it allows us to “factor
out” the component of sovereign bond returns due to changes in interest rates and
focus instead on the returns due exclusively to sovereign credit risk. Furthermore, the
sovereign CDS market may often be more liquid than the corresponding sovereign bond
market, resulting in more accurate estimates of credit spreads.3 Also, CDS spreads
are often implicitly spreads on bonds that are less encumbered by covenants and
guarantees.
     A number of surprising results emerge from the analysis. First, most of the
variation in sovereign credit spreads is due to common regional and global factors;
idiosyncratic country-speciﬁc variation represents only a minority fraction of the total
variation in sovereign credit spreads. In particular, a simple principal components
analysis reveals that more than 30 percent of the variation in sovereign CDS spreads
is explained by a single global factor that aﬀects almost every country in the sample.
This ﬁrst factor has a correlation of −70 percent with U.S. stock market returns and 66
percent with changes in the VIX volatility index. Furthermore, more than 50 percent
of the variation in sovereign CDS spreads is explained by just three common factors. A
multivariate cluster analysis based on the correlation matrix also indicates that there
is a strong regional or geographical structure to sovereign credit risk.
    Next, to explore the determinants of sovereign credit risk, we regress changes in
CDS spreads on four categories of explanatory variables: local economic variables,
global ﬁnancial market variables, global risk premia measures, and net investment
2
 Typically, sovereign ﬁnancial distress results in a restructuring or rescheduling of
debt. For convenience, we refer to this process simply as sovereign default throughout
the paper.
3
 While CDS spreads generally approximate the spreads of the underlying bonds, there
are several reasons why the two need not be identical. For example, there are cash ﬂow
diﬀerences between bonds and CDS contracts that can induce diﬀerences in spreads
(see Duﬃe and Liu (2001), Duﬃe and Singleton (2003), and Longstaﬀ, Mithal, and
Neis (2005)). Also, there can be bond- or contract-speciﬁc liquidity eﬀects that create
time-varying diﬀerences or basis risk between CDS and sovereign bond spreads.


                                           2
ﬂows into global funds. In general, all four categories have signiﬁcant explanatory
power for CDS spread changes. On average, however, changes in a sovereign’s credit
spread appear to be more closely related to global factors than to changes in the
sovereign’s own local economy. We also ﬁnd that after controlling for other factors,
sovereigns included in the actively-traded CDX emerging market index tend to have
higher correlations with each other. This result, in conjunction with the evidence that
a number of sovereigns have credit spreads that vary with global investment ﬂows,
argues that liquidity and trading patterns may represent an important inﬂuence on
the behavior of sovereign credit spreads.
     If sovereign credit spreads are driven primarily by global factors, what are the
implications for the returns from investing in sovereign credit markets? To explore
this issue, we examine whether sovereign credit returns contain a risk premium after
controlling for these global factors. Not surprisingly, sovereign credit investments
generate positive excess returns during the study period since there were no defaults
in the sample. However, after regressing excess sovereign credit returns on U.S. equity
and bond market factors, we ﬁnd that the alphas from investing in sovereign credit
are almost all insigniﬁcant. Thus, there is little evidence of any unique sovereign
credit risk premium. Whatever risk premium there may be in sovereign credit returns
appears to be primarily compensation for bearing the risk of the global factors that
drive sovereign credit spreads.
     Finally, we examine whether excess returns from sovereign credit can be forecast
using ex ante risk premium measures from other global markets. We ﬁnd that nearly 15
percent of the variation in the monthly excess returns of the portfolio of all sovereigns
in the sample can be explained using ex ante risk premium measures from the U.S.
equity, volatility, and bond markets. For the portfolio of Latin American sovereigns,
more than 27 percent of the ex post variation is predictable. These results provide
strong additional evidence that global risk premia are key determinants of expected
sovereign credit returns.
     In summary, for the 2000-2007 period covered by our study, the evidence indicates
that sovereign credit spreads are driven primarily by external factors; the country-
speciﬁc component of sovereign credit risk is relatively modest. Common ﬁnancial
market factors and time-varying risk premia induce signiﬁcant correlation between
sovereign credit spreads. Thus, the portfolios of lenders and investors in the sovereign
debt markets may be less diversiﬁed than is generally believed. Furthermore, the
absence of a unique sovereign credit risk premium in sovereign credit returns raises
questions about viewing this market as a separate asset class; a diversiﬁed portfolio of
U.S. stock and bond positions reproduces a substantial portion of the historic excess
returns in the sovereign debt market.
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data.
Section 3 examines the correlation structure of sovereign CDS spreads. Section 4
explores the sources of commonality in sovereign credit spreads. Section 5 examines

                                           3
the implications for sovereign credit returns and risk premia. Section 6 summarizes
the results and presents concluding remarks.

                                   2. THE DATA

The data for this study consist of monthly sovereign credit default swap (CDS) pre-
mia for each of the countries in the sample. As discussed in Duﬃe (1999), Longstaﬀ,
Mithal, and Neis (2005), Pan and Singleton (2007), and others, a CDS contract func-
tions as an insurance contract against the event that an entity such as a ﬁrm or a
sovereign defaults on its debt.
     To illustrate how a CDS contract works, consider the case of the People’s Republic
of China. On May 31, 2007, the market premium or spread for a ﬁve-year CDS contract
on China was 12.875 basis points. This means that a buyer of credit protection would
pay 12.875 basis points a year (paid semiannually on an actual/360 daycount basis).
If there was no default, the buyer would pay this annuity for the full ﬁve-year horizon
of the contract. If there was a default, however, the buyer of credit protection (after
paying any accrued premium) could sell the defaulted debt to the protection seller
at its par value of 100, after which the contract would terminate. In general, this
default-linked cash ﬂow is triggered by the default of a speciﬁc reference obligation
of the underlying entity. Upon default, however, the protection buyer typically has
the right to put to the protection seller any of a list of bond or loans with equivalent
seniority rights.4
     The pricing data for ﬁve-year sovereign credit default swaps used in this study
are obtained from the Bloomberg system which collects CDS market quotation data
from industry sources. The sample covers the period from October 2000 to May 2007.
Not every country is included in the sample for the full period, however, since new
sovereign CDS contracts are routinely added to the Bloomberg system throughout
this period. To be included in the sample, we require that sovereign CDS data be
available in the Bloomberg system no later than August 2004. This insures that there
are at least 32 monthly observations for each sovereign CDS contract. This criterion
results in a total of 26 diﬀerent countries in the sample. In each case, the reference
obligation for the CDS contract is designated as senior external or international debt
of the sovereign.5

4
 For a detailed discussion of the contractual provisions of sovereign CDS contracts
(such as physical delivery, standard speciﬁed currencies, credit events triggering pay-
ments, etc.), see Pan and Singleton (2007).
5
 Speciﬁcally, the reference obligation is a U.S. dollar-denominated issue for 23 of the
sovereigns and a Euro-denominated issue for two of the sovereigns. No information is
available about the reference obligation for the CDS contract for China. The contract,

                                           4
     Table 1 provides summary information for the sovereign CDS premia. All premia
are denominated in basis points (free of units of account) but are paid in U.S. dollars
based on U.S. dollar-denominated notional amounts for the CDS swap contracts. The
average values of the premia range widely across countries. The lowest average is 7.50
basis points for Japan; the highest average is 753.02 basis points for Brazil. Both the
standard deviations and the minimum/maximum values indicate that there can also
be signiﬁcant time-series variation in the sovereign CDS premia. For example, the cost
of credit protection for Venezuela ranges from 119.22 to 2,012.50 basis points during
the sample period.


                   3. CORRELATION AMONG SPREADS

Before presenting the empirical analysis, it is useful to ﬁrst have a framework to help
put the results into perspective. From Duﬃe and Singleton (1999), Dai and Singleton
(2003), Pan and Singleton (2007), and others, standard arbitrage arguments allow us
to express credit spreads in terms of risk-neutral default probabilities and loss given
default. Speciﬁcally, credit spreads can be expressed (approximately) as λQ LQ + l.
Here, λQ is the risk-neutral default arrival rate, LQ is the risk-neutral loss given
default, and l represents compensation for illiquidity. As we will discuss later, a
sovereign CDS spread should equal the credit spread that a sovereign ﬂoating-rate
note would need to pay to sell for par (abstracting from basis risk). Thus, this intuitive
representation can also be extended to sovereign CDS spreads.
     Although simple, this framework provides a useful way of thinking about the
sources of correlation in sovereign credit spreads. In particular, correlations between
sovereign CDS spreads could arise through the correlations between the arrival rates of
credit events λQ , through the correlation between loss rates LQ , through the common
variation in the liquidity portion l of sovereign spreads, or some combination of these.
     Focusing on the ﬁrst of these three components, variation in the risk-neutral
arrival rates of credit events λQ could reﬂect changes in the economic fundamentals of
the sovereigns in the study. For example, the existence of a global business cycle could
induce correlation in the arrival rates across countries through their shared linkages to
global fundamentals. On the other hand, variation in risk-neutral arrival rates could
also reﬂect changes in the premium for ﬁnancial-distress risk.
    In similar fashion, the variation in the risk-neutral recovery rate LQ could reﬂect
changes in the economic, political, institutional, and legal environment that aﬀect the
bargaining power of creditors and their ability to extricate investment capital following

however, explicitly references Chinese Government international debt, and the only
current Chinese international bond issues for the ﬁve-year horizon are U.S. dollar-
denominated issues.


                                            5
a sovereign credit event. However, the variation in LQ could also reﬂect changes in
the associated risk premium.
     In allowing for a liquidity component l in spreads, this framework is consistent
with a broad interpretation of liquidity and how it aﬀects sovereign credit spreads.
First, investors incur trading costs on illiquid securities and want to be compensated
for this through higher returns (see Amihud, Mendelson, and Pederson (2005) and
the references therein). Further, investors are subject to margin requirements (Liu
and Longstaﬀ (2004)) and, hence, their funding problems can lead to market illiquid-
ity (Brunnermeier and Pederson (2007)). Such funding and demand pressures have
been found to aﬀect convertible bond prices (Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007)),
mortgage backed securities (Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007)), option
prices (Gârleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2007)), stock liquidity (Hameed, Kang,
and Viswanathan (2007)), among other eﬀects.6 This notion of liquidity is also consis-
tent with the ﬂights to quality or liquidity observed in markets, often in conjunction
with currency crises or credit events (Longstaﬀ (2004)). For example, imagine that
heightened concerns about the risk of a liquidity shock reduced the willingness of the
international lending community to commit capital to, say, the emerging market sec-
tor of the sovereign debt markets. In this situation, there could potentially be direct
eﬀects on the liquidity component l of emerging market sovereign CDS spreads, as
well as spillover eﬀects on the rest of the sovereign CDS market. Given these various
perspectives, we will use the term liquidity in a very general sense throughout this
paper.
3.1 The Correlation Matrix
Table 2 presents the matrix of pairwise correlations of monthly changes in CDS premia.
Since the time series of observations for the countries are not equal in length, the
correlation between each pair of countries is based on the months in which the data
overlap.
     As shown, many of the pairwise correlations are very high. For example, the
correlation between China and Thailand is 0.89, the correlation between Brazil and
Columbia is 0.82, and the correlation between Russia and Bulgaria is 0.79. On the
other hand, the correlation between Japan and Israel is only −0.09.
3.2 Principal Components Analysis
The next step is to examine whether the patterns of correlations between sovereign
CDS spread changes shown in Table 2 can be explained in terms of a smaller number
of common factors. To this end, Table 3 reports summary results from a principal
components decomposition of the correlation matrix of CDS spread changes. The
ﬁrst part of the table reports results based on the correlation matrix formed from

6
    See also Gromb and Vayanos (2002), and Acharya and Viswanathan (2007).


                                          6
the pairwise correlations between countries shown in Table 2 (all observations).7 The
second part of the Table 3 reports results for the correlation matrix obtained from using
only the months for which all of the countries have data (overlapping observations).8
    The results when all observations are used indicate that there is a signiﬁcant
amount of commonality in the variation of CDS spreads across sovereigns. The ﬁrst
principal component captures nearly a third of the variation in the correlation matrix.
Furthermore, the ﬁrst three principal components collectively explain more than 53
percent of the variation in the correlation matrix. All together, the ﬁrst ﬁve principal
components capture nearly two-thirds of the variation.
     The results when only the overlapping observations are used imply an even greater
level of commonality in the movements of CDS spreads. The ﬁrst principal component
now accounts for more than 47 percent of total variation by itself, while the ﬁrst three
principal components account for more than 65 percent.
     Figure 1 plots the ﬁrst three principal components based on all observations. As
shown, the ﬁrst principal component consists of a roughly uniform weighting of the
credit spreads for most of the sovereigns in the sample. In essence, the ﬁrst principal
component resembles a “parallel shift” factor in the spreads of sovereign CDS. The
primary exceptions are Israel and Qatar which both tend to have very low correlations
with the credit spreads of the other sovereigns.
     To explore further the interpretation of the ﬁrst principal component, we compute
a time series for the ﬁrst principal component. This is done by taking a weighted
average of the changes in the 26 sovereign credit spreads, where the weight for sovereign
i equals the i-th principal component weight divided by the sum of all the principal
component weights (where the sum is taken over all sovereigns with available data
for that date). The correlation of this ﬁrst principal component index with U.S.
stock market returns is −0.697, and the correlation with changes in the VIX index is
0.659. The correlation between stock market returns and changes in the VIX index
is −0.787. Thus, the principal source of variation across almost all sovereign credit
spreads appears to be very highly correlated with the U.S. market as measured with
by U.S. stock market returns or by U.S. equity market volatility. These results are
consistent with Pan and Singleton (2007) who likewise ﬁnd a strong relation between
sovereign credit spreads and the VIX index.
    The second principal component places signiﬁcant positive weight on Chile, China,
Japan, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Venezuela, and negative
weight on almost all of the other countries. Thus, this principal component could
be viewed roughly as a spread between “Asian” and “non-Asian” sovereigns. This
7
 The resulting correlation matrix is positive deﬁnite despite the unequal number of
observations used in computing these pairwise correlations.
8
    The overlapping sample consists of the ﬁnal 32 monthly observations for each country.


                                             7
dichotomy isn’t perfect, of course, since it categorizes Chile and Venezuela as “Asian”
countries. The third principal component also resembles a spread. Speciﬁcally, this
principal component puts signiﬁcant positive weight on Israel, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Qatar, and the Ukraine, and negative weights on many of the other coun-
tries in the sample.
3.3 Credit Cluster Analysis
Given the evidence of signiﬁcant commonality in sovereign credit spreads, the next
step is to try to understand the nature and structure of these commonalities. As one
way of doing this, we use the methodology of cluster analysis to search for structure
in the pairwise correlations reported in Table 2.
     In this cluster analysis, the algorithm attempts to sort the countries into groups
where the members of each group are as similar as possible. At the same time, the
algorithm attempts to form the groups to be as dissimilar from one another as pos-
sible. In eﬀect, the algorithm tries to create groupings in a way that maximizes the
average correlation between countries in the same group, while minimizing the average
correlation between countries in diﬀerent groups.9 Since the composition of clusters
depends on the choice of the number of clusters to be formed, we use a simple rule
of thumb that the number of clusters be roughly N/4, where N is the number of
individual items to be grouped. For the 26 countries in the sample, this rule of thumb
suggests categorizing countries into about six clusters.
     Table 4 reports the composition of the clusters, along with the average correlation
of countries within each cluster and the average correlation of the countries in each
cluster with the countries outside of that cluster. Although we present the clusters
in order of the number of countries each contains, there is no particular signiﬁcance
to this ordering in cluster analysis. Similarly, the cluster analysis algorithm does not
place any restrictions on the number of items that can appear in any cluster (other
than the obvious requirement that a cluster has to contain at least one element).
     Table 4 illustrates that there is a strong regional structure to sovereign credit
risk. In particular, ﬁve of the seven sovereigns in Cluster 1 are in Eastern Europe
and the Mediterranean: Bulgaria, Poland, Russia, the Slovak Republic, and Turkey.
Four of the six sovereigns in Cluster 2 are Asian countries: China, Japan, Korea, and
Thailand. Three of the ﬁve sovereigns in Cluster 3 are in Eastern Europe: Croatia,
Hungary, and Romania. All three of the sovereigns in Cluster 4 are in Latin America:
Columbia, Panama, and Peru. Cluster 6 consists only of countries in the Mideast,

9
 The cluster analysis is done using Ward’s method in which clusters are formed so as
to minimize the increase in the within-cluster sums of squares. The distance between
two clusters is the increase in these sums of squares if the two clusters were merged.
A method for computing this distance from a squared Euclidean distance matrix is
given by Anderberg (1973, pages 142-145).


                                           8
Israel and Qatar.
     The regional structure of sovereign credit risk is also evident from the magni-
tude of the correlations within each cluster. Speciﬁcally, the average correlation of
sovereigns within the same cluster ranges from about 40 to 60 percent across the six
clusters, indicating a very high level of commonality in their credit risk. In contrast,
the average correlation of the sovereigns in a cluster with sovereigns outside of that
cluster ranges from about 10 to 28 percent.
     Table 4 also reports the average CDS spread levels for the sovereigns in each
cluster. As shown, there is little evidence that the clustering is based on credit spread
levels (which also argues against the clustering being based on credit ratings). In
particular, the average credit spreads for clusters 1, 4, and 5 are all in the range of
240 to 300 basis points.


                      4. SOURCES OF COMMONALITY

In an eﬀort to identify some of the fundamental sources of commonality in sovereign
credit spreads, we study the extent to which a set of local and global economic vari-
ables explain the variation in credit spreads of individual sovereigns. Since there is
virtually an unlimited number of variables that could be related to sovereign credit
risk, however, it is necessary to be selective in the variables considered. Guided by the
framework discussed earlier, we focus primarily on market-determined variables that
may be related to variation in the risk-neutral default-arrival process λQ , the loss-
given-default process LQ , and/or the compensation for liquidity risk l in the sovereign
credit market.
4.1 Explanatory Variables
4.1.1 Local variables
There are a number of possible economic forces that might determine the credit spread
of a sovereign nation. Foremost among these is the state of the local economy, which
could be related to both the default-arrival process λQ as well as the loss-given-default
process LQ . This theme appears throughout the literature in papers such as Grossman
and Van Huyck (1988) which seek to explain why defaults are associated with bad
states of the economy, and why defaults are often partial rather than complete.
     To capture information about the state of the local economy, we include the local
stock market return (denominated in units of the local currency), percentage changes
in the exchange rate of the local currency against the dollar, and percentage changes
in the dollar value of the sovereign’s holdings of foreign reserves. Details about the
deﬁnitions, timing, and source of the data for these variables are provided in the
Appendix (and similarly for all of the other explanatory variables described in the
paper).


                                           9
4.1.2 Global ﬁnancial market variables
Far from being autarkies, the sovereigns included in the study typically have extensive
economic relationships with other countries. Thus, the ability of one of these sovereigns
to repay its debt and, therefore, the default-arrival process λQ , may depend not only
on local variables, but also on the state of the global economy. Furthermore, this
dependence could become increasingly more important as the trend towards global-
ization continues. In addition, shifts in the relative liquidity of markets over time as
shocks induce investors to reallocate capital across diﬀerent asset classes (for example,
from stock to bonds, from investment grade to high yield, from developed to emerging
markets, etc.) could create correlations between asset class prices even in the absence
of correlated fundamentals.
     To capture broad changes in the state of the global economy and/or shifts in the
relative performance of diﬀerent asset classes, we include a number of measures from
the U.S. equity and ﬁxed income markets. There are several reasons for this approach.
First, the U.S. is not one of the sovereigns included in our sample. Second, there is
extensive evidence that shocks to the U.S. ﬁnancial markets are transmitted globally.
For example, Roll (1988) shows that of 23 stock markets around the world, 19 declined
by more than 20 percent during the October 1987 U.S. stock market crash. This is
also consistent with the evidence in Goetzmann, Li, and Rouwenhorst (2005) and
others. Thus, the prices of securities in U.S. ﬁnancial markets presumably incorporate
information about economic fundamentals or market liquidity that is relevant to a
broad cross-section of countries. Finally, as the largest economy in the world, the U.S.
has direct eﬀects on the economies and ﬁnancial markets of many other sovereigns.
     As the equity market variable, we include the excess return on the CRSP value-
weighted portfolio. To reﬂect variation in the U.S. ﬁxed income markets, we include
the change in the ﬁve-year constant maturity Treasury (CMT) yield reported by the
Federal Reserve. Including this variable in the study is important since changes in the
CMT yield can signal changes in U.S. economic growth, and in turn, the global business
cycle. Furthermore, these changes may also incorporate a ﬂight-to-liquidity element
due to the variation in the perceived safety of U.S. Treasury bonds as a “reserve” asset
in international ﬁnancial crises. Thus, this variable might also reﬂect variation in a
liquidity component l if it were incorporated into sovereign credit spreads.
     We also include changes in the spreads of U.S. investment-grade and high-yield
corporate bonds as additional ﬁnancial market variables. Speciﬁcally, we include the
change in the spreads between ﬁve-year BBB- and AAA-rated bonds and between
ﬁve-year BB- and BBB-rated bonds. The former captures the range of variation in
investment-grade bond yields, while the latter reﬂects the variation in the spreads of
high-yield bonds.
4.1.3 Global risk premia
Standard results imply that the risk-neutral values of the default-arrival process λQ ,

                                           10
the loss-given-default process LQ , and the liquidity component l can diﬀer from their
values under the objective measure if sovereign credit spreads include risk premia.
Recent research on corporate credit spreads suggests that these spreads may include
premia for bearing risks such as jump-to-default risk, recovery risk, the risk of variation
in spreads or distress risk, liquidity risk, etc. Although sovereign credit risk diﬀers
in many respects from corporate credit risk, sovereign spreads could include similar
components. If so, then changes in these risk premia could induce time variation in
the values of λQ , LQ , and l, which in turn, could help drive movements in sovereign
credit spreads.
     In the absence of direct measures of the various potential risk premia in sovereign
credit spreads, we adopt the approach of using risk premia estimates from other global
markets as explanatory variables. Intuitively, one might expect that there would be
some commonality in the properties of risk premia across markets. This is because,
in principle, risk premia arise from investor’s attitudes towards bearing risk and the
covariance of those risks with their consumption streams. Thus, assets with similar
covariance properties might well have correlated risk premia.
      As a proxy for the variation in the equity risk premium, we use monthly changes
in the earnings-price ratio for the S&P 100 index. Although admittedly simplistic,
this proxy does have the important advantage of providing a model-free measure and
is often used in asset-pricing contexts.
     As another risk premium proxy, we use monthly changes in the spreads between
implied and realized volatility for index options. As discussed by Britten-Jones and
Neuberger (2000), Pan (2002), and many others, the diﬀerence between implied and
realized volatility may represent a premium for bearing the volatility risk of an option
position. Speciﬁcally, we compute a rolling 20-day estimator of the realized return on
the S&P 100 index using the Garman and Klass (1980) open-high-low-close estimator
applied to daily index data. We subtract the month-end value of this estimator from
the month-end VIX index value. Diﬀerencing the two series gives the monthly change
in the volatility risk premium proxy.10 Finally, we use monthly changes in the expected
excess returns of ﬁve-year Treasury bonds as a proxy for changes in the term premium.
The expected excess returns are based on the model estimates presented in Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005), but updated through the end of our sample period using Fama-
Bliss and Bloomberg discount-bond term structure data.
4.1.4 Global investment-ﬂow variables
Another potential inﬂuence on the credit spreads of sovereign debtors is the ﬂow of

10
  As a robustness check, we also perform the analysis using the volatility risk premium
estimator of Bollerslev, Gibson, and Zhou (2004) and Bollerslev and Zhou (2007). The
results from this estimation are very similar to those we report. We are grateful to
Hao Zhou for providing the volatility risk premium data to us.


                                            11
investment capital around the world. To illustrate this, suppose that investors choose
to increase their diversiﬁcation by holding more foreign equity and debt securities in
their portfolios. The resulting investment ﬂows could be associated with signiﬁcant
valuation eﬀects for international assets such as sovereign debt because of enhanced
risk sharing, the local economic beneﬁts of improved access to global sources of capital,
or simply the improvement in the liquidity of these securities. Thus, while it might
be natural to map these eﬀects into changes in the compensation for liquidity l, these
eﬀects might also map into variation in the default-arrival process λQ .
     There is an extensive literature discussing the potential eﬀects of investment ﬂows
on security values. In a sovereign debt context, Sinyagina-Woodruﬀ (2003) considers
the eﬀects of shifts in investor conﬁdence and their willingness to supply capital (herd-
ing behavior). Others such as Obstﬁeld (1986), Sachs, Tornell, Velasco, Giavazzi, and
Szekela (1996), and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2000) describe the role that
speculative attacks by strategic investors may play in currency crises (such as the 1997
Asian crisis).
     As measures of the ﬂow of investment capital to foreign markets, we use the
net ﬂows (inﬂow minus outﬂow) to mutual funds investing primarily in international
bonds and equity, respectively. These net ﬂows are expressed as percentages of the
total assets of each fund category. This data is obtained from the Investment Company
Institute and described in the Appendix.
4.1.5 Spreads of other sovereigns
As proxies for any other external economic factors that might inﬂuence the credit
spread for a particular sovereign, we also include in its regression two measures of
the changes in the CDS spreads of the other sovereigns in the sample. Speciﬁcally,
we divide the countries in the sample into four categories based on their geographical
location: Latin America, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East/Other (details provided
in the Appendix). For each of the sovereigns in the sample, we compute the average
CDS spread for the other countries in the same region (the regional spread), and the
average CDS spread for the countries in the other three regions (the global spread, but
excluding the speciﬁc region). We regress the changes in these spreads on the other
explanatory variables and use the orthogonalized residuals from these regressions as
additional explanatory variables in the analysis.
4.2 Regression Analysis
For each of the 26 sovereigns in the sample, we regress the monthly changes in the CDS
spread on the explanatory variables described above. Table 5 reports the t-statistics
(based on the White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent estimate of the covariance
matrix) and adjusted R2 for each of the regressions.
     Focusing ﬁrst on the local variables, Table 5 shows the state of the local economy
has signiﬁcant eﬀects on a sovereign’s credit risk. Not surprisingly, the sign of the local
stock return coeﬃcient is almost uniformly negative across countries, indicating that

                                            12
good news for the local stock market is also good news for sovereign credit spreads.
The local stock market return is signiﬁcant (at the ﬁve-percent level) for 14 of the
sovereigns in the sample.
     The results for the other two local variables are not quite as strong. The sign
of the exchange rate coeﬃcient is roughly equally split between positive and negative
across countries. Of the ﬁve signiﬁcant coeﬃcients, however, four are positive. A
positive sign for this variable implies that the sovereign credit spread increases as the
sovereign’s currency depreciates relative to the U.S. dollar. Similarly, the coeﬃcient
for the change in foreign currency reserves is roughly evenly split between positive and
negative, and is only signiﬁcant for three of the sovereigns.
     The results for the global ﬁnancial market variables are striking. Table 5 shows
that the most signiﬁcant variable in the regressions is the U.S. high-yield spread. The
high-yield spread is signiﬁcant for 16 of the sovereigns. Interestingly, this variable
is not just signiﬁcant for the sovereigns with high CDS spreads (which generally are
rated below investment grade), but is signiﬁcant for a number of investment-grade
sovereigns with relatively small CDS spreads. The sign of the coeﬃcient for this
variable is positive for 25 of the 26 sovereigns.
     The U.S. stock market is also an important explanatory variable for sovereign
CDS spreads. Table 5 shows that even after including the local stock market return,
the U.S. stock market return is signiﬁcant for seven of the sovereigns in the sample.
The sign of the coeﬃcient for the U.S. stock market return is negative for 24 of the
26 sovereigns. The other two global ﬁnancial market variables appear to have only
limited explanatory power for sovereign CDS spreads.
      The regression results also indicate that there is a relation between the sovereign
CDS spreads and the global risk premia included as explanatory variables. In particu-
lar, the equity premium proxy is signiﬁcant for ﬁve of the sovereigns, the volatility risk
premium proxy is signiﬁcant for six of the sovereigns, and the term premium proxy is
signiﬁcant for three of the sovereigns.
     Turning next to the global investment-ﬂow variables, Table 5 shows that the either
the global-bond-ﬂow variable, the equity-ﬂow variable, or both, is signiﬁcant for seven
of the countries in the study. The sign of the coeﬃcient for the bond-ﬂow variable is
roughly evenly split between positive and negative. The sign of the coeﬃcient for the
equity-ﬂow variable is positive for 16 of the 26 sovereigns.
     Finally, Table 5 shows that there are strong interrelationships between sovereign
credit spreads even after including the local economic, and global ﬁnancial market, risk
premia, and investment-ﬂow variables in the regression. All but one of the sovereign
credit spreads in the sample are positively related to the regional credit spread, and
the regression coeﬃcient is signiﬁcant for 13 of the 26 sovereigns. The coeﬃcient for
the global credit spread is positive for 18 of the 26 sovereigns, and is signiﬁcant for 7.
These results are consistent with the presence of regional or global factors that aﬀect

                                           13
all sovereign credit spreads, but are not captured by the other explanatory variables.
As one possibility, the regional and global spreads could reﬂect the variation in a
liquidity component present in the CDS spreads for all sovereigns.
     The adjusted R2 s for the regressions are also intriguing. In general, these R2 s are
fairly high, indicating that the explanatory variables capture much of the variation in
sovereign credit spreads. The mean and median values of the adjusted R2 s are 46 and
52 percent, respectively. These adjusted R2 s range from 9 to 78 percent.
      Finally, the last column of Table 5 reports a measure of what fraction of the total
variation explained by the regression is due solely to the local variables. To calculate
this ratio, we ﬁrst regress the changes in spreads on just the local variables, and then
divide the R2 from this regression by the R2 from the full regression. Since the local
variables are not orthogonal to the remaining variables, this ratio likely overstates the
proportion of the total variation due solely to the local variables. Thus, this local
ratio should be viewed more as an upper bound. As shown, the fraction of the total
explanatory power of the regression due solely to the local variables varies signiﬁcantly
across sovereigns. On average, however, this ratio is only about 0.37. Similarly, the
median value of the ratio is 0.37. Thus, at most, the local variables provide only a
little more than one-third of the total explanatory power of the regression.11
4.3 Cluster and Regional Level Analysis
So far, we have focused on sovereign credit risk at the individual country level. To
provide some perspective on the nature of sovereign credit risk at the cluster level,
we form indexes for each of the six clusters shown in Table 4 by simply averaging the
changes in spreads for the sovereigns in each cluster. Similarly, we form indexes for
each of the four geographic regions in the sample by averaging the changes in CDS
spreads for the sovereigns in each region. We then regress these cluster and regional
indexes on the global ﬁnancial market, risk premia, and capital-ﬂow variables.
      As another approach, we also form indexes based on sovereigns with CDS con-
tracts that may tend to trade in tandem. In particular, we form indexes based on
whether the sovereigns are included in the actively-traded CDX emerging market in-
dex (CDX-EM) of sovereign CDS contracts and repeat the regression analysis. This
index currently consists of 14 emerging market countries, 12 of which are included
in our sample: Brazil, Columbia, Malaysia, Mexico, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
South Africa, Russia, Turkey, the Ukraine, and Venezuela. Since many market par-
ticipants trade this index, as opposed to trading individual sovereigns in the index,
it is possible that this aspect could induce similarities in the spreads of constituent
sovereigns in the index. Finally, we also estimate the regression using a global index

11
 These results are consistent with the evidence that closed-end country fund pre-
miums are closely tied to movements in the U.S. equity markets. For example, see
Bodurtha, Kim, and Lee (1995) and Levy-Yeyati and Ubide (2000).


                                           14
formed using all 26 of the sovereigns in the sample. The regression results are reported
in Table 6.
     At each level, the U.S. stock and high-yield markets remain the dominant factors.
The U.S. stock market is signiﬁcant for Clusters 1, 2, and 4, but is signiﬁcant for all
four regions. The U.S. high-yield spread is signiﬁcant for Clusters 1, 3, 4, and 5, and is
signiﬁcant or marginally signiﬁcant for all four regions. Both variables are signiﬁcant
at the global level. The results are similar when we form indexes based on whether
the sovereigns are included in the CDX-EM index or not. In each case, the U.S. stock
market and the high-yield spread are signiﬁcant. However, the results are somewhat
stronger for the sovereigns in the CDX-EM index. In particular, the t-statistics for
these variables are larger in absolute value. Furthermore, the adjusted R2 for the
sovereigns in the CDX-EM index is 0.51, but only 0.22 for the sovereigns not in the
index.
     The results for the other variables indicate that there are geographical diﬀerences
in way that sovereign credit spreads relate to the global risk premia and capital-
ﬂow measures. Speciﬁcally, the equity premium proxy is signiﬁcant or marginally
signiﬁcant for Cluster 5 and Latin America, while the volatility premium and term
premium proxies are signiﬁcant only for Cluster 3. The stock-ﬂow variable is signiﬁcant
or marginally signiﬁcant for Cluster 3, Europe, and the CDX-EM index.
4.4 Correlation Matrix Analysis
As an alternative way of exploring the sources of commonality among sovereign credit
spreads, we use an approach in which we model the cross-sectional structure of the un-
conditional correlation matrix of spread changes and estimate the model via maximum
likelihood.
     In this approach, we assume that the distribution of standardized monthly changes
in the N -vector of sovereign credit spreads Ȳt is a standard multivariate normal with
zero mean vector and covariance matrix Σ with main diagonal elements equal to one.
Given this structure, the log likelihood function L(Ȳ ; θ) for T independent monthly
observations is

                                                    1   −1
                                                       T
                           NT          T
             L(Ȳ ; θ) = −    ln(2π) −   ln | Σ | −      Ȳ Σ Ȳt ,                   (1)
                            2          2            2 t=1 t

where θ is a vector of parameters. Standard results imply that the maximum likelihood
estimator for Σ is the sample covariance matrix. In general, Σ is heavily parameterized;
the total number of free parameters in Σ is (N 2 − N )/2.
    In this framework, it is possible to consider alternative speciﬁcations for Σ. For ex-
ample, one could test the hypothesis that there is no correlation among credit spreads
by setting the (N 2 − N )/2 free parameters of Σ equal to zero (the identity matrix)
and evaluating the resulting decline in the log likelihood via a standard likelihood

                                           15
ratio test. Similarly, one could test the hypothesis that the correlations among credit
spreads are constant by estimating a single oﬀ-diagonal element for Σ, thus placing
(N 2 − N )/2 − 1 parameter restrictions on Σ.
     Our goal, however, is not to test speciﬁc restrictions on Σ. Rather, our objec-
tive is to understand better the cross-sectional structure of the correlation matrix of
sovereign credit spread changes. Accordingly, we examine whether sovereign credit
spread correlations are related to local stock market correlations, exchange rate cor-
relations, etc.
    To illustrate the approach, ﬁrst denote the correlation of the credit spreads of
sovereigns i and j, i = j, by σij . To parameterize σij , we adopt the speciﬁcation

                                                       
                                                       12
                      σij = α0 + α1 DR + α2 DCDX +           γk σijk ,                (2)
                                                       k=1


where DR is a dummy variable that takes value one if sovereigns i and j are in the
same geographic region, DCDX is a dummy variable that takes value one if sovereigns
i and j are both included in the current CDX-EM index, and σijk , k = 1, 2, 3 are the
correlations between the local stock returns, percentage changes in exchange rates, and
percentage chances in foreign currency reserves for sovereigns i and j, respectively.
The term σijk , k = 4 is the product of the correlation of changes in sovereign’s i
spread with the U.S. stock market return and the correlation of changes in sovereign’s
j spread with the U.S. stock market return. Similarly, σijk , k = 5, 6, . . . , 12 are the
products of the correlations of changes in the spreads for sovereigns i and j with
the Treasury, investment-grade, high-yield, equity premium, volatility premium, term
premium, bond-ﬂow, and stock-ﬂow explanatory variables, respectively. All of the
correlations are based on the overlapping sample.
      With this speciﬁcation, the α and γ parameters are easily estimated via maximum
likelihood. In doing this, care must be taken so that the estimated Σ is positive
deﬁnite and the individual ﬁtted correlations all lie within the range [−1, 1]. Once
the parameters are estimated, we can test whether individual α and γ parameters are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. If so, then this implies that there is cross-sectional
structure in Σ related to the corresponding dummy variable or correlation measure.
     Table 7 reports the maximum likelihood estimates and asymptotic t-statistics of
the coeﬃcients for the intercept, dummy variable, and the correlations included in
the linear speciﬁcation. Intuitively, the estimated parameters can be thought of as the
“slope coeﬃcients” obtained from “regressing” σij on a vector of explanatory variables
(which are either dummy variables, correlations, or products of correlations).
    The estimated intercept of the model is 0.053, but is not signiﬁcant. In contrast,
the coeﬃcient for the regional dummy variable is 0.063 with a t-statistic of 3.16.
Thus, holding all other correlations ﬁxed, the correlation between two sovereign credit

                                           16
spreads is roughly six percent higher when the two sovereigns are located in the same
geographical region. This result indicates that there is a strong regional dimension
to sovereign credit risk above and beyond that captured by the correlations of other
local or global variables.
     The 0.102 coeﬃcient for the CDX-EM dummy variable is also signiﬁcant with a
t-statistic of 2.29. Thus, holding all other eﬀects ﬁxed, the common inclusion of two
sovereigns in the CDX-EM index is associated with more than a ten-percent increase
in the correlation of their credit spreads. A possible interpretation of this result could
be that correlated trading induces correlation in sovereign spreads. Thus, sovereign
CDS contracts within the same index basket and, therefore, traded in similar ways by
index market participants, display more correlation than could be accounted for by
economic fundamentals.
     Table 7 shows that a number of the correlations included in the model speciﬁcation
have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the value of σij . Consistent with the earlier regression
results, the most signiﬁcant of these correlations are those for the U.S. stock market
return, changes in the U.S. investment and high-yield spreads, and changes in the
volatility premium. Both of the capital-ﬂow correlations are signiﬁcant. Of the three
local variables, however, only the reserve correlation is signiﬁcant.
     In summary, the results from this alternative approach reinforce those presented
earlier. The results support the view that multiple types of factors play important
roles in determining the correlation structure of sovereign credit spreads: geography,
local variables, and global ﬁnancial market, risk premia, and capital-ﬂow variables.


                     5. SOVEREIGN CREDIT RETURNS

We have shown that there is signiﬁcant correlation in sovereign CDS spreads. Fur-
thermore, a major source of this correlation is their common dependence on global
ﬁnancial market, risk premia, and capital-ﬂow variables. The natural next step is to
consider what implications these results have for the expected returns of sovereign
credit instruments.
     From the earlier discussion about the components of credit spreads, there are
at least four potential types of risk premia that might be present in sovereign credit
returns. First, investors may require a risk premium as compensation for the jump-
to-default risk inherent in sovereign debt. This premium would be incorporated into
the risk-neutral default-arrival process λQ . Second, investors may require a separate
risk premium as compensation for the risk created by the variation in the probability
of an arrival of a credit event, which we designate distress risk. This risk premium
would likewise be incorporated into the risk-neutral default-arrival process λQ . Third,
there may be a premium for recovery risk which would be included in LQ . Finally,
expected returns may also incorporate a premium for various types of liquidity risk

                                           17
such as event-related ﬂights to quality or liquidity, sovereign credit crunches, or similar
withdrawals of risk capital from the global debt markets. These types of risk premia
would be incorporated into the value of l.
     In turn, each of these four types of risk premia could have both “local” and
“global” components. For example, part of the distress-risk premium could stem from
the risk of country-speciﬁc economic and political events, while another part may
arise from the risk of broader economic crises aﬀecting entire regions or the entire
global economy. Similarly, part of the liquidity premium may be due to the projected
supply of a speciﬁc sovereign’s debt in the market, while another part may be due to
the sovereign’s enhanced liquidity in the event of a global liquidity crisis through its
inclusion in a broad emerging markets index.
     To explore the nature of sovereign credit risk premia, we conduct a Sharpe style
analysis by regressing the excess returns from portfolios invested in sovereign credit in-
struments on the excess returns of a number of U.S. equity and bond market portfolios.
Speciﬁcally, we compute the monthly returns from a hypothetical dollar-denominated
ﬁve-year ﬂoating-rate note issued by each sovereign. As shown by Duﬃe and Singleton
(2003), this hypothetical ﬂoating-rate note is equivalent to investing $100 in a U.S.
money market account and selling credit protection via the sovereign CDS market.
Thus, this return directly measures the returns associated with sovereign CDS con-
tracts.12 An important advantage of studying the returns for these ﬂoating-rate notes
is that their prices are unaﬀected by changes in riskless rates; the returns for these
ﬂoating-rate notes reﬂect only variation in credit spreads. Thus, this approach allows
us to focus on the returns from sovereign credit exclusively and avoid the confound-
ing eﬀects of changes in riskless interest rates. We then regress the excess monthly
returns from this sovereign credit position on the three Fama-French factors (the mar-
ket, SMB, and HML) and the excess returns from portfolios of ﬁve-year par Treasury
bonds, investment-grade corporate bonds, and high-yield corporate bonds.
     Table 8 presents summary statistics for the excess returns and the Appendix
provides details of how the excess returns are calculated. The ﬁrst column of the table
reports the mean (non-risk-adjusted) monthly excess returns for the sovereign credit
portfolios. All of these mean excess returns are positive. This is perhaps not surprising
given that there were no sovereign defaults or restructurings for any of the countries
in the sample during the period studied. Many of the mean excess returns are large in
economic and statistical terms. For example, the mean excess returns for Venezuela
and Brazil are 151.6 and 143.6 basis points per month, respectively. Averaging over
all 26 sovereigns, the mean excess return is 38.4 basis points per month. Of the 26
sovereigns, 16 have mean excess returns that are signiﬁcant at the ﬁve-percent level,

12
  Like interest rate swaps, CDS contracts have a value of zero at inception. Thus, the
return on a CDS contract is not deﬁned. By combining a CDS contract with a money
market position, however, the return on the portfolio is well speciﬁed.


                                            18
and 20 have mean excess returns that are signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level.
     Table 9 reports the results from regressing the excess returns on the market
factors. Consistent with the evidence about the behavior of spreads, Table 9 shows that
many sovereigns have signiﬁcant loadings on the U.S. market factors. In particular,
15 of the sovereigns have signiﬁcant coeﬃcients for the U.S. stock market factor, 8
have signiﬁcant coeﬃcients for the HML factor, and 16 have signiﬁcant coeﬃcients
for the high-yield factor. Thus, there is signiﬁcant U.S. market risk incorporated into
sovereign credit returns.
     Turning now to the risk-adjusted excess returns, the second column of Table 9
reports the regression alpha (intercept), and the third column reports its t-statistic.
Although 20 out of 26 sovereigns have positive alphas, only 3 of these are signiﬁcant
or marginally signiﬁcant. Averaging over all 26 sovereigns, the mean alpha is only
11.2 basis points per month. Thus, after controlling for global risk factors as proxied
by U.S. equity and bond market excess returns, there is little or no evidence of a
sovereign credit risk premium. In other words, the positive mean excess return from
taking sovereign credit positions appears to be simply compensation for bearing the
risk of global factors that drive sovereign credit spreads; a diversiﬁed portfolio of U.S.
stock and bond positions reproduces a substantial portion of the historic excess returns
in the sovereign debt market.
     Given that there were no sovereign defaults or restructurings in our sample, one
might be tempted to extrapolate that a sovereign’s alpha might have been much
smaller, or even negative, had it experienced such a credit event. However, this con-
clusion does not necessarily follow since it is also possible that any peso-problem risk
premium associated with sovereign default may already be part of the risk premium
incorporated into the prices of other global asset classes such as U.S. equities and
bonds. Thus, the results in Table 8 may not necessarily have been diﬀerent had there
been a sovereign default during the sample period.
     Although only a few of the alphas in Table 9 are signiﬁcant, it is important to
stress that a number of these alphas are still large in economic terms. For exam-
ple, both Russia and Turkey have alphas of roughly 0.44 percent per month, while
Venezuela has an alpha in excess of 0.30 per month. Interestingly, these countries
all experienced large local shocks during the sample period, and some may have ac-
tually come close to restructuring. Pan and Singleton (2007) document substantial
idiosyncratic behavior for Turkey’s CDS spreads (such as inversion of the CDS curve).
Thus, it is possible that these sizable alphas may in fact represent a “local” jump-to-
default risk premium as compensation for the special economic and political factors
experienced by these sovereigns, factors that would not have been captured by the
U.S.-based risk factors in the regression.
    A closely related issue is the extent to which measures of global risk premia can
be used to forecast sovereign credit returns. If sovereign credit returns include a time-


                                           19
varying risk premium for bearing the risk of broader global factors, then ex ante risk
premia measures from these global markets may be able to explain variation in realized
credit returns.
     To explore this, we ﬁrst regress the ex post monthly excess returns for the indi-
vidual sovereigns on the ex ante levels of the U.S. equity, volatility, and term premia
(described in the previous section) and the U.S. high-yield credit spread (which should
incorporate credit risk premia).13 In the interest of brevity, we do not report the results
for the individual regressions. The one-month forecasting ability of these regressions,
however, is often relatively large. In particular, the adjusted R2 from the forecast-
ing regression is greater than 20 percent for 7 of the sovereigns, and greater than 15
percent for 10. On average, the adjusted R2 is 10.8 percent.
     Because there appears to be some clustering in terms of which sovereigns display
predictability, we reestimate the regression for portfolios formed on the basis of cluster,
region, and CDX-EM inclusion (similar to Table 6). These results are presented in
Table 10.
     These results indicate that the ex ante risk premium measures have signiﬁcant
forecasting ability for the realized excess returns of some of these portfolios. The
most signiﬁcant risk premium is the U.S. high-yield spread which is signiﬁcant for
several of the clusters, and for three of the four geographical areas. This spread is
also highly signiﬁcant for the overall portfolio formed from all 26 sovereigns. The U.S.
equity premium measure is also signiﬁcant for several of the clusters, and also for Latin
America. On the other hand, the fact that none of coeﬃcients for the term premium
are signiﬁcant may be due to the sovereign credit returns being based on ﬂoating-rate
note returns, and not on longer-duration ﬁxed-coupon bond returns.
    The adjusted R2 s for a number of the regressions are fairly sizable. For example,
the adjusted R2 for the Latin America regression is 0.274. Similarly, the adjusted
R2 for the CDX-EM portfolio formed from the 12 emerging markets sovereigns in the
index that are included in our sample is 0.155. The adjusted R2 for the portfolio
formed from all 26 sovereigns is 0.147.
     These results raise the interesting issue of why the credit returns for the Latin
American countries display so much predictability. Table 8 indicates that ﬁrst order
serial correlations of monthly excess returns for Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Venezuela
are 0.399, 0.198, 0.237, and 0.241, respectively. If this predictability is due to the
eﬀects of time-varying risk premia, then these results argue that the sovereign spreads
for these Latin American countries may incorporate more risk premium than is true

13
  We include only the high-yield spread in this regression, rather than both the invest-
ment-grade and high-yield spreads, since the two spreads are highly correlated in
their levels. Note that this regression involves the level of the credit spread; previous
regressions involve changes in credit spreads.


                                            20
for most of the other countries in the study. Although beyond the scope of this study,
it would be interesting to explore how the return predictability varies with the level
of credit risk.


                                 6. CONCLUSION

Understanding the nature of sovereign credit risk is of ﬁrst-order importance in many
ﬁnancial and economic contexts. If sovereign credit risk is driven primarily by idiosyn-
cratic or country-speciﬁc factors, then standard portfolio diversiﬁcation methods are
available to manage sovereign credit risk. On the other hand, if sovereign credit risk
is driven primarily by systematic global factors, then there are major implications for
the optimal allocation of investment capital across individual countries and regions of
the world.
     The results of this paper suggest that sovereign credit risk is driven much more
by global ﬁnancial market variables and global risk premia than by local economic
forces. This dependence on common global factors such as U.S. stock market returns
and high-yield spread changes induces signiﬁcant correlation into the credit spreads
of a broad cross-section of sovereign nations. Also, we ﬁnd that global investment
ﬂows play an important role in determining the correlation structure of credit risk
in sovereign debt markets. These results help explain why we ﬁnd no evidence of a
separate credit risk premium in sovereign debt markets—the risk premium embedded
in sovereign credit returns is the same risk premium embedded in U.S. stock, volatility,
and ﬁxed income markets. These results raise the question of whether sovereign credit
should be viewed as a separate asset class.
     It is tempting to attribute these results to the growing importance of globalization
in the international economy. However, there are many other possible explanations
for these results. In particular, the relation between global investment ﬂows and the
variation in risk premia in markets such as the sovereign debt market needs to be
explored in greater depth. Similarly, the commonalities in risk premia across such
widely-diﬀerent asset classes as stocks, corporate bonds, and sovereign bonds also
requires further investigation.
     Finally, it is important to provide the caveat that our results are to the 2000-2007
period. Thus, the sample period does not include sovereign crises and credit events
such as those experienced during the 1990s. Similarly, there are no defaults for the
sovereigns included in the study during the sample period. As a result, further research
and additional data would be necessary before being able to determine whether these
results would hold during a global economic downturn.




                                           21
                                   APPENDIX

This appendix provides additional details about the deﬁnition, sources, and timing of
the data used in the study.
1. Sovereign CDS Spreads. The CDS spreads in the study are obtained from
the Bloomberg system. These CDS spreads are midmarket indicative prices for ﬁve-
year CDS contracts. In all cases, the CDS contract references the sovereign (as op-
posed to a central bank or some other entity). For 23 of the countries, the reference
bond is U.S. dollar-denominated. For two of the sovereigns, the reference bond is
Euro-denominated. The CDS contract for the People’s Republic of China references
international debt, but the only international bonds in the ﬁve-year sector are U.S.
dollar-denominated. Thus, the reference bond for the People’s Republic of China is
presumably U.S. dollar-denominated. The monthly data are generally for the last
trading day of the month. When there is no quotation for the last trading day of the
month, however, the last available quotation during the month is used.
2. Local Stock Market Returns. The local stock market returns for the countries
in the sample are monthly total returns (including dividends). The data are obtained
from Datastream. In all cases, the indexes are either from MSCI or S&P IFC. Local
stock market data for Panama is not available. Local stock market data for Qatar is
only available beginning with June 2005. Thus, for the several months prior to June
2005 for which we have CDS data for Qatar, we use the mean stock market return for
Qatar for the June 2005 to May 2007 period as a proxy for the missing observations.
3. Exchange Rates. Exchange rates, expressed as units of the local currency per
U.S. dollar, are obtained from Datastream. For some time periods for a few of the
countries, the exchange rate does not vary from month to month. In these cases, the
percentage change of zero is included in the sample.
4. Foreign Currency Reserves. The dollar values of sovereign foreign currency
holdings are obtained from the Datastream system. The original source of the data
is the International Monetary Fund. Since this data is reported with a lag, data for
the ﬁnal two or three months of the sample period are missing for some countries.
In these cases, we use the average percentage change over all available months as the
estimate of the percentage changes for the months with missing observations.
5. U.S. Stock Market Returns. The U.S. stock market excess return is the
monthly value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks (from
CRSP) minus the one-month Treasury-bill return (from Ibbotson Associates). We
also include in the latter part of the study the additional Fama-French factors SMB
and HML. Data are provided courtesy of Ken French.
6. Treasury Yields. Changes in the Treasury yields are monthly diﬀerences in the
ﬁve-year constant maturity Treasury (CMT) rates computed by the Federal Reserve
Board and reported as part of the H.15 Federal Reserve Statistical Release (Historical

                                         22
Data).
7. Corporate Yield Spreads. Changes in investment-grade yield spreads are
monthly changes in the basis-point yield spread between BBB and AAA industrial
bond indexes. Changes in high-yield spreads are monthly changes in the basis-point
yield spread between BB and BBB industrial bond indexes. The yield data for the
AAA, BBB, and BB bonds are obtained from the Bloomberg system (fair market
curves). These indexes represent the average yields of a broad cross-section of non-
callable AAA-, BBB-, and BB-rated bonds with maturities approximately equal to
ﬁve years.
8. Equity Premium. As a proxy for changes in the equity premium, we use monthly
changes in the price-earnings ratio for the S&P 100 index. This time series is obtained
from the Bloomberg system.
9. Volatility Risk Premium. The volatility risk premium is calculated as the dif-
ference between the VIX index (obtained from the Bloomberg system) and a measure
of realized volatility for the S&P 100 index. The measure of realized volatility for
date t is based on the Garman-Klass (1980) open-high-low-close volatility estimator
applied to the corresponding data for the S&P 100 index for the 20-day period from
date t − 19 to t. S&P 100 index open, high, low, and close prices are obtained from
the Yahoo ﬁnancial webpage.
10. Term Premium. The term premium is based on Cochrane-Piazzesi (2005) in
which expected excess returns on Treasury bonds are represented as a linear function
of one- through ﬁve-year forward rates. Using the estimated parameters for excess
returns on ﬁve-year Treasury bonds reported in their Table 1, we use Fama-Bliss
data (from CRSP) to construct their estimator of expected excess returns for the
period from the beginning of the sample through December 2006. For the period from
January 2007 to May 2007, we use one- through ﬁve-year Treasury Strips data (from
the fair value curves in the Bloomberg system) instead of the Fama-Bliss bond prices
to construct their estimator (since Fama-Bliss data is only available through 2006).
11. Bond and Equity Flows. The bond-ﬂow and equity-ﬂow variables are measures
of the ﬂow of investment capital to foreign markets. Speciﬁcally, we use the net ﬂows
(inﬂow minus outﬂow) to mutual funds investing in international bonds and equity,
respectively. The data are obtained from The Investment Company Institute. We
measure ﬂows to international bond funds as the total net ﬂows to the fund category
“World Bond,” as a percentage of total net assets for this category. Similarly, we
measure ﬂows to international equity funds as the total net ﬂows to the fund category
“World Equity,” again as a percent of total net assets.
12. Regional and Global Sovereign CDS Spreads. For each country, we com-
pute the regional CDS spread by taking the average of the CDS spreads for all of the
other countries in that country’s region. In doing this, we categorize the 26 coun-
tries in the sample into four distinct regions: Latin America, Asia, Europe, and the

                                          23
Middle East/Other (including Pakistan and South Africa). For each country, we also
compute the global CDS spread by taking the average of the CDS spreads for all of
the countries outside that country’s region. The regional and global spreads are then
orthogonalized by regressing them on the other explanatory variables and using the
residual from this regression as the measure of regional and global spreads.
13. Sovereign Credit Returns. Duﬃe and Singleton (2003) Chapter 8 implies a
(hypothetical) sovereign ﬂoating-rate note paying the riskless rate plus the sovereign
CDS spread is equivalent to selling protection via a sovereign CDS contract and owning
a riskless ﬂoating-rate note (which will always trade at par). Thus, the change in the
value of this hypothetical sovereign note over a month is identical to the change in
the value of a sovereign CDS contract. We compute the change in the value of a ﬁve-
year sovereign CDS contract during month t by assuming that the market ﬁve-year
CDS spread at time t + 1 also applies to a four-year eleven-month contract. Thus,
the change in value is just the change in the CDS spread over the month times the
present value of a four-year eleven-month annuity (discounted at the ﬁve-year riskless
par CMT rate plus the sovereign CDS spread). The return on the ﬂoating-rate note is
then given by taking the sum of the change in the value of the sovereign CDS contract
from t to t + 1 and the accrued coupon for the note over the same period, and dividing
by the initial par value of the ﬂoating-rate note.
14. Fixed Income Returns. To calculate the returns on portfolios of ﬁve-year
Treasury, investment-grade corporate, and high-yield corporate bonds, we assume that
the yields described above in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Appendix above represent par
yields for ﬁve-year bonds, and that the yield of a four-year eleven-month bond is equal
to that of a ﬁve-year bond. With this assumption, bond returns can be computed
directly from the time series of yields.




                                          24
                                REFERENCES

Acharya, Viral, and S. Viswanathan, 2007, Moral Hazard, Collateral, and Liquidity,
Working paper, London School of Business.

Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Liquidity and Asset
Prices, Foundations and Trends in Finance 1, 269-364.
Anderberg, Michael, R., 1973, Cluster Analysis for Applications, Academic Press,
New York, NY.

Atkeson, Andrew, 1991, International Lending with Moral Hazard and Risk of Re-
pudiation, Econometrica 59, 1069-1089.

Berg, Andrew, and Jeﬀrey Sachs, 1988, The Debt Crisis: Structural Explanations of
Country Performance, Journal of Development Economics 29, 271-306.
Bodurtha, James N., Dong-Soon Kim, and Charles M. C. Lee, 1995, Closed-End
Country Funds and U.S. Market Sentiment, Review of Financial Studies 8, 879-918.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, and William L. Megginson, 1990, Determinants of Secondary
Market Prices for Developing Country Syndicated Loans, Journal of Finance 45,
1517-1540.

Bollerslev, Tim, Michael Gibson, and Hao Zhou, 2004, Dynamic Estimation of
Volatility Risk Premia and Investor Risk Aversion for Option-Implied and Realized
Volatilities, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Bollerslev, Tim, and Hao Zhou, 2007, Expected Stock Returns and Variance Risk
Premia, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.

Britten-Jones, Mark, and Anthony Neuberger, 2000, Option Prices, Implied Price
Processes and Stochastic Volatility, Journal of Finance 55, 839-866.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2007, Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity, Working paper, Princeton University.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 1989a, A Constant Recontracting Model of
Sovereign Debt, Journal of Political Economy 97, 155-178.

Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 1989b, Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?,
American Economic Review 79, 43-50.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2000, Prospective Deﬁcits
and the Asian Currency Crisis, Working paper, Northwestern University.

Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond Risk Premia, American Eco-

                                       25
nomic Review 95, 138-160.
Cole, Harold L., and Timothy J. Kehoe, 1996, A Self-Fulﬁlling Model of Mexico’s
1994-95 Debt Crisis, Journal of International Economics 41, 309-330.

Cole, Harold L., and Timothy J. Kehoe, 2000, Self-Fulﬁlling Debt Crises, Review of
Economic Studies 67, 91-116.
Dahiya, Sandeep, 1997, The Risk and Returns of Brady Bonds in a Portfolio Context,
Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments 6, No. 5, 45-60.

Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2003, Term Structure Modeling in Theory
and Reality, Review of Financial Studies 16, 631-678.

Dooley, Michael P., 2000, A Model of Crisis in Emerging Markets, The Economic
Journal 110, 256-272.
Dooley, Michael P., and Lars E. O. Svensson, 1994, Policy Inconsistency and External
Debt Service, Journal of International Money and Finance 13, 364-374.

Duﬃe, Darrell, 1999, Credit Swap Valuation, Financial Analysts Journal January-
February, 73-87.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Jun Liu, 2001, Floating-Fixed Credit Spreads, Financial Ana-
lysts Journal 57, 76-87.

Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of De-
faultable Bond Yields, Review of Financial Studies 12, 687-720.

Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2003, Credit Risk, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
Duﬃe, Darrell, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2003, Modeling Sover-
eign Yield Spreads: A Case Study of Russian Debt, Journal of Finance 58, 119-159.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz, 1981, Debt with Potential Repudiation: The-
oretical and Empirical Analysis, Review of Economic Studies 48, 289-309.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1984, LDC Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
Investigation, 1976-80, American Economic Review 74, 726-734.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1986, The Pricing of Bonds and Bank Loans in International
Markets: An Empirical Analysis of Developing Countries’ Foreign Borrowing, Euro-
pean Economic Review 30, 565-589.

Edwards, Sebastian, 2002, The Argentine Debt Crisis of 2001-2002: A Chronology
and Some Key Policy Issues, Working paper, UCLA.


                                        26
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ashoka Mody, 2000, What Explains Changing Spreads on
Emerging-Market Debt?, in (Sebastian Edwards, ed.) The Economics of Interna-
tional Capital Flows, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Erb, Claude B, Campbell R. Harvey, and Tadas E. Viskanta, 1996, The Inﬂuence of
Political, Economic, and Financial Risk on Expected Fixed-Income Returns, Journal
of Fixed Income September, 7-31.
Erb, Claude B, Campbell R. Harvey, and Tadas E. Viskanta, 1997, Emerging Market
Bonds: A Global Perspective, Proceedings of the Association for Investment Man-
agement and Research, Financial Analysts Seminar, Northwestern University, July
24.

Erb, Claude B, Campbell R. Harvey, and Tadas E. Viskanta, 1999, New Perspectives
on Emerging Market Bonds, The Journal of Portfolio Management Winter, 83-92.

Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Oliver Vigneron, 2007, Limits of Arbi-
trage: Theory and Evidence from the Mortgage Backed Securities Market, Journal
of Finance 62, 557-596.

Gârleanu, Nicolae, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Allen Poteshman, 2007, Demand-Based
Option Pricing, Working paper, New York University.

Garman, Mark, and Michael J. Klass, 1980, On the Estimation of Security Price
Volatilities from Historical Data, Journal of Business 53, 67-78.

Geyer, Alois, Stephan Kossmeier, and Stefan Pichler, 2004, Measuring Systematic
Risk in EMU Government Yield Spreads, Review of Financee 8, 171-197.

Goetzmann, William, Lingfeng Li, and Geert Rouwenhorst, 2005, Long-Term Global
Market Correlations, Journal of Business 78, 1-38.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with
Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.

Grossman, Herschel I., and John B. Van Huyck, 1988, Sovereign Debt as a Contin-
gent Claim: Excusable Default, Repudiation, and Reputation, American Economic
Review 78, 1088-1097.

Hameed, Allaudeen, Wenjin Kang, and S. Viswanathan, 2007, Market Declines and
Liquidity, Working paper, Duke University.
Kamin, Steven, and Karsten von Kleist, 1999, The Evolution and Determinants of
Emerging Market Credit Spreads in the 1990s, Working paper No. 68, Bank for
International Settlements.
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Angel Ubide, 2000, Crises, Contagion, and the Closed-

                                       27
End Country Fund Puzzle, Work, International Monetary Fund Staﬀ Papers 47,
54-89.
Liu, Jun, and Francis A. Longstaﬀ, 2004, Losing Money of Arbitrage: Optimal
Dynamic Portfolio Choice in Markets with Arbitrage Opportunities, Review of Fi-
nancial Studies 17, 611-641.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2004, The Flight to Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond
Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511-526.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield Spreads:
Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market,
Journal of Finance 60, 2213-2253.

Mitchell, Mark, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow Moving Capital,
American Economic Review 97, 215-220.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1986, Speculative Attack and the External Constraint in a Maxi-
mizing Model of the Balance of Payments, Canadian Journal of Economics 19, 1-22.

Pan, Jun, 2002, The Jump-Risk Premia Implicit in Options: Evidence from an
Integrated Time-Series Study, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 3-50.
Pan, Jun, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2007, Default and Recovery Implicit in the Term
Structure of Sovereign CDS Spreads, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Remolona, Eli, Michela Scatigna, and Eliza Wu, 2007, The Dynamic Pricing of
Sovereign Risk in Emerging Markets: Fundamentals and Risk Aversion, Working
paper, The Bank for International Settlements.

Roll, Richard, 1988, The International Crash of October 1987, Financial Analysts
Journal September-October, 19-35.
Rozada, Martin, and Eduardo Yeyati, 2005, Global Factors and Emerging Market
Spreads, Working paper, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

Sachs, Jeﬀrey, Aaron Tornell, Andres Velasco, Francesco Giavazzi, and Istvan Sze-
kely, 1996, The Collapse of the Mexican Peso: What Have We Learned?, Economic
Policy 11, 13-63.

Sinyagini-Woodruﬀ, Yulia, 2003, Russia, Sovereign Default, Reputation and Access
to Capital Markets, Europe-Asia Studies 55, 521-551.
White, Halbert, 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator
and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.

Zhang, Frank X., 2003, What did the Credit Market Expect of Argentina Default?


                                        28
Evidence from Default Swap Data, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.




                                     29
                                                              Table 1

Descriptive Statistics for Sovereign Credit Default Swap Spreads. This table reports summary statistics for month-end spreads for five-year
sovereign CDS contracts for the October 2000 to May 2007 period. CDS spreads are measured in basis points.




                                              Standard                                                              Serial
                                 Mean         Deviation        Minimum         Median         Maximum          Correlation       N


      Brazil                     753.02          827.24            62.92        464.56          3790.00             0.951        68
      Bulgaria                   195.99          188.90            13.45        130.69           697.50             0.979        80
      Chile                       44.55           38.94            13.37         23.67           160.00             0.990        53
      China                       28.15           15.88            10.23         25.45            85.75             0.892        53
      Columbia                   328.67          188.19            79.00        310.24           805.00             0.966        53
      Croatia                    133.66          120.19            15.90         98.38           382.50             0.988        80
      Hungary                     29.47           10.05            11.00         29.75            50.34             0.884        63
      Israel                      32.80           10.85            17.75         34.25            66.41             0.476        34
      Japan                        7.50            5.11             2.50          5.70            21.50             0.968        53
      Korea                       47.88           27.42            14.25         39.39           162.50             0.882        64
      Malaysia                    67.95           56.28            13.63         35.84           180.00             0.986        68
      Mexico                     138.58           90.70            28.82        109.96           392.00             0.957        68
      Pakistan                   216.57           45.54           157.50        217.50           335.00             0.863        32
      Panama                     180.49           80.05            63.53        164.32           354.55             0.954        43
      Peru                       221.72          117.02            63.14        202.21           570.89             0.928        44
      Philippines                367.33          145.16           102.19        414.96           617.50             0.967        62
      Poland                      34.30           18.93             8.13         35.50            83.33             0.960        80
      Qatar                       27.43            9.32            11.50         31.00            39.00             0.867        34
      Romania                    127.13          121.63            18.05         59.77           455.00             0.984        56
      Russia                     324.11          288.16            38.83        233.79          1017.50             0.985        80
      Slovak                      37.48           41.76             6.00         15.00           152.50             0.981        68
      South Africa               122.29           66.83            25.25        115.42           254.67             0.983        80
      Thailand                    44.05           22.26            27.50         37.64           130.00             0.926        53
      Turkey                     527.64          330.42           122.94        446.94          1281.25             0.911        80
      Ukraine                    203.22           64.68           132.63        180.06           369.50             0.875        34
      Venezuela                  516.86          475.90           119.22        337.67          2012.50             0.976        53
                                                                    Table 2

Correlation Matrix of Monthly Changes in Sovereign Credit Default Swap Spreads. This table reports the pairwise correlation coeﬃcients
for monthly changes in the CDS spreads for the indicated countries. Each pairwise correlation is computed using all available overlapping observations
for the two sovereigns.




                        Brazil   Bulgar    Chile    China     Colum     Croatia Hungary     Israel    Japan     Korea   Malays Mexico Pakistan


    Brazil               1.00
    Bulgaria             0.62     1.00
    Chile                0.69     0.39     1.00
    China                0.65     0.21     0.64      1.00
    Columbia             0.82     0.39     0.49      0.60      1.00
    Croatia              0.29     0.15     0.48      0.43      0.34      1.00
    Hungary              0.14     0.27     0.23      0.26      0.14      0.37      1.00
    Israel               0.33     0.35     0.06      0.04      0.42      0.31      0.15      1.00
    Japan                0.27     0.27     0.55      0.47      0.22      0.12      0.36     −0.09      1.00
    Korea                0.00     0.08     0.51      0.68      0.31      0.23      0.37     −0.08      0.53     1.00
    Malaysia             0.39     0.34     0.71      0.75      0.48      0.26      0.37     −0.01      0.59     0.57      1.00
    Mexico               0.78     0.64     0.56      0.68      0.76      0.28      0.24      0.41      0.38     0.19      0.28     1.00
    Pakistan             0.31     0.56     0.36      0.46      0.36      0.53      0.38      0.17      0.00     0.31      0.31     0.49     1.00
    Panama               0.54     0.55     0.53      0.23      0.61      0.65      0.32      0.29      0.17     0.07      0.44     0.64     0.50
    Peru                 0.72     0.60     0.43      0.45      0.68      0.49      0.26      0.02      0.15     0.28      0.56     0.66     0.34
    Philippines          0.25     0.20     0.27      0.50      0.42      0.35      0.42      0.35      0.31     0.47      0.40     0.35     0.64
    Poland               0.49     0.39     0.37      0.35      0.23      0.36      0.49      0.07      0.35     0.30      0.34     0.60     0.53
    Qatar                0.12     0.34     0.06      0.23      0.15      0.39      0.37      0.47      0.09     0.20      0.24     0.08     0.18
    Romania              0.49     0.77     0.49      0.13      0.17      0.60      0.50      0.28      0.41     0.30      0.60     0.23     0.56
    Russia               0.63     0.79     0.50      0.47      0.69      0.29      0.21      0.26      0.19     0.10      0.30     0.74     0.41
    Slovak               0.35     0.42     0.33      0.10     −0.09      0.25      0.23      0.13      0.17     0.05      0.08     0.45     0.21
    S. Africa            0.40     0.21     0.46      0.33      0.55      0.29      0.53      0.20      0.21     0.26      0.44     0.48     0.36
    Thailand             0.69     0.30     0.71      0.89      0.58      0.43      0.35      0.10      0.48     0.70      0.85     0.63     0.34
    Turkey               0.59     0.63     0.71      0.57      0.42      0.31      0.35      0.54      0.46     0.52      0.51     0.70     0.55
    Ukraine              0.38     0.56     0.14      0.19      0.42      0.52      0.34      0.17      0.02     0.09      0.34     0.64     0.58
    Venezuela            0.47     0.53     0.46      0.56      0.43      0.14      0.36      0.24      0.45     0.59      0.66     0.41     0.27
                                                       Table 2 Continued

Correlation Matrix of Monthly Changes in Sovereign Credit Default Swap Spreads.




                   Panama   Peru    Phillip   Poland    Qatar Romania Russia   Slovak   S Africa   Thai   Turkey Ukraine   Venez


   Brazil
   Bulgaria
   Chile
   China
   Columbia
   Croatia
   Hungary
   Israel
   Japan
   Korea
   Malaysia
   Mexico
   Pakistan
   Panama           1.00
   Peru             0.64     1.00
   Philippines      0.51     0.27    1.00
   Poland           0.59     0.46    0.31     1.00
   Qatar            0.22    −0.20    0.41     0.19      1.00
   Romania          0.45     0.68    0.12     0.52      0.23    1.00
   Russia           0.48     0.66    0.28     0.46      0.13    0.41   1.00
   Slovak           0.16     0.00    0.08     0.47      0.38    0.40   0.57     1.00
   S. Africa        0.60     0.60    0.32     0.49      0.29    0.54   0.33     0.35     1.00
   Thailand         0.30     0.49    0.55     0.39      0.12    0.28   0.51     0.16     0.39      1.00
   Turkey           0.73     0.62    0.44     0.61      0.34    0.57   0.67     0.41     0.41      0.65   1.00
   Ukraine          0.59     0.31    0.54     0.48      0.18    0.38   0.56    −0.02     0.43      0.23   0.62    1.00
   Venezuela        0.31     0.55    0.43     0.33      0.18    0.34   0.42     0.33     0.38      0.64   0.50    0.14     1.00
                                                                Table 3

Principal Components Analysis Results. This table reports summary statistics for the principal components analysis of the correlation matrix
of monthly sovereign CDS spread changes. All Observations denotes results based on the correlation matrix computed using all available overlapping
observations for each pairwise correlation. Overlapping Observations denotes results based on the correlation matrix computing using only the months
of the sample for which data is available for all 26 sovereigns.


                                                      All Observations                                    Overlapping Observations

                                                                   Cumulative                                               Cumulative
           Principal                         Percentage            Percentage                         Percentage            Percentage
           Component                          Explained             Explained                          Explained             Explained


           First                                  31.69                   31.69                            47.67                  47.67
           Second                                 11.76                   43.45                             9.63                  57.30
           Third                                   9.78                   53.23                             8.19                  65.49
           Fourth                                  6.36                   59.59                             5.86                  71.35
           Fifth                                   6.02                   65.61                             5.59                  76.94
                                                                    Table 4

Sovereign Credit Clusters. This table reports the clusters formed on the basis of the correlation matrix of monthly changes in sovereign CDS
spreads. The pairwise correlations in the correlation matrix are computed using all available overlapping observations for the two sovereigns. Ave.
Corr. Internal denotes the average correlation among sovereigns within each cluster. Ave. Corr. External denotes the average correlation between the
sovereigns within a cluster and those outside of that cluster. Ave. CDS Spread is the average CDS value taken over all monthly observations for all
sovereigns within a cluster. CDS spreads are measured in basis points.


                                          Cluster 1        Cluster 2          Cluster 3       Cluster 4        Cluster 5          Cluster 6


                 Countries                Brazil           Chile              Croatia         Columbia         Pakistan           Israel
                 in Cluster               Bulgaria         China              Hungary         Panama           Philippines        Qatar
                                          Mexico           Japan              Malaysia        Peru             Ukraine
                                          Poland           Korea              Romania
                                          Russia           Thailand           S. Africa
                                          Slovak           Venezuela
                                          Turkey


       Ave. Corr. Internal                0.516            0.596              0.402           0.588            0.517              0.466
       Ave. Corr. External                0.210            0.220              0.278           0.245            0.218              0.102

         Ave. CDS Spread                  287.30           114.83             96.10           243.63           262.37             30.12
                                                                     Table 5

Results from the Regression of Changes in Sovereign Credit Default Swap Spreads on the Local Variables, Global Financial Market
Variables, Global Risk Premia, Capital Flows, and Regional and Global Sovereign Factors. This table reports the White (1980) t-statistics
for the indicated regression explanatory variables. Local Ratio denotes the ratio of the R2 from the regression in which only the local variables are included
to the R2 from the regression in which all of the variables are included. Significance at the five-percent (ten-percent) level is denoted by ∗∗ (∗ ).


                     Local Variables           Global Financial Market          Global Risk Premia        Capital Flows       Sov Spreads
                                                                                                                                               Adj    Local
 Country         Stock   Exchg    Resrv      Mkt      Trsy      IG     HY        Equ      Vol   Term      Bond     Stock      Reg     Glob      R2    Ratio


 Brazil          −1.09    4.46∗∗ 1.75∗      −0.38 −1.22 −0.22      2.19∗∗       1.77∗ −1.14    1.14       −1.45    1.51   −1.03    1.48        0.67    0.82
                                                  ∗∗
 Bulgaria         0.07 −0.43      0.55      −4.78    0.12   1.18   0.74        −0.99 −0.37     0.28        0.64    1.87∗   3.76∗∗ 1.84∗        0.58    0.02
 Chile           −2.25∗∗ 0.89 −0.41         −0.94    0.95   1.80∗ 2.55∗∗       −2.10∗∗ 2.52∗∗ 0.80         0.96    0.32    1.64    4.64∗∗      0.54    0.38
 China            1.29 −1.41      0.81      −2.48∗∗ −0.55   0.41   3.26∗∗       1.13    1.78∗ 2.42∗∗            ∗∗
                                                                                                           2.57 −0.82      2.86 ∗∗
                                                                                                                                   0.75        0.67    0.02
 Columbia         0.53    3.78∗∗ 0.19       −2.38 ∗∗
                                                     0.77 −0.34    3.47∗∗      −2.03 ∗∗
                                                                                        3.49∗∗ 1.40        1.06 −0.38      3.50∗∗ −1.08        0.57    0.18
 Croatia         −1.60 −1.60 −2.44∗∗        −0.08 −1.65     0.82   4.39∗∗       0.40    0.12   2.97∗∗      0.16    1.43    2.40∗∗ −0.52        0.24    0.34
 Hungary         −2.94∗∗ 1.29 −0.62          0.22    0.00   0.67   1.24         0.07 −1.06     0.08       −0.71    0.09    1.89∗ −1.38         0.26    0.75
 Israel          −0.49 −0.79 −1.57          −1.35 −0.99     0.26   1.09        −1.03 −0.33     1.15       −0.88    0.18    1.58 −0.85          0.09    0.42
 Japan           −0.68 −0.31 −0.04          −1.26    0.83 −1.15    1.42        −0.39 −0.62     0.00        0.76 −0.35      1.24    0.92        0.13    0.21
 Korea           −2.15∗∗ 1.25     0.93      −0.32    1.32 −1.03    0.44        −0.87 −1.10     0.16        1.33 −1.21      2.41∗∗ −0.22        0.27    0.36
 Malaysia        −2.68∗∗ 3.53∗∗ 1.17        −1.85∗ −0.42 −0.65     1.06        −1.70∗ −1.91∗ −0.49        −0.84    2.02∗∗  3.47∗∗ 2.74∗∗       0.59    0.21
 Mexico          −2.69∗∗ −0.51    1.86∗     −3.16∗∗ 0.78    2.13∗∗ 4.33∗∗       4.10∗∗ −4.10∗∗ 1.26        0.05    1.50    3.44∗∗ 1.38         0.78    0.48
 Pakistan        −2.36∗∗ 0.90     1.43      −1.08 −0.18     0.02 −1.07          0.90 −0.96 −0.19          −0.47    0.75    0.37    0.89        0.14    0.63
 Panama                           1.78∗     −0.24    0.61   2.45∗∗ 2.79∗∗       2.14∗∗ −1.19   1.06       −2.59∗∗ −0.30    1.91∗ 2.14∗∗        0.63    0.05
 Peru            −1.20 −0.07      1.32      −0.19 −1.58     0.73   2.69∗∗       0.49 −0.42     2.93∗∗     −1.48    1.44    3.11∗∗ −0.19        0.50    0.18
 Philippines     −2.79∗∗ 0.01     2.19∗∗    −1.65 −0.28 −0.20      1.57        −0.28    0.27   1.70∗      −0.13 −2.07∗∗    4.92∗∗ 1.08         0.44    0.56
 Poland          −2.59∗∗ −0.38    1.75∗     −0.62    0.45   1.25   3.94∗∗       0.24 −1.56 −0.41          −0.35    0.04    0.97    1.46        0.38    0.41
 Qatar           −2.56∗∗ 0.04 −1.24         −1.30 −1.21     1.44   1.42        −1.14 −2.48∗∗ 1.94∗        −0.87 −1.20      2.27∗∗ −1.24        0.19    0.41
 Romania         −0.08 −0.39      1.63      −1.32 −0.31     0.86   2.02∗∗       0.70 −2.55∗∗ 0.72         −1.81∗ 2.52∗∗    1.77∗ 1.48          0.36    0.01
 Russia          −6.28∗∗ −0.15 −2.05∗∗      −2.07∗∗ −0.68   0.86   2.47∗∗      −0.60    0.03 −0.35        −2.16∗∗ 3.77∗∗   3.45∗∗ 2.70∗∗       0.68    0.52
 Slovak          −0.74 −0.85      0.29      −0.31    2.03∗∗ 0.22   2.47∗∗       1.34 −0.29 −0.73           1.19 −0.04      1.51    0.99        0.27    0.08
 S. Africa       −3.34∗∗         −0.28      −0.80    1.07   1.18   3.32∗∗       0.88 −2.00∗∗ 0.48         −1.86∗ 1.36      0.71    1.47        0.33    0.51
                                                  ∗∗
 Thailand         1.00 −0.90      1.23      −2.61    0.57   0.37   2.73∗∗       0.89    1.32   1.77∗       2.82∗∗ 0.16     2.88∗∗ 2.52∗∗       0.68    0.11
 Turkey          −3.70∗∗ 1.94∗ 0.64         −0.83 −0.46     0.38   2.19∗∗       0.26 −0.08     1.67∗       1.55 −0.03      0.32    4.96∗∗      0.70    0.75
 Ukraine         −4.97∗∗ 4.90∗∗ −0.55        0.24 −0.83     0.85   0.06         0.89 −1.59     0.64       −0.44    1.80 ∗
                                                                                                                           1.46 −0.04          0.65    0.83
 Venezuela        4.47∗∗ −3.84∗∗ −0.31      −2.91∗∗ −0.47 −1.78∗ 2.99∗∗        −2.28∗∗ 0.40    0.85        1.83∗ −1.07     2.60∗∗ 2.04∗∗       0.66    0.36
                                                                        Table 6

Results from the Regression of Credit Default Swap Indexes on the Global Financial Market Variables, Global Risk Premia, and
Capital Flows. This table reports the White (1980) t-statistics for the indicated variables from the regression of the CDS indexes on these explanatory
variables. Significance at the five-percent (ten-percent) level is denoted by ∗∗ (∗ ).


                                     Global Financial Market                        Global Risk Premia              Capital Flows
                                                                                                                                             Adj
    Region                     Mkt        Trsy        IG       HY                 Equ       Vol     Term           Bond       Stock           R2


    Cluster   1              −4.27∗∗     −0.66      0.24       2.23∗∗          0.73       −0.28          1.33     −0.62       1.46           0.45
    Cluster   2              −2.43∗∗      0.36      0.21       1.33           −2.56∗∗     −0.43          1.03      1.29       0.29           0.19
    Cluster   3              −1.50       −1.43      0.98       4.48∗∗         −0.08       −2.11∗∗        2.36∗∗   −1.05       1.77∗          0.25
    Cluster   4              −2.08∗∗      0.20      0.83       2.85∗∗         −0.44        1.52          1.20     −0.32       0.47           0.40
    Cluster   5              −1.73∗      −0.34     −0.09       2.60∗∗         −1.98∗      −0.79          1.49     −0.68      −1.36           0.24
    Cluster   6              −1.79∗      −1.29      0.80       1.49           −0.94       −0.44          2.01∗∗   −0.95      −0.71           0.05


    Latin America            −2.37∗∗     −1.56       0.43      2.08∗∗          2.06∗∗     −1.27          1.60     −1.28       1.63           0.50
    Asia                     −2.00∗∗      0.51       0.50      2.41∗∗         −1.50       −0.98          0.88      0.32      −1.39           0.25
    Europe                   −3.40∗∗     −0.38       0.92      2.45∗∗         −0.34       −0.18          0.60     −0.61       2.10∗∗         0.24
    Mideast/Other            −4.89∗∗      0.41       0.35      1.74∗          −0.37       −0.18          1.05      1.52      −0.07           0.39


    CDX-EM                   −5.27∗∗      -0.64      0.00      2.75∗∗          0.45       −0.44          1.62     −0.83        1.67∗         0.51
    Non-CDX-EM               −3.11∗∗      -0.35      0.84      2.35∗∗         −0.32       −0.32          0.90      0.44        1.31          0.22


    All                      −5.16∗∗     −0.62       0.20      2.83∗∗             0.39    −0.49          1.49     −0.59        1.66          0.49
                                                              Table 7

Maximum Likelihood Estimation Results for the Unconditional Covariance Matrix Model. This table reports the maximum likelihood
parameter estimates and associated asymptotic t-statistics for the indicated cross-sectional structural variables for the unconditional covariance matrix
model for the sovereign CDS spreads.


                  Variable                                                                   Coeﬃcient                     t-Statistic


                  Intercept                                                                        0.053                         1.22

                  Regional Dummy                                                                   0.063                         3.16
                  CDX-EM Dummy                                                                     0.102                         2.29

                  Local Stock Correlation                                                        −0.003                        −0.19
                  Currency Rate Correlation                                                       0.003                         0.15
                  Reserve Correlation                                                             0.050                         2.24

                  Correlation   with   US Stock Market                                             0.942                         4.54
                  Correlation   with   US Treasury Yields                                          0.101                         0.18
                  Correlation   with   US IG Yields                                                2.803                         6.05
                  Correlation   with   US HY Yields                                                1.105                         3.69
                  Correlation   with   Equity Premium                                              0.230                         0.77
                  Correlation   with   Volatility Premium                                          1.167                         4.02
                  Correlation   with   Term Premium                                                0.426                         0.87
                  Correlation   with   Bond Flows                                                  0.455                         2.45
                  Correlation   with   Equity Flows                                                1.419                         2.40
                                                                  Table 8

Descriptive Statistics for Sovereign Credit Excess Returns. This table reports summary statistics for the monthly excess returns of sovereign
floating-rate notes. These returns are computed using the changes in the five-year sovereign CDS contracts for the October 2000 to May 2007 period.
Significance at the five-percent (ten-percent) level is denoted by ∗∗ (∗ ).


                                                  t Statistic      Standard                                                Serial
                                   Mean        for the Mean        Deviation        Minimum          Maximum          Correlation        N


      Brazil                     0.01436                1.86∗         0.06336        −0.26827           0.17314             0.399        67
      Bulgaria                   0.00457                2.72∗∗        0.01491        −0.04166           0.04075            −0.201        79
      Chile                      0.00162                3.98∗∗        0.00293        −0.00266           0.01545             0.198        52
      China                      0.00084                1.85∗         0.00330        −0.00224           0.02282             0.053        52
      Columbia                   0.00841                3.12∗∗        0.01944        −0.03754           0.08196            −0.060        52
      Croatia                    0.00296                3.40∗∗        0.00774        −0.01072           0.05121             0.121        79
      Hungary                    0.00033                1.20          0.00213        −0.00685           0.00592            −0.178        62
      Israel                     0.00076                0.92          0.00474        −0.01308           0.01834            −0.375        33
      Japan                      0.00021                2.54∗∗        0.00060        −0.00140           0.00234             0.108        52
      Korea                      0.00076                1.02          0.00592        −0.02280           0.02906            −0.141        63
      Malaysia                   0.00166                3.19∗∗        0.00425        −0.01074           0.01845            −0.015        67
      Mexico                     0.00301                2.22∗∗        0.01109        −0.03717           0.03378             0.237        67
      Pakistan                   0.00038                2.17∗∗        0.00966        −0.01681           0.02772             0.054        31
      Panama                     0.00038                2.51∗∗        0.00986        −0.03150           0.02198            −0.054        42
      Peru                       0.00044                1.64          0.01773        −0.03548           0.05505            −0.085        43
      Philippines                0.00046                2.47∗∗        0.01460        −0.03128           0.05185             0.086        61
      Poland                     0.00052                1.96∗         0.00237        −0.00589           0.00944             0.128        79
      Qatar                      0.00055                1.52          0.00206        −0.00441           0.00753            −0.174        33
      Romania                    0.00443                3.32∗∗        0.00992        −0.02197           0.03440             0.256        55
      Russia                     0.00708                3.42∗∗        0.01842        −0.03677           0.06592             0.102        79
      Slovak                     0.00129                2.83∗∗        0.00372        −0.00761           0.01434             0.508        67
      South Africa               0.00195                3.25∗∗        0.00532        −0.00971           0.02333             0.049        79
      Thailand                   0.00110                2.04∗∗        0.00390        −0.00344           0.02447             0.116        52
      Turkey                     0.00071                1.32          0.04800        −0.13564           0.13735            −0.040        79
      Ukraine                    0.00044                1.92∗         0.01309        −0.01585           0.04808             0.030        33
      Venezuela                  0.01516                2.99∗∗        0.03653        −0.04734           0.15787             0.241        52
                                                                       Table 9
Results from the Regression of Sovereign Excess Returns on Global Risk Factors. This table reports the intercept (alpha) and White
(1980) t statistics from the regression of implied monthly excess returns for sovereign floating-rate notes on the excess return on the three Fama-
French factors, and the excess returns on five-year US Treasury bonds, investment-grade bonds, and high-yield bonds. Significance at the five-percent
(ten-percent) level is denoted by ∗∗ (∗ ).


                                                                                   t-Statistics
                                                                                                                                          Adj.
     Country                       α                α      Market        SMB          HML          Trsy        IG         HY               R2


     Brazil                 0.00286             0.34          2.75∗∗     −1.40         0.40        0.34     −0.82        2.21∗∗           0.32
     Bulgaria               0.00281             1.80∗         1.87∗       2.08∗∗      −0.43       −0.84      0.71        0.71             0.23
     Chile                  0.00057             1.39          1.33        0.31         0.86       −0.48      0.14        1.70∗            0.25
     China                 −0.00014            −0.33          1.35       −0.88         0.62        1.32     −1.70        1.66             0.26
     Columbia               0.00258             0.91          2.26∗∗     −0.09         0.78        2.08∗∗   −2.52∗∗      3.36∗∗           0.41
     Croatia                0.00154             1.92∗         0.27        0.99         1.31       −2.36∗∗    0.53        3.06∗∗           0.15
     Hungary               −0.00007            −0.25          2.22∗∗     −0.52         2.25∗∗      0.08     −0.27        1.37             0.07
     Israel                 0.00002             0.02          1.40        1.12         0.05       −0.15      0.12        0.97             0.11
     Japan                  0.00011             1.36          0.29        1.16         1.33        1.68∗    −2.30∗∗      1.69∗            0.14
     Korea                 −0.00016            −0.21          1.76∗       1.04         2.14∗∗      2.00∗∗   −1.68∗       0.82             0.13
     Malaysia               0.00104             1.26          0.72        0.65         0.55        1.66     −1.60        1.78∗            0.06
     Mexico                 0.00019             0.16          4.38∗∗     −0.89         0.85        0.36     −0.76        3.00∗∗           0.44
     Pakistan               0.00085             0.39          2.25∗∗     −1.67∗        0.41       −0.28      0.58       −0.11             0.03
     Panama                −0.00006            −0.04          2.06∗∗     −0.63         1.87∗      −1.16      0.63        2.87∗∗           0.42
     Peru                  −0.00128            −0.41          1.47        0.56         3.19∗∗      1.60     −1.69∗       2.18∗∗           0.27
     Philippines            0.00199             1.08          2.25∗∗     −1.49         1.65        0.64     −1.25        2.52∗∗           0.19
     Poland                 0.00014             0.50          2.37∗∗      0.41         0.46       −0.67     −0.11        2.81∗∗           0.23
     Qatar                  0.00029             0.52          0.56        0.45         0.43       −0.94      1.11        0.00            −0.12
     Romania                0.00166             1.07         −0.27        2.32∗∗       1.84∗      −0.08     −0.35        2.65∗∗           0.16
     Russia                 0.00439             2.10∗∗        2.16∗∗      1.55        −0.05        0.00     −0.39        2.40∗∗           0.26
     Slovak                 0.00073             1.24          0.18        0.67        −0.44       −0.38     −0.10        2.35∗∗           0.11
     S. Africa              0.00059             1.14          3.07∗∗      1.69∗        1.68∗      −0.37      0.23        3.15∗∗           0.24
     Thailand              −0.00031            −0.65          1.77∗      −0.69         1.67∗       0.98     −1.27        1.57             0.28
     Turkey                 0.00443             0.90          4.39∗∗      0.23        −1.61        0.34     −0.67        2.13∗∗           0.43
     Ukraine                0.00134             0.58          1.56       −2.00∗∗      −0.21       −0.90      0.83        0.90             0.08
     Venezuela              0.00304             0.72          2.03∗∗      1.46         2.25∗∗      2.02∗∗   −1.39        1.40             0.36
                                                                    Table 10

Results from the Forecasting Regression. This table reports White (1980) t-statistics from the regression of ex post monthly implied excess returns
for sovereign floating-rate notes on ex ante measures of the U.S. equity, volatility, and term premia as well as the ex ante spread on U.S. high-yield bonds.
Significance at the five-percent (ten-percent) level is denoted by ∗∗ (∗ ).


                                                               Equity              Vol           Term               HY                         Adj
         Region                             Intercept           Prem             Prem            Prem            Spread                         R2


         Cluster   1                            0.14            −1.99∗∗          1.64            0.56              2.79∗∗                   0.192
         Cluster   2                           −0.62             0.82           −1.01           −1.30              1.04                     0.035
         Cluster   3                           −0.31             0.07            0.07            0.35              1.10                     0.056
         Cluster   4                            1.27            −2.31∗∗          0.09           −0.76              2.74∗∗                   0.272
         Cluster   5                            0.93            −0.70           −0.15           −1.05              0.47                    −0.017
         Cluster   6                           −0.90             0.83           −1.49           −0.87              0.92                    −0.060


         Latin America                          0.28            −2.08∗∗          1.31            0.13              2.55∗∗                   0.274
         Asia                                  −0.21             0.27           −0.14           −1.14              0.38                    −0.042
         Europe                                −0.30            −0.75            1.65∗           0.94              2.08∗∗                   0.122
         Mideast/Other                          0.19            −1.37            0.85            0.25              1.87∗                    0.063


         CDX-EM                                 0.05            −1.70∗            1.43            0.08             2.73∗∗                    0.155
         Non-CDX-EM                            −0.35            −0.67             1.28            0.91             2.10∗∗                    0.113


         All                                     0.00           −1.56             1.48            0.38             2.67∗∗                    0.147
                                             3rd Component                                  2nd Component                            Ist Component




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                              0.2




                                            −0.1
                                                       0.1
                                                             0.3
                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                     0.3




                                                   0
                                                                                                   0




                                     −0.3
                                                                                     −0.3
                                                                                            −0.1
                  
    
                           Brazil                                          Brazil                                      Brazil
         
 
 
                         Bulgaria                                         Bulgaria                                   Bulgaria

 
                            Chile                                            Chile                                      Chile
                  
                            China                                           China                                       China
                  
         
                        Columbia                                         Columbia                                   Columbia

                         Croatia                                          Croatia                                    Croatia

         
                         Hungary                                         Hungary                                     Hungary
         
         
                            Israel                                          Israel                                      Israel


                         Japan                                            Japan                                      Japan
              
 
 
                          Korea                                            Korea                                      Korea

                        Malaysia                                        Malaysia                                    Malaysia
                  

                          Mexico                                           Mexico                                     Mexico
         
         
                  
                         Pakistan                                        Pakistan                                    Pakistan
         
                         Panama                                           Panama                                     Panama

         

                           Peru                                            Peru                                        Peru
         

                       Philippines                                   Philippines                                   Philippines
                  

                          Poland                                          Poland                                      Poland
                  
                           Qatar                                           Qatar                                       Qatar
         
         
                        Romania                                          Romania                                    Romania

                           Russia                                          Russia                                      Russia

                           Slovak                                          Slovak                                      Slovak

                         S Africa                                         S Africa                                   S Africa

                         Thailand                                        Thailand                                    Thailand

                           Turkey                                          Turkey                                      Turkey

                          Ukraine                                         Ukraine                                     Ukraine

                       Venezuela                                     Venezuela                                     Venezuela
