NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FUZZY FRONTIERS OF PRODUCTION:
EVIDENCE OF PERSISTEI'TT INEFFICIENCY
IN SAFETY EXPENDITURES

Casey Ichniowski

Working Paper No. 1366

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 198)4

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and project in Productivity (World Economy). Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 11366
June l984

Fuzzy Frontiers of Production:

Evidence of Persistent Inefficiency
In Safety Expenditures

ABSTRACT

This study

documents a strong inverse relationship between accident rates

and production in a sample of eleven firms in the same narrowly defined industry

classification. Given the detailed set of input controls and controls for
plant—specific and time—specific factors used in the analysis, the study argues
that a theoretical framework that describes firms as operating on well—defined
production frontiers is not adequate for providing an entirely accurate
interpretation of the basic empirical finding.

Three elaborations to the basic

production frontier framework are developed and used to interpret the accident—
productivity relationship.

Casey Ichniowski
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
02138
Cambridge, MA

I. INTRODUCTION
The basic constuct of microeconomic theory used to describe a firm's

operation is the production frontier. Simply, the production frontier maps the
set of efficient input—-output transformations with a given technolog,r. Factor
prices, then, will determine the position of competing firms on that frontier.
In competitive markets, firms that err in short—run decisions will be forced out

of the industry in the long run. Theoretical elaborations have of course been
developed that permit competing firms to differ in their investments and their

input configurations and still remain viable parts of the industry. There is,
however, a very different tradition in microeconomics that questions the deter-

ministic production frontier framework. Liebenstein's "x—inefficiency1,"
Simon's "adaptive organizations2," and Cyert and March's "bounded—rationality"
in their behavioral theory of the firm3 are leading examples of the view that
competitive market forces do not insure microeconomic efficiency.
These two theoretical traditions provide very different frameworks for

interpreting observed relationships between inputs and outputs. Unfortunately,
empirical tests to distinguish between these views face formidable obstacles.
Analysis of firm—level production would be required; however, accurate models of
production at the micro—level are generally recognized to be much more difficult

to develop than more aggregate forms. Even with an accurate functional form,
micro data on plant operations are not publicly available. Difficulties with
interpretation of any firm—level model will also exist. With the complexities
of multiple input configurations in most production processes, it becomes virtually impossible to distinguish movements between frontiers from disturbances

that force firms inside their frontiers. It is particularly difficult to

—2—

control for certain inputs such as investments in information and managerial

ability. Others, who have estimated frontiers empirically and observe points
inside the frontiers, consider such observations as evidence of a problem in
one—sided measurement error.

To consider these important differences in theoretical interpretation, I
analyze a unique set of data on the operations of eleven plants in the same four
digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC 2621—paper).

The specific focus

of the study is the relationship between plant safety and production after

controlling for the effects of capital, labor, and energy. Several elaborations
of the basic production frontier framework are developed and used to interpret

the safety—productivity relationship. To evaluate each of the theoretical frameworks, I consider how reasonable each interpretation is given the nature of
the empirical tests and the structure of control variables.

The study is developed in the four following sections. The next section
describes the detailed model of the paper production process and the input—

output data. Section III presents empirical estimates of the safety—
productivity relationship obtained from the detailed model of production.
Section IV presents the basic economic framework for considering the rela-

tionship between safety and

production

and introduces four elaborations on that

framework. The empirical results obtained in Section III are interpreted within

each of these theoretical frameworks. Finally, the conclusion considers the
implications of broadening the basic production frontier framework to allow for
a degree of persistent inefficiency in microeconomic production.

—3—

II.

INPUT—OUTPUT DATA AND SPECIFICATION OF THE PRODUCTION PROCESS

Monthly observations from January 1976 to September 1982 on the operations
of ten paper mills make up the sample for the study. With the aid of on—site

investigations of each mill's production process, the production function given
by equation 1 was developed to account for variations in productivity in these
inills1:
3

lnQ

13

o

+

PMv) +
(135•

tons

Where; Q
=

9
(13

•

i=1 11

L) +

KD.

1

E)

)

3

+(13.

i=11

+ (137•

AC)

KY.) +E(13 .
1

+ £

=i31

PMD.)
1

+I(B

(Equation i)

of physical output;

three

plant dummies to control for two major product differences

(white paper vs. newsprint; sheeted vs. not sheeted) and one
major process difference (make vs. buy pulp) across the eleven
mills;
=

total

depreciated, deflated value of assets in nine distinct cate-

gories of assets;
PMD1...3

= a

is

set of three related dunmty variables to describe whether a plant
operating two, three, four, or five or more paper machines (the

two paper machine category is omitted);
PMV1_i

total depreciated, deflated value of the two, three, four or five
plus paper machines;

L =

labor

input;

E = energy input;

_)4 —

AC =

The

accident

rate.

KD variables provide a direct control for major product and process

differences observed in these mills. The more conventional method of
constructing

a value added index is particularly difficult in these mills. The

PMD variable provides some control over scale of operations. The KV and PMV

variables

are fashioned to recognize the principles of input aggregation for a

heterogeneous capital stock. For example, three categories involving energy
generation capital, certain land and buildings, and pollution and recycling
capital are not a direct part of the machinery that acts upon the raw materials

flowing through the process. These categories of capital are therefore kept
separate from production process capital. The capital value variables are
constructed from each mill's monthly asset inventory which contains information

on the current value of each asset. In any month, there are some 15,000 assets
that were allocated to these different categories of capital. L is defined as
the natural logarithim of hourly manhours. A salaried manhours variable was
unavailable for the analysis as was a more detailed breakdown of hourly manhours

into its operating and maintenance labor components. E is the natural logarithm
of BTU's used in production. AC, the Occupational Safety and Health
Admiristration's (OSHA) accident rate, is described in detail below.

This unconventional specification is developed to provide an accurate model

of production in these mills. Equation 1 accounts for over 95% of the total
variation in production in this sample. More conventional functional forms produce several nonsensical coefficients. For example, in a Cobb—Douglas function,

—5--

the coefficient on capital is in fact negative for this set of plants in which
capital plays the central role in transforming raw materials into final goods.
More conventional forms explain a imich smaller proportion of the total variation

m
After controlling for the effects of the prinicipal inputs in this way,
the partial correlation between the accident rate and production will be esti-

mated. AC in equation 1 is the OSHA "all accident incident rate." I is
defined as:

(Doctor Cases +

Lost

Time Cases)_• 200,000

Total hours worked

100

The mean of the accident rate variable across all mills is .071 with a standard

deviation of .057. The lowest mill average is .056. The largest mill average
is .099. 16.7% of all mill—months are accident free while the maximum value for
this variable in this sample is .4l.

—6—

III.

EMPIRICAL RESULTS: ESTIMATES OF THE SAFETY-PRODUCTIVITY RELATIONSHIP
when equation 1 is estimated with the plant data, the coefficient on the

accident rate variable shown in column 1 of Table 1 is obtained. The accident
rate coefficient is —.252 and significant at conventional levels. Higher accident rates occur in periods of relatively low production. To understand the
nature of this total effect better, the column 2 and 3 specifications are esti-

mated. Column 2 gives the average within—plant effect. The capital dummies
(KD1_3 in equation 1 which control for product and process differences across
plants) serve as dummy variables for groups of plants. A complete set of ten
plant dummies replaces the capital dummies to obtain the equation 2 specifica—

tion. Again, the average within—mill relationship between accidents and produc-

tion is significant and negative. In the column 3

specification,

a set of time

dummies is added to the column 1 equation to obtain an estimate of the cross—

mill effect. To adjust for time trends and seasonal shifts in accidents or production, a set of six year dummies and a set of eleven month dummies are added.
After controlling for time in this way, one finds that high accident rate mills

are low production mills. The cross—plant accident rate coefficient in column 3
is slightly larger in absolute value than the column 1 coefficient, while the
within—plant accident rate coefficient is slightly smaller in absolute value.

All are significantly negative coefficients. Time dummies and plant dummies
included, the accident rate coefficient given in column 1

is

still significantly

negative.

To provide a more intuitive understanding of the magnitude of these

Table 1: Accident Rate Coefficients in the Model
of Paper Product ion8-

[Dependent Variable: in Tons of Paper; N

Independent
Variables

5451

Equation
1

Equation
2

Equation
3

Equation

(.108)

(.ioo)

(.099)

(.083)

)4

1. accident

rate

no

yes

no

yes

3. plant dummies

no

yes

no

yes

4. time dummies

no

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

.955

.962

.965

.969

2. capital dummies

5. other capital
value, ener,
and hourly man—
hours controls
appearing in
Table 5.1

R2

a —

standard errors in parentheses

significant

at the .01—level, one—lailed test

**

— significant

at the .05—level, one—tailed test

*

— significant

at the .1O—level, one—tailed test

—

—1—

coefficients,

the coefficient obtained in Column 2 of Table 1 is evaluated at

zero, low, average, high, and very high levels of the accident rate variable
(respectively the minimum and 25th,

50th, TSth,

and 90th percentiles of the

distribution). This coefficient, the average within—plant effect, is the

smallest in ngnitude. The zero accident rate months correspond to the zero
level of production on the vertical axis in Figure 1. The production loss associated with a movement from zero accidents to the median accident rate is 1.31%,
while a movement from zero accidents to the very high accident rate corresponds
to a 2.9)4% drop in production

These significant coefficients may seem small when recalibrated in
terms of percentage shifts in production. However, with the available data, a 1%
shift in production can be recalibrated in terms of changes in sales and then

profits for each mill. For an average month in 1980 (a year in which paper prices were relatively low), a 1% increase in production (without any cost
increases) is associated with a revenue increase of $32,300 to $l69,)400

depending on the mill. These 1% sales increases would have significantly
affected the profits of these eleven mills. Nine of these mills had positive

operating incomes during 1980; the other two did not turn a profit. For the
nine with positive incomes in 1980, the monthly revenue increase associated with
a i% production increase translates into a 10.9% increase in operating income on

average. For the two with negative operating incomes, the revenue increase from
a 1% production gain would have reduced their average monthly loss by lT.1%.
For those mills with positive operating incomes, a shift from the zero to the

Figure 1
ACCIDENT RATES ANT. CHANCES IN PRODUCTION

PERCENT

CHAE
IN
PRODUCTION

—1%

—2%

—3%

ZERO

LO

AVERAGE

HIGH

VERY HIGH

ACCIT)ENT RATE

—8—

very high level of accidents (ignoring potential cost increases) would on
average increase profits by one—third.

Omitted Variable Bias
Before presenting the different theoretical frameworks that can be used
to interpret the observed accident rate—productivity relationship, I will first
consider whether the estimated coefficients on the accident rate variable are
spurious correlations that should be attributed to some other factor not

included in the econometric models. Rather than estimate the magnitudes of
possible errors under different assumptions about such a bias, I address this

potential problem in a more direct way. Possible omitted variables that may be
correlated with both accidents and production are taken from the literature on

industrial safety6 and from interviews with mill managers and personnel. Data
on these candidates were then collected from the mills and entered into the
equation.

Most of the variables related to industrial safety suggested in the
literature are already controlled for either by the structure of the sample or
by variables already in the analysis.

The production function already includes

variables for manhours and number of paper machines so that scale controls have

already been incorporated. Technology and the pace of work are controlled for
by the homogeneity of the sample and the capital variables in the analysis.

Furthermore, with workforces that are relatively homogeneous in terms of education and racial composition, the sample controls for many worker characteristics.

—9—

Data on other variables were collected as possible omitted variables:
accession rate; operation of new machinery; and operation of the mill after a

plant shutdown. The literature on industrial safety suggests that workforce
experience may be correlated with safety. as well as productivity. While job
tenure was not consistently available from plants, its converse, the accession

rate, was. Two additional sets of variables were suggested in interviews with
plant personneL It was suggested t.hat when new machinery is being installed,
accidents may be more common and productivity may be relatively low given the

stated level of inputs. Four major machines were introduced in these plants
during the 1976—1982 period. One dumn variable is created for the six—month
period prior to the capitalization date of these machines to see if the

installation period tends to disrupt existing plant operations. A second
variable for the six—month period after the capitalization date is also created
to see if the initial period of operation is one of high accident rates and low
rates of productivity.

Finally, it was suggested in interviews that the period after a strike may

also be a high accident rate—low productivity period. Months with strikes are
not included in the sample on which the Table 1 results are based. During strikes, particularly several extended periods of strike activity during the 1976—
1977 period, mills were either shut—down for lengthy periods or partially

operated by managerial employees. The start—up after a mill has been idle or
run by less experienced employees may then be a low productivity—high accident
period. To test this hypothesis, a dumniy variable was created for the first

—10—

quarter of operations after a strike.

To see if any of the variation in the accident rate variable is accounted

for by these variables, the equations in Table 2 are estimated. Whether the
plant dummies are included or not, the accession rate moves most closely with

accident rates. As expected, accidents are more common in months when the
accession rate is higher.

To see if these additional variables help explain any of the relationship
between accidents and production shown in Table 1, the potential omitted
variables are included along with the accident rate in the basic equation 1

model. The results from these equations are presented in Table 3. The coefficients on the accident rate variable remain similar in magnitude and level of
significance to those presented in Table 1 even after these additional variables

are included in the analysis. Among the newly added variables, the periods
around the installation of new machinery appear to be the most important deter-

minants of the level of production. Both before and after the capitalization
dates of new machines, production is significantly lower than one would have
expected given the stated level of inputs.
We now turn to the development of several different theoretical frameworks

for interpreting this robust empirical relationship: in the face of a detailed
set of controls for inputs, plant—specific factors, time—specific factors and
several potential omitted variables, the partial correlation between accident

rates and production is significant and negative. In particular, the discussion
to follow will consider the degree to which the robust empirical relationship

Table 2: Correlates of Accident Ratesa

[Dependent Variable: OSAA accident rate; N508

(2)

(i)

1. accession rate

2. pre—capitalization
period

3. post—capitalization

period

4.

5.

post

strike period

plant dummies
R2

a —

standard

.16l**

.l81**
(.095)

(.098)

.016
(.013)

.016
(.012)

*

.01

.019

(.013)

(.Oi1)

.008

.008

(.010)

(.010)

no

yes

.016

.0714

errors in parentheses

significant

at the .01—level, one—tailed test

**

— significant

at the .05—level, one—tailed test

*

— significant

at the .10—level, one—tailed test

—

Table 3: Accident Rates and Correlates of Accident Rates
in the Model of Paper Product 0a
[Dependent Variable: in Tons of Paper; N=508

1. accident rate

— .210**
(.112)

2. accession rate

— .025
(.237)

3. pre—capitaliza—
tion period

4 post—capitalization period

5. post—strike period

6.

capital

1.

plant

dummies

dummies

8. time dummies
9.

other

capital
value, energy,
and hourly
manhours controls
appearing in
Equation 1.

— .230***

(.037)

_.206***

(.109)
.055

(.229)
—

.112***

(.035)

— .2l**

(.io)

(.103)

—.188

— .126

(.226)

(.221)

_.198***
(.031)

_.073**
(.o34)
— .012**

(.039)

(.039)

.030*
(.o21)

.038
(.023)

**

(.031)

(.038)

.010
(.023)

.009
(.023)

yes

no

yes

no

no

yes

no

yes

no

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

.960

standard errors in parentheses

significant

at the .01—level, one—tailed test

**

— significant

at the .05—level, one—tailed test

*

— significant

at the .10—level, one—tailed test

—

(4)

_.261***

_.053*

.951

a —

(3)

(2)

(1)

.965

.967

—1 1.-.

should be considered as evidence of constant efficiency or persistent inef—
ficiency in inicroeconomic production.

—12—

IV. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS: INTERPRETING ThE SAFETY - PRODUCTIVITY RELATIONSHIP
Theoretical Framework 1: The Conventional Economic View of Accidents as a
Joint Product
The traditional view in economic theory for considering the rela—
tionship between production and safety considers the two factors as joint

products. In his extensive review of the literature and findings concerning

industrial safety, Oi provides this brief summary of the economic

view:

Textbook

production functions describe how inputs
of labor and capital can be transformed into outputs of economic goods. A more accurate picture is
one in which firms face joint production functions
wherein inputs generate two joint products,
economic goods X and work injuries or accidents A.
If instead of injures A we meausure their complement, uninjured workers 13, then for a given outlay
for inputs, there is a negative technical trade—off
between goods X and uninjured workers B. Given its

outlays for labor, capital, and other inputs
(including safety), a firm can expand its "output"
of

uninjured workers B (achieving a lower injury
rate) only by reducing output of its principal product X.T
In this model, there is a positive relationship between accidents and

output, ceteris paribus. While safety expenditures reduce accidents, the
allocation of resources away from capital and labor inputs will decrease
output.

This model is shown in Figure 2. For purposes of exposition, let

capital (K) and labor (L) represent all productive inputs. With total input

endowment, I, and l of that endowment devoted to safety, Q(I, l) is
realized. Under this standard formulation, if

is increased to s2 by

ire 2

Q(I3>I,s3s1)

Q1(I, s1)

•—__-_--

L

—13—

allocating resources away from K and L, output decreases from Qi (I, si) to

Q2 (I, s2)• Any movements between frontiers for which total input endowment is
fixed would yield a positive (negative) relationship between accidents (safety)
and output.

In order to reconcile this theory with the basic inverse relationship

between accidents and output, one must believe that the empirical work does not

control for differences in input endowment. For example, in Figure 2, output
could be increased from Qi to Q3 if the total input endowment is increased.

Such an increase in output could also be associated with fewer accidents if

enough of the additional input endowment is devoted to safety. The movement
between points A and B in Figure 2 would reveal an inverse relationship between
accidents and output.

The detailed set of input control variables makes this interpretation

of the empirical result highly suspect. The basic production model controls for
the total endowment of principal capital, labor, and energy inputs more comple-

tely than perhaps any existing study. More elaborate theoretical frameworks
should therefore be considered.

First Elaboration: Accidents Reduce Efficiency of Inputs
In the previous frameworks, safety expenditures are not considered as an

input that contributes to the production process. Specifically, consider accidents as disruptions that reduce the efficiency or utilization of other inputs.
In Figure 2 then, the movement from point A to point B could be accomplished by
holding fixed the level of capital and labor inputs and increasing the level of

—l4 —

safety

expenditures. Output would expand as productivity—inhibiting accidents

are reduced. If the empirical equations control for variations in the levels of
most inputs, but not for variations in safety expenditures, the coefficients on
the accident rate variable could still be mapping movements between well—defined
frontiers.

This first elaboration, while a useful first step, still does not provide an entirely satisfactory framework that incorporates all of the empirical
results from the last section.

First, when the basic model is expanded to

include plant dummies, the accident—production relationship is still significantly negative, and my interviews and site visits provided no evidence of any

major changes in safety expenditures over time within mills. Second, and even
more challenging to the view that the accident rate coefficients only map
changes in output associated with changes in safety expenditures, the inverse
relationship between accident rates and output remains significant even after
the basic model is expanded to include plant dummies, month dummies, year dummies and a set of controls for potential omitted variables.

Second Elaboration: Accidents Have a Random Component
A given level of safety expenditures do not seem to guarantee a fixed
accident rate. There is a great deal of variation in accident rates frorrr month

to month within each plant. Safety expenditures do not seem to vary to this
extent, so that movements in the accident rate do not mirror changes in safety

expenditures precisely. Therefore, accidents, A, can be considered to have a
probabilistic component. Regardless of the level of safety expenditures, the
accident rate is still a random variable governed by some probability distribu—

—15—

tion. With a fixed input endowment, I, and i of I devoted to safety there is
still a certain probability that a plant will have no accidents. For given
levels of the parameters I and s, the no accident state is the most productive.
However, the zero—accident production frontier, Qrnax (I,s), is not guaranteed,

since accidents are governed by a probability distribution. Expected output
will be further influenced by the product of the probability of accidents and
the effect of accidents on output.

These elaborations can be summarized in the

following equation:

E(Q) =

s) + PA(s)

(Equation 2)

From this equation, one sees that safety expenditures determine expected output

in two ways. First, when a larger share of the total input endowment is devoted
to safety, the zero—accident frontier is closer to the origin of isoquant space.

Second, safety expenditures also will reduce the probability of accidents. As
in the first elaboration, accidents reduce the efficiency of other inputs, so
that

is negative. Therefore, the two effects of safety expenditures on

output are in opposite directions.

The Equation 2 model is shown in Figure 3.

is the nximum output possible with fixed input endowment I and

devoted

to safety. All points to the left of this zero—accident frontier are

possible. Even zero output may

occur

in the rare event of an accident that

halts production completely for an extended period. Safety expenditures
influence the accident frequency distribution, and it is this distribution

Figure 3

I
K

\.

\'\
I

Qi

N

L

0

I.

—i6—

that governs how often output is forced below Q1. Therefore, safety
expenditures determine how far the expected output frontier

lies

below the maximum output frontier Q.
Now, if safety expenditures are increased from s1 to

by reallo-

cating resources away from capital and labor, the effects on output are

more complicated than in the previous framework. The zero—accident
0
frontier given

will

0
lie below Q,. However, with s2 > s1, the

expected accident rate is less under s2 than it is under s1. The entire
0
set of points to the left of

are still possible, hut perturbations off

the zero—accident frontier will not occur as frequently. In Figure 3,
therefore, the width between
E

0

and Q1. While

the

E

0
and

is narrower than the width between

Q2—band lies entirely below the Q1—band in Figure 3,

it is possible that the bands overlap. In fact,

may exceed Q, so

that expected output can be increased when a greater proportion of the
total input endowment is devoted to safety.
With each elaboration to the theoretical framework, one is also introducing a more complicated, and probably more realistic, view of the role of

managers. Under the initial framework with a fixed input endowment (in the
absence of regulation), a manager selects safety expenditures equal to zero and

maximizes output. With the first two elaborations, the decisions for the
manager are more complex. Now a manager must weigh the loss in output from
moving resources out of production against the gains associated with operating a

safer, and therefore more productive, plant. To guage these gains, a manager

—17—

must understand the effect of accidents on output, and the effects of safety
expenditures on accidents.

Third Elaboration: Random Disturbances to Production Discourage Customers
The theoretical elaborations introduced thus far show that a manager

must search for that value of s that will maximize expected output. k third
elaboration, also with accidents as a random disturbance to production,
demonstrates that the manager's task may be even more complicated than dust

picking the outermost expected production frontier. Assume that the marginal
cost of production is constant for each producer; therefore the firm's supply

curve is horizontal where price equals marginal cast. However each firm faces a
capacity constraint determined by the size of the plant. The supply curve beco-

mes vertical at that value of capacity production, Q (see Figure 4). Because
the firm's customers value certainty of deliveries (and therefore dependability
of production), accidents may further affect the firm's revenue in any given

period. The firm's customers make up his current demand, D0 in Figure 4. The
first equilibrium point (A) corresponds to the amount the firm expects to
supply, E(QS(s )).
=

ma.x''

+

This

is the amount that was given by Equation 2

However if the production manager does not

recognize the effect that accidents have on quantity demanded, he will find that
the expected quantity supplied E(QS(s1)) may be greater than the quantity

demanded, ct(s1), at his chosen level of safety expenditures. More specifically,
once an an "unexpected" level of accidents results in lower than expected pro-

duction, previous customers will become unsatisfied. Risk averse customers,
uncertain about future deliveries, will go to other producers. Although the

Figure 4

Price

S

B

C

A

P

D0

QD (s

Q

D * )=QS (s* )
(s

E(QS(s1))

Quantity

—18—

firm may

produce

at or above its expected output frontier in the following

period, the demand he once faced is no longer there.

A more formal treatment of the hypothesis rests on the assumption
that the quantity demanded, like that supplied, depends on the random
disturbances, A:

QD = QD(p

A(s))

(Equation 3)

In the short run, the firm will want to generate the maximum revenue from

its

fixed endowment, I. The revenue function being maximized is given by:
max (Rev) = max
S

S

•

PQ

Q

;

(Equation 14)

where

S D

Q:nin(Q,Q)
Q = Q (in, A(s)) ;
S

Figure

14

max'

=

shows

+

and

'A

TK

that the expenditure on safety which maximizes

expected output, s1, may not be the expenditure which maximizes revenue.
Because

than

s1 eventually

leads to a quantity demanded, Q

Q5(s1), only Q(s1) is sold (point C in Figure 14);

which

leftover

is lover
output

cannot be sold and revenue equals P Q1(s1). The optimal s, s, may

involve

greater safety expenditures and a lower expected output. But the

increase in sustained demand will generate increased revenue. With the random
disturbances to production also influencing the level of sustained demand,

—19—

managers may no longer simply try to maximize expected output.

Pdditional

expenditures on safety will lead not only to a loss in expected output

decrease

hut a

in the variance of production. This more stable production can lead to

an increase in sustained demand and therefore greater revenue in the long run.
This elaboration complicates the managerial decision process even

further. The manager must now consider three effects of safety expenditures:
(i) safety expenditures reduce output by diverting resources away from capital
and labor; (2) they increase output by making productivity—inhibiting accidents
less frequent; and (3) they increase profitability by reducing the variability

of production, thereby stabilizing the demand

One might
considerations (2)

argue

from customers.

that an inventory would reduce the importance of

and (3), particularly for a non—perishable product like

paper. However, in the paper industry, final product inventories are of
limited value. It is relatively easy to accomodate the detailed specifications of a customer's order for paper. The plant maintains large stocks
of chemical dyes, coats, and bonding chemicals. Cutting and sheeting
operations are also easily adapted to the detailed customer specifica-

tions. The final product will meet one customer's specifications, but few
future orders will have those exact specifications. Inventories, in the
particular case of the paper industry, are of limited value.

Fourth Elaboration: Accidents are Sources of Information
Once one realizes that accidents have a random component, and that
safety expenditures can not guarantee a fixed level of accidents, it be—

—20—

comes clear that managers must make a complicated set of decisions. A
fourth elaboration leads one even further from the simplest economic framework

and provides an even more accurate representation of the firm. Consider a brand
new plant with "frontier" technology. The manager has considered the
three effects of safety expenditures and has made optimal safety expenditures in several areas (maintenance, inspections, safety gear and equipment, employee seminars. etc.).
As in the previous model, these safety expenditures, s1, define

an expected output frontier, Q. However, accidents will occasionally
force production inside its expected frontier. Now, elaborate on the
model so that accidents are not only random disturbances but also sources

of information. Viewed in this way, accidents reveal trouble spots.
After an accident, a manager estimates that the probability of another
accident in the same spot is quite high and makes the necessary investments

to fix the trouble spot. While the increase in safety expenditures from
S1

to

2 takes resources away from capital and labor, the shift in the expected

isoquant is not toward the origin but away from it, This is because the
manager's stock of information about his plant has increased from i1 to i2

The more efficient safety expenditure s2 was not made in state 1 since it would
have been too costly to find the trouble spot. Put another way, in state 1 it
would have been very costly (extensive policing of the plant) to locate the
trouble spot. Now with greater information in state 2, a small expenditure
repairs the trouble spot.

—21—

Figure 5

depicts this model. The

contour shows production

with total input endowment, I, safety expenditures, s, the expected
level of accidents, and stock of information, i1. An accident occurs
forcing production to point A which is below the

isoquant. After the

accident, two changes in the parameters occur. The information stock
increases to i2
effect

and

safety expenditures are increased to s2.

The

net

of the changes is to move the expected state 2 isoquant, Q,

away

from the origin.
The outermost frontier of production in Figure 5, Q, is never

realized,
might

since there will never be perfect information, i. One now

introduce another elaboration involving search activity to the basic

economic framework. To maintain the production frontier construct, one
could consider "search activity as one competitor for internal resources,
and Ithati expenditures for search are made up to the point where the

marginal cost of search equals the marginal expected return from it."8
Regardless of any attempts to model or measure such an intangible input, one
must also recognize that the four theoretical elaborations that have been deve—
loped to provide a more realistic framework for interpreting the empirical
results in this study have altered the conventional production frontier

construct considerably. It

is

perhaps more reasonable to believe that empirical

micro—productivity research, as in this study, estimates some sort of "average"
production function through some fuzzy band of observed input-output con-

figurations. It would be difficult to describe this average production function

K

j*)

/
A

I'

(t,s,i1)

L

—22—

as a true "frontier," since observed production will often exceed the input—

output points along the average production function. Across competitors over
long periods of time, disturbances to production would have to be relatively

equal for all firms to remain part of the industry. For data aggregated over
time or firms, however, the production frontier framework might he a more reaso-

nable approximation as disruptions to production average out. However, the
deterministic production frontier framework can be a misleading description of
the actual day—to—day operations of individual firms.

—23—

VI. CONCLUSION —

HOW

FAR INSIDE THE FRONTIER?

The magnitude of the disturbance effect of accidents on production

ranges to about 3% of production. A 3% shift in production is shown to
correspond to a sizeable shift in profits. The effect of accidents on the performance of firms was selected for this study since it seemed that accidents by
their very nature should be thought of as having a random component.

on safety do not guarantee a fixed level of accidents. The acci
dent rate coefficients, in equations with detailed sets of controls for

Expenditures

variations in the level of productive inputs, could therefore represent

distrup—

tions to the production process. Still, the magnitude of these disruptions may
be viewed as a second—order consideration. However, safety is only one dimension of plant operations. By considering just one additional factor that keeps
firms inside their frontier, one begins to realize that the distance between
observed production and frontier production may be substantial.
Strikes have long been recognized as economically inefficient
phenomena.9 Both labor and management would have been better off had they

reached the eventual solution without a strike. With the rare exception of

when managers partially operated plants during strikes, plants were at the
origin of isoquant space when on strike——clearly on no frontier. In this
times

sample,

over the period from January 19T6 to September 1982, strike days in the

mills ranged from a low of no days to 239 days (or 9.7% of all potential

operating days). On average, a mill lost 6.0% of potential operating days.
Under the assumption that a mill would have matched its production in the same

214

month of the previous year had it not been on strike, one finds that mills lost
up to io.6% of total production over the period to strikes. The average loss
was 6.1i%.

Moreover, with salaried personnel still on the payroll and expensive

capital idle, the shutdowns during stikes in this industry provide staggering
examples of microeconomic inefficiency.

By considering this one additional dimension, the distance between

observed production and frontier production widens substantially. Furthermore,
in other sectors, when production is not machine—paced and more under the

control of employees, these disturbances may be even more noticeable. In
short, the theoretical elaborations that suggest that firms operate inside and
not

on frontiers can be more than a second—order consideration——particularly for

empirical research at the micro—level.
In

addition, this theoretical distinction in the framework for analyzing

microeconomic production generates very different research questions. The
dimensions which are subject to managerial discretion and decision making must

be better documented. These dimensions and their effects on productivity should
be an active area of micro—level research. At aggregate levels of analysis, the
deterministic frontier framework provides a useful theoretical construct.

However, at the micro—level one should try to allow for interpretations that
acknowledge the sources of microeconoinic inefficiency.

The view of the firm developed through detailed empirical analyses of
similar firms provides a significant set of elaborations to the basic economic

framework of well defined production frontiers. Here, the real frontier is

—25—

viewed as some unreachable moving target. Managers imist make decisions along a
number of dimensions to run

their

firms. Each dimension involves a number of

detailed component decisions. The safety dimension, for example, involves dec—
sions about capital equipment, safety gear, awareness programs and responses to

regulatory guidelines. Decisions are made in each area. After the resulting
performance is evaluated, adjustments are made. Even in the most competitive of
environments, firms will vary in their decisions, their investments, and there-

fore their performance. Furthermore, a poor managerial decision in one area
which leads to some degree of microecoriomic inefficiency- can be counterbalanced

by any number of sound managerial decisions not matched by competitors. What is
required in a competitive environment is not a correct decision and investment

at every turn. With the countless number of decisions required to run a firm,

that is not possibile. A firm does, however, have to make enough correct decisions so that its performance does not lag behind that of its competitors for

too long. Firms that fair poorly today can remain viable competitors since
dynamic adjustments can lead to more rapid movements toward that ever moving,

unreachable final frontier of production. Detailed observation of the operations of similar firms and analysis of data on their production processes leads
to much the same conslusion that Liebenstein developed over twenty years ago:

"the production frontier is neither completely specified or known. An experimental factor always exists." 10

—26—

FOOTNOTES

1.

Liebensteiri, "Allocative Efficiency vs. X—Efficiency," American Economic
Review, June 1966, Vol. 56.

2.

Simon, Herbert A., Models

3.

Cyert, Richard M., and James G. March, A Behavioral Theory of the Firm
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1963).

1+.

of

Man (New York: Wiley, 1951).

Casey, "Micro—Production Functions Aren't Pretty: Firm—Level and
Industry—Level Specification for Inputs and Outputs," NBER Working Paper
No. 1365, Cambridge, Massachusetts (June 1984).
ichniowski,

5.

Ibid. pp. 19—21.

6.

For

7.

0±,

8.

Cyert and March, p. 10.

9.

Hicks,

a useful summary, see 0±, Walter Y., "On the Economics of Industrial
Safety," Law and Contemporary Problems, Summer/Autumn 1974, pp. 669—699.
"On the Economics of Industrial

John H., The

Safety," p. 674.

Theory of Wages (New York:

10. Liebenstein, pp. 4o6—4o.

Macmillan, 1932), Chapter

2.

