                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              FINANCIAL STRUCTURE, LIQUIDITY, AND FIRM LOCATIONS

                                           Andres Almazan
                                           Adolfo de Motta
                                           Sheridan Titman
                                            Vahap Uysal

                                        Working Paper 13660
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13660


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




We would like to thank Aydogan Alti, Charles Hadlock, Simi Kedia, Roberto Rigobon and seminar
participants at Baylor University, Boston College, BYU, UC-Irvine, Columbia University, Drexel
University, Fundacion Rafael del Pino, Princeton University, Rutgers University, University of Michigan,
University of Southern California, UT-Dallas and UT-Austin for helpful comments. Corresponding
author: andres.almazan@mccombs.utexas.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Andres Almazan, Adolfo de Motta, Sheridan Titman, and Vahap Uysal. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Structure, Liquidity, and Firm Locations
Andres Almazan, Adolfo de Motta, Sheridan Titman, and Vahap Uysal
NBER Working Paper No. 13660
December 2007
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,R3

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the relation between a firm's location and its corporate finance decisions. We
develop a simple model where being located within an industry cluster increases opportunities to make
acquisitions, and to facilitate those acquisitions, firms within clusters maintain more financial slack.
Consistent with our model we find that firms that are located within industry clusters tend to make
more acquisitions, and have lower debt ratios and larger cash balances than their industry peers located
outside clusters. In addition, we document that firms in growing cities and technology centers also
maintain more financial slack. Overall, these findings, which reveal systematic patterns between geography
and corporate finance choices, suggest the importance of growth opportunities in firms’ financial decisions.


Andres Almazan                                       Sheridan Titman
Finance Department                                   Finance Department
McCombs School of Business                           McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin                        University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179                                Austin, TX 78712-1179
andres.almazan@mccombs.utexas.edu                    and NBER
                                                     titman@mail.utexas.edu
Adolfo de Motta
McGill University                                    Vahap Uysal
Bronfman Building, Rm 581                            Michael F. Price College of Business
1001 Sherbrooke Street West                          Division of Finance
Montreal, Quebec, Canada                             University of Oklahoma
adolfo.demotta@mcgill.ca                             307 W. Brooks, Suite 252
                                                     Norman, Oklahoma 73019-4005
                                                     uysal@ou.edu
1    Introduction

In 1992 the Apache Corporation, then a small oil and gas firm located in Denver (CO), ac-
quired MW Petroleum, a subsidiary of Amoco Corporation, a major integrated oil company.
This acquisition, which more than doubled the size of its oil and gas reserves, was viewed
by Apache’s top management as a major success, and to a large extent defined Apache’s
future strategy: to grow by acquiring mature oil and gas fields from the major integrated
oil firms. To implement this strategy Apache moved from Denver to Houston (TX), where
most of the major oil firms had operations, and reduced its debt ratio to improve its credit
rating. By locating in Houston, Apache’s management believed that they would have better
access and knowledge about potential deals. Maintaining an investment grade bond rating
(Apache had a B rating when they acquired MW Petroleum and reached an A rating a
few years later) was viewed by Apache’s management as essential, since their acquisition
strategy required an ability to raise capital on relatively short notice.1

    This paper examines whether, as suggested by the Apache case, a firm’s acquisition and
financial policies are related to its location. More specifically, we examine whether a firm’s
tendency to make acquisitions and its capital structure choices are related to whether or not
the firm is located within an industry cluster, that is, close to its industry peers. To study
these issues, we start by developing a simple model that describes the relation between a
firm’s location, financial structure and acquisition activities. Consistent with the Apache’s
experience, our model assumes that firms located in industry clusters have more acquisition
opportunities but also face greater competition from other potential acquirers. To take
advantage of these opportunities, the firms in our model maintain more financial slack if
they are located in clusters, which allows them to bid more aggressively for acquisitions.2

    We initially examine the model’s assumptions, and find that after controlling for indus-
try aﬃliation, firms located in clusters do tend to make more acquisitions. In addition,
consistent with previous research (e.g., Hartford, 1999), we document that firms with more
   1
     The above discussion is based on three Harvard Business Cases, (“MW Petroleum Corp. A” and “MW
Petroleum Corp. B” and “Risk Management at Apache”) and extensive discussions with Tom Chambers,
Apache’s Executive Vice President.
   2
     This aspect of the model is related to Clayton and Ravid (2002) and Morellec and Zhdanov (2006),
which show that more levered bidders tend to bid less aggressively.



                                                 1
financial slack tend to make more acquisitions. Moreover, we show that the positive relation
between acquisition activity and financial slack is stronger in clusters, which is consistent
with the presence of greater competition for targets in clusters.

       While the evidence on the relation between location and acquisition activity supports
the assumptions of our model, the main focus of our empirical analysis is on the relation
between a firm’s choice of financial slack and whether or not the firm is located in a cluster.
As we just discussed, our model focuses on an “acquisition” channel, which predicts a
positive relation between being located in a cluster and having financial slack. However,
there is an existing literature that suggests a “collateral” channel, which generates the
opposite prediction. In particular, Williamson (1986) suggests that when firms have assets
that are redeployable, which is more likely to be the case when they are located in clusters,
they are able to obtain more debt financing.3

       To assess the importance of these competing theories we extend the literature on the
empirical determinants of capital structure, (e.g., Titman and Wessels 1988 and Rajan and
Zingales 1995) and cash holdings (e.g., Opler et al. 1999), by considering the eﬀects of
location proxies in the traditional regressions. Our results indicate that firms in clusters
have lower debt ratios and maintain higher cash balances. Our tests also show that firm
characteristics like size and profitability, which are related to leverage and cash balances in
the cross-section, have a weaker eﬀect on these choices in clusters.

       The empirical evidence in this paper–which rejects the null hypothesis that firms’ cor-
porate finance decisions are independent of location–can be interpreted in at least two
ways. First, the evidence is consistent with the idea that location aﬀects investment op-
portunities and that these in turn influence capital structure choices, (i.e., a direct cluster
eﬀect). Alternatively, these findings may reflect the possibility that firms that choose to
locate either within or outside of clusters have fundamentally diﬀerent characteristics (i.e.,
a cluster-selection eﬀect), and that these characteristics are related to both the tendency of
   3
    Shleifer and Vishny (1992) also discusses how a liquid asset market increases the ability of firms to use
assets as collateral for loans. Myers and Rajan (1998), however, suggest a negative eﬀect of liquidity on
borrowing capacity that arises because a more liquid asset market makes it easier for firms to substitute
more risky assets for safe assets.




                                                     2
firms to make acquisitions as well as their capital structure choices.4

       In order to address the possibility that a cluster-selection eﬀect is driving our findings,
we perform the previously described tests on a sample of firms that have been in a given
location for more than ten years and find that the relation between location and corporate
finance choices continues to hold.5 To the extent that the unobserved characteristics that
influence a firm’s location choice become less important over time, this evidence suggests
that the findings are determined more by a direct cluster eﬀect rather than by a cluster-
selection eﬀect.

       Our final tests examine other geographical characteristics that may also influence the
availability of growth opportunities (e.g., acquisition or other types) and thus may influence
the demand for financial slack. Since location can influence a firm’s opportunities in a
variety of ways, it is of interest to consider other geographical characteristics that may also
be related to future opportunities, and examine how these characteristics are related to
firms’ financing choices. Specifically, we consider both growing cities and cities with more
aggregate R&D expenditure and find that in these areas–where growth opportunities are
likely to be more prevalent–firms maintain more financial slack.6 We also find that this
relation also holds for firms that have been in the same location for at least ten years.

       By linking a firm’s location to its corporate finance decisions we contribute to two
distinct literatures. The first is the literature in corporate finance that examines the relation
between investment opportunities and financing choices. In this sense, our analysis is related
to Harford (1999), who showed that firms with more cash do more acquisitions. His empirical
tests are motivated by the theoretical literature that suggests that reduced financial slack
can curb a firm’s ability to fund new investments (Myers 1977, Myers and Majluf 1984,
Jensen 1986, and Hart and Moore 1995). However, as is also recognized in this literature,
firms anticipating good investment opportunities have an incentive to maintain financial
   4
      For example, as shown in Almazan, de Motta and Titman (2007), clusters are likely to attract firms
with attributes that make them more likely to succeed.
    5
      Even though firms may originally self-select into diﬀerent locations, their choice of location can be
considered almost permanent. For instance, Pirinsky and Wang (2006) who show that in the period 1992-97
less than 2.4% of firms in Compustat changed headquarters’ location.
    6
      As suggested by the economic geography literature, this is consistent with the presence of innovation
spillovers for firms located in the same geographical area.



                                                    3
slack, which suggests that the observed relation between cash holdings and acquisition
activity might arise because firms accumulate financial slack when they have acquisition
opportunities. The current literature provides evidence of an eﬀect running from debt
choices to investment choices.7 In contrast, by comparing the capital structure choices of
firms with diﬀerent locations we develop tests that provide evidence of an eﬀect running
from investment opportunities to the choice of financial slack.8

       By using location as a proxy for acquisitions and other growth opportunities, this paper
also contributes to the economic geography literature that examines how location influences
corporate choices.9 For example, previous studies have shown that firms in urban clusters
are more likely to outsource (Ono 2003), to vertically disintegrate (Holmes 1999) and to
innovate (Glaeser et al. 1992). Also, Landier et al. (2006) find that geographic dispersion
within the firm aﬀects its labor and divestiture policies. Like our study, these papers
provide evidence that supports the idea that being located in industry clusters aﬀects firms’
behavior.10 Finally, the two papers that are most closely related to ours are Kedia et al.
(2007), which examines how physical proximity aﬀects the ability of firms to complete
acquisitions, and Loughran (2007), which finds that firms in rural areas issue equity less
often than otherwise similar urban firms.11

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a stylized model and
describes the empirical research motivated by it. Section 3 describes the data and considers
   7
     For example, Lang, et al. (1996) argue that the overall debt choice of a conglomerate can be viewed
as exogenous with respect to the investment opportunities of the non-core division, and show that it is,
nevertheless, negatively related to the non-core divisions investment expenditures. See also Lamont (1997)
and Stein (2003) for an excellent review of this literature.
   8
     Although the negative relation between market to book ratios (a commonly used proxy for growth op-
portunities) and debt ratios has been previously established, the direction of causation between opportunities
and financial slack has not been fully resolved. Since cluster and city growth eﬀects are likely to be directly
related to growth opportunities, but can be viewed as exogenous with respect to the firm’s capital structure
choice, the documented relation between geography and financial slack is likely to arise from the eﬀect that
the presence of potential opportunities produces on a firm’s desire to maintain financial slack.
   9
     Issues relating to firm location and industrial clustering have been discussed by economists since Marshall
(1890). See Fujita, Krugman and Venables (2001), Fujita and Thisse (2002), Duranton and Puga (2003)
and Rosenthal and Strange (2003) for recent reviews of this literature..
  10
     Better input sharing (e.g., Holmes 1999), labor market pooling (e.g., Diamond and Simon 1990, Costa
and Kahn 1990, Krugman 1991, Dumais et al. 1997, and Almazan et al. 2007), and higher knowledge
spillovers (e.g., Jaﬀee et al. 1993) have been suggested as leading forces of agglomeration economies.
  11
     In contrast to Loughram’s findings, however, we show that after controlling for a firm’s physical proximity
to its competitors there is a relatively weak but positive relation between the size of the urban area and
debt ratios.


                                                       4
some descriptive evidence. Sections 4 and 5 present the main empirical results. Finally,
section 6 presents our conclusions.


2         Empirical research design
2.1        A simple model

This section presents a simple model that motivates our empirical tests. The model is based
on the idea that firms can find it useful to have financial slack when they are likely to have
to compete for acquisitions.

         The model includes two periods, t = 0, 1, and two potential acquirers, i.e., firms 1 and
2. At t = 0 firm i (i = 1, 2) sets its leverage ratio, 0 ≤ di ≤ 1. At t = 1, with probability γ,
firms have the opportunity to make an acquisition, and engage in a second-price sealed bid
auction for the target. The value created by such an acquisition depends on the synergy si
with the target, which is known to the firm at t = 1 but unknown at t = 0. We assume
that synergies are independent and uniformly distributed on the interval [s̄ − 1/2, s̄ + 1/2],
where s̄ ≥ 1/2.

         We make three assumptions regarding the eﬀects of leverage. First, we assume that
debt is risk-free, which allows us to abstract from wealth transfers between debt-holders
and equity-holders that can arise in acquisitions. Second, we assume that leverage reduces
the funds that a firm can raise to finance an acquisition. In particular, we assume that
firm i can raise funds up to (v + si − ρdi ) to make the acquisition, where v is the value
of the target as a stand alone, i.e., without the synergies, and ρ ∈ (0, 1/2) is a measure
of the financial constraints that debt creates.12 With this specification, a firm’s ability to
raise funds increases in the value of the target with the synergy (v + si ) and decreases in
its leverage ratio di . Furthermore, for simplicity we focus on the case where s̄ > 1/2 + ρ,
which ensures that si − ρdi ≥ 0 for any potential synergy realization and choice of debt.
When this assumption holds, all targets are ultimately acquired.13 Third, we assume that,
    12
     The assumption ρ < 1/2 ensures that program (2) is concave and that its first order condition, i.e.,
equation (3) below, characterizes the global optimum.
  13
     Since the minimum realization of the synergy is si = s̄ − 1/2 and the maximum choice of debt is di = 1,
assuming s̄ > 1/2 + ρ implies si − ρdi > 0 for all si , di . Considering the alternative case where debt can
impede acquisitions when the realized synergy is small, i.e., v − si − ρdi < 0, complicates the presentation
but does not aﬀect the main intuitions obtained from the analysis. For brevity, we omit these additional


                                                     5
besides its eﬀects on acquisitions, debt generates some net benefits on firm value, τ di . We
refer to τ as the “non-M&A” debt benefits.14

    To solve the model, we proceed by backward induction and obtain the bidding strategy
at t = 1 in the event that an acquisition opportunity arises. Specifically, when this is true,
each firm i bids bi = v + si − ρdi and acquires the target for bj if bi > bj (for j = 1, 2 and
j 6= i).

    At t = 0, firm i sets its leverage ratio di taking into account the eﬀect that leverage will
have on its ability to acquire potential targets at t = 1. In particular, firm i solves:

                           max τ di + γE(v + si − bj |bi > bj ) Pr(bi > bj ).                                  (1)
                                di

Since bi = v + si − ρdi , and since firm i takes firm j’s leverage choice as given, (1) can be
expressed as:
                                          Z s∗ ÃZ s̄+ 1                                 !
                                                      2
                         max τ di + γ                           (si − sj + ρdj ) dsi dsj ,                     (2)
                           di               s̄− 12    s∗∗

where s∗ ≡ min{s̄+ 12 +ρ(dj −di ), s̄+ 12 } and s∗∗ ≡ max{sj −ρ(dj −di ), s̄− 12 }.15 Computing
the first order condition that characterizes the symmetric interior solution (i.e., di = dj ),
we obtain:16
                                               τ
                                                  .  d∗i =                                                     (3)
                                              γρ2
The following result follows directly from equation (3):

Result 1 The optimal debt ratio, d∗i , is lower when:
                                                                                 dd∗i
   (i) acquisition opportunities are more likely to arise (i.e.,                 dγ     < 0);
                                                                                                dd∗i
   (ii) debt has a stronger negative eﬀect on financing acquisitions (i.e.,                     dρ     < 0);
                                                                      dd∗i
   (iii) the non-M&A debt benefits are smaller (i.e.,                 dτ     > 0).

derivations which are available from the authors upon request.
   14
      For instance if, per dollar of debt, τ1 > 0 is the savings on taxes and τ2 < 0 the increases on financial
distress costs, we are considering a case in which the net benefits of debt are positive i.e., τ1 − τ2 = τ > 0.
   15
      The limits of integration s∗ and s∗∗ capture the fact that for certain realizations of s1 and s2 competition
between firms can be limited because of their diﬀerences in leverage. For example, if v = 0, ρ = 0.25, d1 = 0.2
and d2 = 0.4 then, s∗ = s̄ + 12 and s∗∗ ≡ max{s2 − 0.05, s̄ − 12 }. In this case, if s2 < (s̄ − 12 ) + 0.05 and
hence s∗∗ = s̄ − 12 , firm 1 makes the acquisition regardless of its realized synergy. This occurs because even
for the smallest possible synergy s1 = s̄ − 12 firm 1 bids more than 2, i.e., b1 = (s̄ − 12 ) − 0.05 > b2 . Hence,
if s2 < (s̄ − 12 ) + 0.05 then s∗∗ ≡ s̄ − 12 and s1 ∈ [s̄ − 12 , s̄ + 12 ].
   16
      Solving (2) one gets: d∗i = γρ2 (1−ρτ d∗ −d ) which becomes (3) under symmetry. A symmetric interior
                                             | i j|
solution requires τ < γρ2 .


                                                            6
In addition, equation (3) has the following implications about the sensitivity of debt to its
determinants:

                                                                                        dd∗i
Result 2 The sensitivity of debt to the non-M&A debt benefits (i.e.,                    dτ ),   is lower when:
                                                                            d2 d∗i
   (i) acquisition opportunities are more likely to arise (i.e.,            dτ dγ    < 0);
                                                                                             d2 d∗i
   (ii) debt has a stronger negative eﬀect on financing acquisitions (i.e.,                  dτ dρ    < 0).


    To clarify the predictions stated in Result 2 it is illustrative to consider an example where
the non-M&A debt benefits are aﬀected by two factors, e.g., taxes and costs of financial
distress: τ = τ1 + τ2 , where τ1 > 0 > τ2 . The previous result suggests that the empirical
importance of τi is ameliorated in situations where debt has a greater influence on the ability
to fund acquisitions, and when acquisition opportunities are more likely to arise. Formally:
¯ ∗¯ ¯          ¯
¯ ddi ¯ ¯ 1 ¯
¯ dτi ¯ = ¯ γρ2 ¯ is decreasing in γ and ρ. Intuitively, while a reduction in the cost of financial
distress (or an increase in the tax benefits of debt) tend to increase leverage, this eﬀect is
weaken when having financial flexibility is important (e.g., when acquisition opportunities
are more likely to arise).

2.2     Empirical implementation

Following insights from the literature on Economic Geography we conjecture that firms in
clusters have more opportunities to make acquisitions which are subject to competition, i.e.,
a higher γ in the model above. While our theory suggests that debt has a negative eﬀect
on competition and thus strictly applies to the acquisitions subject to competition, in our
empirical analysis, we start by examining the diﬀerences in acquisition activities (i.e., total
number of acquisitions) of firms inside and outside clusters.17 Specifically we examine the
following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 1 Firms in clusters make more acquisitions than firms located outside clusters.


    In addition, we examine whether leverage has a negative eﬀect on the ability to make
acquisitions, and whether this eﬀect is particularly strong for firms in clusters.18 Notice,
  17
     A larger γ can stem from either a larger number of acquisition opportunities, or a larger degree of
competition for those opportunities.
  18
     Notice that, if there is more competitive acquisitions in clusters (a higher γ), firms in clusters will want
more financial flexibility. See Hypothesis 3 below.


                                                       7
however, that leverage is an endogenous variable in our model and hence, one must interpret
the empirical relation between leverage and firms’ acquisition activity as stemming from
exogenous shocks in leverage. Formally, this eﬀect is described by the partial derivative
of debt on the probability of making an acquisition evaluated at the equilibrium. In our
                                                                    ∂Pi
model, such probability is given by Pi = γ Pr(bi > bj ), and        ∂di   = −γρ, which is decreasing
in γ and ρ.19 If we assume that γ is larger in clusters hypothesis 2 follows.


Hypothesis 2 The negative eﬀect of leverage on acquisitions is stronger in clusters.


       Our third hypothesis is about the eﬀect of firm’s location on its leverage. We start from
(3) and consider two eﬀects of clusters in the parameters of the model:

   1. According to Williamson (1988), we assume that in clusters firms have better op-
         portunities to redeploy their assets, which implies a positive shift in the non-M&A
         benefits of debt (i.e., an increase in τ ). Specifically, we postulate the following linear
         formulation to incorporate the redeployability eﬀects:
                                                               X
                                      τi = α + βc Clusteri +       βj Kij                          (4)
                                                               j


         where {Kij } are the determinants of the non-M&A net benefits of debt, {βj } are the
         coeﬃcients of these determinants of leverage, Clusteri is a dummy variable that takes
         a value of 1 if the firm is located within an industry cluster and βc > 0 represents the
         positive shift in τ for clustered firms.20

   2. Consistent with our conjecture that firms in clusters encounter more acquisitions
         opportunities, we consider the following formulation:

                                            δi = μ + μc Clusteri                                   (5)

         where μc > 0 measure the additional acquisition eﬀects on clusters.
  19                                     ∂ Pr(b >b )
                                               i j
    Pr(bi > bj ) = 1 − sj + ρ(dj − di ) and  ∂di
                                                    = ρ.
  20
    As described below, Clusteri takes a value of 1 when a firm’s headquarters is located in a MSA with
ten or more firms in the same three-digit SIC and 0 otherwise.




                                                       8
         Substituting (4) and (5) in d∗i and adding a random term εi we obtain the following
econometric specification:

                                   α + βc Clusteri      X          βj
                        di =                        2
                                                      +                       K j + εi .
                                                                             2 i
                                                                                                                            (6)
                                 (μ + μc Clusteri )ρ    j
                                                          (μ + μc Clusteri )ρ

Since Clusteri is a dummy variable, the previous specification can be re-written as:
                                                    X                   X
                di = φ0 + φc Clusteri +                      φj Kij −           φj · (1 − λ)(Kij × Clusteri ) + εi ,        (7)
                                                         j                  j

where the correspondence between φ’s and the parameters in equation (6) follows from
the comparison of expressions (6) and (7).21 Notice that, while a priori the net eﬀect of
clusters on leverage is ambiguous, the higher likelihood of acquisitions in clusters μc > 0 is
a necessary condition for firms in clusters to have lower leverage. This condition, however,
is not suﬃcient since firms in clusters may choose to have more leverage due to the higher
                                                                                                   γβc
redeployability of their assets (i.e., φc is positive only when μc >                                α ).



                                                                                                               γβc
Hypothesis 3 When the acquisition eﬀect is suﬃciently strong (i.e., μc >                                        α ),   firms in
clusters will exhibit lower leverage (i.e., φc < 0).

         Finally, our fourth and last hypothesis relates to the determinants of leverage inside and
outside of clusters. As shown in equation (7), for each determinant of leverage Kj , the ratio
of the coeﬃcients for firms inside and outside of clusters is constant and equal to λ. Notice
                                 μ
that λ < 1 (i.e., λ ≡           μ+μc )       captures the amelioration eﬀect described in Result 2.

Hypothesis 4 The ratio of estimates of the determinants of leverage for firms inside versus
outside clusters is constant and smaller than 1 (i.e., λ < 1).


3         Data and sample characteristics

We examine firms covered in Compustat and CRSP from 1990 to 2005. Since we are
interested in considering firms with a well defined location (i.e., firms with a high percentage
of their assets and employees located at the firm’s corporate headquarters) we exclude
from our sample industries like hotels and restaurants chains, and concentrate instead on
    21                         α               α+βc                     βj                 μ
         Specifically: φ0 ≡   γρ2
                                  ,   φc ≡   (μ+μc )ρ2
                                                         − φ0 , φj ≡    γρ2
                                                                                and λ ≡   μ+μc
                                                                                               .


                                                                        9
manufacturing firms. Furthermore, because manufacturing industries are likely to exhibit
national-wide product market competition, in the interpretation of our results, we abstract
from product market competition eﬀects associated to diﬀerences in firms’ locations.22

    Specifically, we consider firms with primary three digit SIC between 200 and 399 and
firms in SIC 737 (Computer Programming, and Data Processing).23 Our data set also
excludes: (1) firms in Hawaii and Puerto Rico; (2) firms with sales less than $50 million
(in 1990 dollars); and (3) three-digit SIC industries that have less than 10 firms in any of
the sample years. The final sample includes 21 industries, 16 years, 1,910 firms and 13,342
firm-year observations. Approximately 80% of our sample belongs to firms classified in SIC
200-399 (manufacturing) and the rest to firms in SIC 737. Variables are windsorized at the
bottom and top 1% to limit the eﬀect of outliers.

    We focus on the geographical location of firms’ headquarters, where location is defined
by the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as specified in the 1990 Census. When the
firm’s headquarters are not located in an MSA we consider the county of location instead.
With this information, for each firm-year, we construct three measures of industry clustering
based on the geographical proximity of firms’ headquarters: (i) The number firms with the
same three-digit SIC that are located in a given MSA, Number of Firms in MSA,24 (ii) the
number of firms within the same industry in an MSA divided by the total number of firms
within the same industry, Ratio of Firms in MSA, and (iii) a dummy variable, Cluster, that
takes a value of 1 for firm-years in which a firm’s headquarters is located within an MSA
that has ten or more firms with the same three-digit SIC and 0 otherwise. According to
this third definition, 41% of the observations correspond to firms located inside an industry
cluster. The median number of firms in the same industry within an MSA, Number of Firms
in MSA, in our sample is six.25
  22
     This is consistent with Glaeser and Kohlhase (2003) who reports that transportation costs for manufac-
turing goods have fallen by over 90% in the last century, and argues that ”the world is better characterized
as a place where it is essentially free to move goods.”
  23
     Most SIC 737 firms manufacture products (e.g., Microsoft Windows) rather than provide a service.
  24
     To facilitate the presentation, in the regressions we divide Number of Firms in MSA by ten so that the
coeﬃcient measures the eﬀect of an increase of ten firms in a given location. (The standard deviation of
Number of Firms in MSA is 25.) We have also run regressions using the logarithm of the number of firms
located in the same location as the explanatory variable and find consistent results.
  25
     While we require that the firm has at least $50 million in sales to be part of our sample, both cluster
measures consider all the firms that are included in Compustat in a given year even if their sales are less
than $50 million.


                                                    10
         On average, there are 1.93 clusters per industry (i.e., MSAs with at least ten firms in
that industry). There is, however, substantial variation across industries. For instance,
Computer Related Services Industry (SIC 737) has seven clusters in 1990, 19 clusters in
1999, and 11 clusters in 2005. In 1999, 80% of the firms in this industry were located in an
industry cluster. In contrast, Bottled Drinks (SIC 208) does not have any cluster during our
sample period.26 On average, each MSA has 0.71 industry clusters, but there is significant
variation across MSAs. For example, New York City hosts eight industry clusters in 1990,
seven in 1994 and five in 2005. In contrast, Albuquerque did not have any industry clusters
during our sample period.

         Table I provides descriptive statistics of the firms in the sample for a number of vari-
ables of interest. It reports firm mean values (i.e., Mean Values) and firm mean values
after subtracting industry means (i.e., Industry Adjusted Mean Values) for firms inside and
outside clusters. According to these figures, while firms in clusters are not more profitable
than firms outside clusters, they have lower book and market leverage, hold more cash,
have higher debt ratings, and pay dividends less often than firms outside clusters.27 In ad-
dition, firms in clusters do more R&D, have higher Market to Book ratios, have less tangible
assets, and are slightly smaller (as measured by their volume of sales). With the exception
of size, these diﬀerences between clustered and non-clustered firms remain significant after
subtracting the industry means, and hence they cannot be fully explained by the fact that
industries exhibit diﬀerent tendencies to cluster. Finally, the descriptive statistics show
that clusters tend to be in larger MSAs, which suggest the need to control for the size of
the MSA in our regressions.


4         Mergers, acquisitions and cluster location

This section presents evidence that relates a firm’s location to its acquisition activity. The
analysis provides descriptive statistics on acquisition activity followed by a multivariate
analysis. Our sample includes all completed acquisitions on the Securities Data Corpora-
tion’s (SDC) U.S. Mergers and Acquisitions Database from 1990 to 2005 where: (1) the
    26
      Ellison and Glaeser (1997) document that while some industries exhibit high concentration, most indus-
tries are only slightly concentrated.
   27
      Details on the definition and construction of the variables are reported in the Data Appendix.



                                                    11
acquirer is covered by Compustat and belongs to a manufacturing or computer services in-
dustry (SIC 200-399 and 737); (2) data on the county and state of the acquirer is available;
(3) the transaction is classified as a merger or an acquisition of majority interest by SDC;
and (4) the value of the transaction is more than $10 million, and it represents more than
1% of the acquirer’s total assets. In a given year, we classify a firm as an acquirer if it
makes at least one acquisition and as a non-acquirer otherwise. We also record the dollar
volume of transactions made by each firm during the year.

       Table II provides descriptive statistics for all acquisitions (Panel A), as well as for ac-
quisitions of public targets (Panel B). While the implications of the analysis correspond
more closely to the total acquisition activity of a firm, documenting the evidence on public
targets is also of interest since the more stringent disclosure requirements aﬀecting public
acquisitions are likely to translate into better quality data.28 In particular, Table II con-
firms that firms inside vis-à-vis outside clusters: (i) are more likely to acquire another firm
(i.e., 0.192 vs. 0.144); (ii) are more likely to acquire another public firms (i.e., 0.063 vs.
0.034); (iii) make more acquisitions per year (i.e., 0.251 vs. 0.175); and (iv) make more
public acquisitions per year (i.e., 0.071 vs. 0.036). Furthermore, these eﬀects are propor-
tionally more pronounced for local transactions, suggesting that having targets in the same
geographical area facilitates the acquisition process. Finally, Table II also documents that
the value of a firm’s acquisitions as a percentage of its total assets is larger in clusters than
outside clusters (i.e., for all acquisitions is 7.3% vs. 4.4%, and for acquisitions of public
targets is 2.5% vs. 1.1%).29

       Table III reports the results of the multivariate analysis. Regressions (1) to (4) relate
industrial clustering to the probability of making an acquisition (regressions (1) and (3)
consider all acquisitions, and regressions (2) and (4) restrict the analysis to acquisition of
public targets).30 Regressions (1) and (2) indicate that the eﬀect of a firm’s location on its
  28
     A number of studies have raised doubts on the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the SDC database,
caveats that are likely to aﬀect the information on non-public acquisitions. See for instance Boone and
Mulherin (2007) and references therein.
  29
     The finding that clustering facilitates M&A transactions is also consistent with existing evidence that
geographic proximity facilitates input sharing (e.g., Holmes 1999), labor market pooling (e.g., Diamond and
Simon 1990, Dumais et al. 1997, and Costa and Kahn 1990) and knowledge spillovers (e.g., Jaﬀee et al.
1993, and Audretsch and Feldman, 1996).
  30
     The reported regressions in columns (1) to (4) correspond to linear probability models. We also run a



                                                    12
acquisition activity remains statistically significant after controlling for year and industry
dummies (and hence, for the possibility that more acquisitive industries will exhibit a greater
tendency to cluster). This eﬀect is economically significant: one standard deviation increase
in the number of firms (i.e., 25 firms) raises the probability of making an acquisition by 1.5
percentage points, which is approximately a 10% increase. This finding, together with the
evidence from Table II, provides support to our conjecture that firms in clusters are more
acquisitive, i.e., Hypothesis 1.

    In columns (3) and (4), we include a measure of the firm’s financial slack (Net Market
Leverage), and the interaction between this measure and our proxy for cluster (Number of
Firms in MSA × Net Market Leverage). In addition, the regressions include the following
controls: firm size (Sales in logs), profitability (EBITDA/TA), firm’s stock return (Aver-
age Stock Return), firm age (Age), city size (Population in logs), and year and industry
dummies. The net market leverage coeﬃcient in this regression is consistent with Hartford
(1999), which shows that financial slack increases a firm’s acquisition activity. Moreover,
the regressions indicate that the negative eﬀect of leverage on acquisitions is stronger in
clusters (i.e., the interaction term is negative and significant).31 The eﬀect is significant
despite the fact that in many acquisitions the choice of payment is not cash, which sug-
gests that having a liquid balance sheet might be important for strategic reasons during the
bidding process.32

    The stronger negative eﬀect of debt in clusters is consistent with the idea that firms in
clusters are more likely to lose out on attractive acquisitions when they have insuﬃcient
slack. Given this interpretation, as our model illustrates, firms in clusters find it desirable
to maintain more financial slack in anticipation of acquisition opportunities. However, given
the feedback from acquisition opportunities to the choice of financial slack, these regressions
should be interpreted with some caution.33
probit analysis and obtain very similar results. Also, for brevity, we report the results by using Number of
Firms in MSA as the proxy for clustering. Qualitatively similar (but less strong) results are obtained with
our alternative clustering proxies.
  31
     We have also run separate regressions for firms inside and outside clusters and found that in clusters
Net Market Leverage has a larger negative eﬀect on acquisitions.
  32
     These strategic considerations, as illustrated in our model, are particularly important when the bidding
process is competitive as it is more likely to be in clusters.
  33
     Ideally, this endogeneity concern should be addressed with instruments for debt. We did estimate this
model with instrumental variables, but because of a lack of good instruments our results were inconclusive.


                                                     13
         In columns (5) to (8) we relate firm location to the value of the acquisitions (rather
than to the number of acquisitions) using Tobit regressions. The results are consistent with
our earlier results and can be summarized as follows: there is evidence that the transaction
volume is larger in clusters, that leverage reduces the transaction volume, and that the
negative eﬀect of leverage is stronger in clusters. Overall, the multivariate results are
consistent with our Hypotheses 1 and 2: relative to firms outside clusters, firm in clusters
are more acquisitive and their acquisition activity is more strongly aﬀected by leverage.



5         Financial structure and cluster location

This section explores the relation between a firm’s location and its capital structure. As we
discussed earlier, location can aﬀect a firm’s capital structure choice through two channels.
The first channel, related to the arguments in Williamson (1986) and Shleifer and Vishny
(1992), is that firms will have greater debt capacity if their assets are more easily redeploy-
able. Hence, if firms in clusters can redeploy (e.g., sell) their assets more easily, they should
also have higher debt ratios. The second channel suggest that firms may want to have more
financial slack to take advantage of potential growth opportunities. These opportunities can
arise, as we illustrate in our model, in the form of more competitive acquisition opportuni-
ties (which are more likely to arise in clusters),34 or, as we discuss in section 5.4, as other
types of growth opportunities. Therefore, while the collateral channel implies that firms in
clusters will be more highly levered, the acquisition (or growth opportunity) channel implies
that firms in clusters will maintain more financial slack.

5.1        Leverage regressions

Table IV examines the relation between capital structure and cluster location after con-
trolling for other determinants of capital structure previously identified in the literature.
In particular, we regress three measures of leverage (i.e., book, market, and net market
leverage) on the following variables: (i) a measure of clustering; (ii) firm size (Sales in
logs); (iii) profitability (EBITDA/TA); (iv) Market to Book, (v) asset tangibility (Tangible
Assets/TA); (vi) R&D expenses (R&D/TA); (vii) the firm’s average stock returns in the
    34
    Notice that the evidence in section 4, which shows that the negative of leverage on the firms’ acquisition
activity is particularly strong in clusters, is consistent with the acquisition eﬀect.


                                                     14
last three years (Average Stock Return); (viii) a control for the size of the MSA in which
the firm is located (Population in logs); and (ix) industry and year dummies.35 We run
separate regressions for each of our three diﬀerent measures of clustering: Number of Firms
in MSA, Ratio of Firms in MSA and Cluster.36

       The results in Table IV show that even after controlling for other factors previously
identified as determinants of leverage, firms in clusters have lower debt ratios than firms
outside clusters.37 The eﬀect is both statistically and economically significant. For instance,
firms located in clusters exhibit market leverage and net market leverage ratios that are,
respectively, 2.0 and 4.9 percentage points smaller than those of firms located outside clus-
ters. Since the average net market leverage in our sample is 22.7%, this represents more
than a 20% reduction from the average firm in the sample. The results are robust across
diﬀerent measures of clustering and leverage, and the coeﬃcients of other determinants of
leverage previously identified are all significant and have the expected sign. These findings
support Hypothesis 3 and document systematic geographical eﬀects in Corporate Finance.

       These regressions can help us interpret the negative relation between debt ratios and
acquisitions documented in the previous section. Such a negative relation could be because
firms with more opportunities maintain financial slack, as we illustrate in our model, or
alternatively as suggested by Jensen (1986), managers may simply find it easier to exploit
these opportunities when they have financial slack. However, to the extent that cluster
location proxies for acquisition and growth opportunities, one can interpret the results as
indicating that firms with greater opportunities maintain lower debt ratios.38

       Table V presents a second set of regressions corresponding to the leverage model pro-
posed in equation (7). These regressions estimate a constant λ that multiplies the estimates
  35
      We also include a dummy variable, R&D Dummy, that takes a value of 1 for firm-year observations
in which R&D is not reported. The following control variables are lagged for one fiscal year: Sales,
EBITDA/TA, Market to Book, Tangible Assets/TA, and R&D/TA .
   36
      We have also run regressions with the logarithm of firms in an MSA as an independent variable and
found very similar results.
   37
      Notice that our specification is similar to Rajan and Zingales’ (1995) except that we also include a proxy
for clustering (Number of Firms in MSA or Cluster) and three additional controls: R&D/TA, Population,
and Average Stock Return. In controlling for past stock returns we follow Welch (2005) who shows that a
firm’s past stock return can be an important determinant of its leverage ratio. In separate regressions we
have also included Selling Expenses/Sales and Firm Age and got almost identical results.
   38
      Notice that this interpretation relies on the exogeneity of a firm’s location. Section 5.3 addresses the
firm’s location choice.


                                                      15
of the determinants of leverage inside and outside of industry clusters. Our hypothesis is
that there is an amelioration eﬀect in clusters (i.e., λ < 1), which means that when the
estimation does not take into account the additional importance of having financial flexi-
bility in clusters, the determinants of capital structure may appear to be empirically less
important in clusters. (Notice that if λ = 1 is imposed, this non-linear specification would
be equivalent to the one reported in Table IV.) Specifically, Table V reports the NLLS
estimation of equation (7) where di corresponds to each of the measures of leverage, and
Kij are the above described control variables (i.e., (i) through (viii)).

       The results in Table V document the presence of an amelioration eﬀect in the market
leverage regressions. For instance, in the net market leverage regression λ = 0.636, i.e., the
eﬀect of the determinants of capital structure is ameliorated by 36.4% in clusters. In addition
to the amelioration eﬀect, Table V also confirms the negative eﬀect of cluster on leverage (for
three of the four regressions Cluster is negatively related to firm leverage). Overall, these
results support Hypothesis 4: consistent with the extra importance of financial flexibility
in clusters, we observe a reduced eﬀect of the other determinants of capital structure in
clustered firms.


5.2      Cash regressions

From a comparison between the leverage and the net leverage regressions, it can be inferred
that firms in clusters vis-a-vis outside clusters tend to hold more cash. In this section we
explore the relation between firm location and cash holdings in more detail.39 Similar to our
analysis of location and leverage, we estimate two types of regressions. First, we estimate
OLS regressions that examine how location aﬀects a firm’s cash holdings after controlling
for the usual determinants of cash. Specifically, we regress the ratio of cash and marketable
securities to total assets minus cash, Cash/nTA, and its logarithm, Log(Cash/nTA), on our
measures of clustering (Number of Firms in MSA, Ratio of Firms in MSA, or Cluster) and
the following controls:40 (i) Sales (in logs, a control for firm size); (ii) Market to Book (a
  39
      See Opler et al., (1999), Dittmar et al., (2003), Acharya et al., (2005), Harford et al. (2005) and Foley
et al., (2007) for papers that examine firms’ decisions to hold cash.
   40
      Both cash variables i.e., Cash/nTA and log(Cash/nTA) are constructed by substracting cash balances
from total assets. This is for consistency with the literature e.g., Foley et al. (2007). Identical results are
obtained when cash balances are not substracted from total assets.


                                                      16
proxy for investment opportunities); (iii) R&D/TA (a proxy for expected costs of financial
distress); (iv) Capital Exp/TA (a proxy for the firms’ investment needs); (v) Debt Rating,
a dummy that takes a value of 1 if the firm has long term debt rated by S&P and of 0
otherwise (a proxy for the costs of accessing financial markets); (vi) Dividend, a dummy
that takes a value of 1 if the firm pays dividends in that year and 0 ( to account for ability
to raise funds by reducing dividends); (vii) Cash Flow Std. Dev. (a measure of cash flow
volatility); (viii) Average Stock Return, the firm’s average stock returns in the last three
years; (ix) Population in logs, (a control for the size of the MSA in which the firm is located);
and (x) industry and year dummies.41

       The OLS regressions reported in Table VI, columns (1) through (6), indicate that af-
ter controlling for other variables previously identified as determinants of cash holdings,
Cash/nTA is 13.7 percentage points higher for firms in clusters.42 Since firms in the sample
have, on average, 32.3% Cash/nTA, the cluster eﬀect represents 42% increase of the aver-
age firm cash holdings. The eﬀect is statistically significant, and robust across the diﬀerent
measures of clustering and of cash balances. Among the controls, Sales and Capital Exp/TA
decrease cash holdings while Market to Book, R&D/TA, Cash Flow Std. Dev and Average
Stock Return increase cash balances.

       We also estimate a non-linear model similar to the one proposed by (7) and estimated
in Table V:
                                                X                X
 log(Cash/nT A)i = φ0 + φc Clusteri +                 φj Kij −       φj · (1 − λ)(Kij × Clusteri ) + εi (8)
                                                  j              j

where Kij are the above described control variables (i.e., (i) through (x)). As in the lever-
age regressions from Table V, the estimate of λ will allow us to test for the presence of the
amelioration eﬀect (i.e., λ < 1). The NLLS estimation of equation (8), which is reported in
column (7), confirms that firms in clusters hold more cash. In addition, it shows that there
is a significant amelioration eﬀect in the determinants of cash holdings in clusters. Specifi-
cally, the amelioration eﬀect, which is statistically significant at the 1% level, represents a
  41
     Controls (i) through (vii) are those considered in Foley et al. (2007) and, as in their analysis, they are
lagged for one fiscal year. As in the leverage regressions, we set R&D equal to zero if the R&D value is not
reported and include a dummy variable for these observations, i.e., R&D Dummy.
  42
     This value is obtained from regression (5), the specification where Cash/nTA is used as the dependent
variable and Cluster is used as the clustering measure.


                                                       17
reduction of 26.2% (i.e., λ = 0.738) in the coeﬃcients of the determinants of cash holdings
in clusters. Overall, the findings in this section are consistent with the previous results on
leverage and with Hypothesis 3 and 4, and confirm the importance of geographical location
on firms’ financial decisions.


5.3      The choice of location

Our results, up to this point, can be summarized as follows: Firms in clusters (1) make more
acquisitions; (2) have acquisition activities that are more negatively aﬀected by leverage;
(3) have more financial slack (i.e., less leverage and more cash); and (4) are less sensitive
to the usual determinants of financial slack. These findings reject the null hypothesis that
firm’s corporate finance decisions are independent of location and, to the extent that loca-
tion choices are exogenous with respect to the firm’s capital structure choice, support the
hypothesis that firms maintain financial slack when they anticipate acquisition opportuni-
ties.

       A potential concern is that firms with better growth and acquisition opportunities as
well as more financial slack, choose to locate in clusters.43 This cluster-selection eﬀect can
potentially be a serious issue for young firms, that have recently chosen their locations.44
However, to the extent that the unobserved characteristics that may influence a firm’s
location choice become less important over time, the observed eﬀect on capital structures of
older firms which chose locations many years ago, is unlikely to arise because of a cluster-
selection eﬀect. For this reason it is interesting to explore whether the relation between
capital structure and location for older firms is indeed consistent with what we observe for
the entire sample.

       In Table VII we present regressions that replicate our previous analysis but on a sample
of firms that have been public for at least 10 years. As was the case in the full sample, our
regressions indicate that firms in clusters make more acquisitions and that leverage reduces
  43
      A large literature has examined the incentives of firms to locate in clusters. For instance Almazan, de
Motta and Titman (2007) show that clusters are likely to attract firms with attributes that make them more
likely to succeed.
   44
      Indeed, Pirinsky and Wang (2006) document that from 1992 to 1997 less than 2.4% of firms in Compustat
moved its headquarters from one MSA to another (i.e., 118 out of 5,000 firms did so).



                                                     18
the tendency to make acquisitions more in clusters (the coeﬃcient of the interaction term
between Net Market Leverage and Number of Firms in MSA is significantly negative also
for older firms). In addition, older firms in clusters have lower leverage and larger cash
balances than older firms outside clusters. As in the full sample case, these results are both
economically and statistically significant. Furthermore, these eﬀects are not significantly
diﬀerent for the older firms. For instance, a one standard deviation increase in the number
of firms, that is, 25 firms, decreases the net market leverage by 2.25 percentage points in the
full-sample case (see Table IV), and by 2.75 percentage points in the sample of older firms
(Table VII panel b). Overall, the consistency of the eﬀects between older firms and the
entire sample suggests that the results are likely to be generated by direct cluster eﬀects.

5.4      Location, growth opportunities and firms’ financial slack

Up to this point our focus has been on the greater acquisition opportunities in clusters, and
how this influences the demand for financial slack. Our focus on clusters is motivated by
the economic geography literature that suggests that opportunities may be more available
to firms that are located close to their industry peers, for instance, due to the importance of
input sharing and resource pooling. In contrast, our focus on acquisitions is motivated by
data considerations. Since acquisitions must be reported publicly, they provide an observ-
able example of a growth opportunity that may influence a firm’s desire to hold financial
slack.

    In reality, however, location can influence a firm’s opportunities in a variety of ways,
so in practice it is diﬃcult to pin down the specific channel through which location influ-
ences the demand for financial slack.45 For this reason it is of interest to consider other
geographical characteristics that may also be related to future opportunities, and examine
how these characteristics are related to firms’ financing choices. In this section we con-
sider R&D expenditures within an MSA, which we measure by the ratio of the aggregate
R&D expenditures to the aggregate firms’ total assets in the MSA (MSA R&D/MSA TA),
as a measure of the regional business climate. If, as discussed in the economic geogra-
phy literature, innovation has spillover eﬀects, it is likely that high R&D cities generate
 45
    As documented above, location eﬀects on financial slack (both in leverage and cash) are substantial,
which suggests that acquisitions are only a manifestation of a more general eﬀect.



                                                  19
opportunities for firms that go beyond what one might expect given their firm specific char-
acteristics (e.g., their own R&D expenditures). Similarly, there may be more opportunities
in growing cities, which would also indicate a positive relation between financial slack and
MSA growth (Population Growth).46

    The results in Table VIII document a significant relation between these regional char-
acteristics (MSA R&D/MSA TA and Population Growth) and capital structure choices.
Specifically, firms in high R&D and growing MSAs have lower leverage and hold more cash,
which is consistent with the idea that these urban characteristics are associated with greater
future business opportunities.47 The eﬀect is economically significant. For instance, a 5%
increase in MSA R&D/MSA TA, (i.e., one standard deviation), reduces firms’ net market
leverage ratio by 3 percentage points, a 13% reduction from the average net market lever-
age in the sample. Furthermore, after controlling for these eﬀects, the eﬀect of cluster on
financial slack continues to be statistically and economically significant (i.e., the coeﬃcient
estimates for Number of Firms in the MSA and Ratio of Firms in the MSA in Table VII are
very similar to those obtained in Tables IV and VI).48 Overall, the eﬀect of these regional
characteristics on debt ratios and cash are consistent with firms maintaining financial slack
in anticipation of future growth opportunities (acquisition or otherwise).


6     Concluding remarks

As we mentioned in the introduction, there is a growing economic geography literature
that describes how a firm’s location can be related to a number of its choices. This paper
contributes to that literature by documenting that firms that are located in industry clusters
are involved in more acquisitions and maintain more financial slack than their industry peers
that are located away from clusters. Although our main focus has been on industry clusters,
like Silicon Valley, we have also considered other urban characteristics, such as the size of
  46
     We also test a specification with state dummies (not reported) to account for diﬀerences in taxation and
regulation across states. When we include state dummies the results are weakened for market leverage but
remain statistically very significant for net market leverage and cash-holdings.
  47
     The regressions in Table VII follow the same specifications as the Net Market Leverage regressions in
Table IV, and the Log(Cash/n-TA) regressions in Table VI (except that now we add the new variable of
interest: MSA R&D/MSA TA or/and Population Growth). These regressions also include industry dummies
and hence, control for the possibility that high R&D industries exhibit a greater tendency to cluster.
  48
     We have also run these tests for older firms, and have found consistent results: older firms in high R&D
and growing MSAs also have more financial slack.


                                                     20
the metropolitan area, the rate of growth of the metropolitan area and the R&D intensity
of the metropolitan area. In this regard, we find that, ceteris paribus, firms in high tech
cities and growing cities tend to maintain more financial slack.49

       This paper contributes to the corporate finance literature that examines the determi-
nants of corporate debt ratios and cash holdings. Up to now, the focus of this literature has
been on the characteristics of firms, and the extent to which these characteristics correlate
with how they are financed. In this paper we show that firm’s locations are also related to
their capital structure choices, and argue that firms in locations that facilitate investment
opportunities maintain more financial slack.

       As we discussed in the introduction, although the negative relation between acquisitions
and debt ratios has been previously established, the direction of causation between opportu-
nities and financial slack has not been fully resolved. Given the arguments in Jensen (1986)
and others, it is plausible that this association arises because firms exploit opportunities
when they have financial slack rather than maintaining financial slack when they anticipate
opportunities. However, since cluster and city growth eﬀects are likely to be directly related
to acquisitions and other opportunities, but can be viewed as exogenous with respect to the
firm’s capital structure choice, the observed relation between geography and financial slack
in this study is likely to arise from the eﬀect that the presence of potential opportunities
produces on a firm’s desire to maintain financial slack.




  49
    Since knowledge spillovers are particularly important for high R&D industries, this finding is consistent
with Glaeser et al. (1992) which documents the importance of knowledge spillovers for the growth in cities.




                                                     21
References

 [1] Acharya, V., H. Almeida and M. Campello, “Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging Per-
    spective on Corporate Financial Policies,” 2005, London Business School IFA Working
    Paper Series.

 [2] Almazan, A., A. de Motta, and S. Titman, “Firm Location and the Creation and
    Utilization of Human Capital,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, Vol. 74, pp. 1305-
    1327.

 [3] Audretsch, D., and F. Maryann, “R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
    and Production,” American Economic Review, 1996, pp. 630-640.

 [4] Mulherin, J. and A. Boone, “Do Termination Provisions Truncate the Takeover Bidding
    Process?” Review of Financial Studies, 2007, 20(2), pp. 461-489.

 [5] Costa, D., and M. Kahn, “Power Couples,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001,
    Vol. 116, pp. 1287-1315.

 [6] Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in Do-
    mestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 1999, Vol. 54, pp. 1-39.

 [7] Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, “The geography of Investment: Informed Trading and
    Asset prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 2001, Vol. 109, pp. 811-841.

 [8] Degryse H., and S. Ongena, “Distance, Lending Relationships, and Competition,”
    Journal of Finance, 2005, Vol. 60, pp. 231-266.

 [9] Diamond, C., and C. Simon, “Industrial Specialization and the Returns to Labor,”
    Journal of Labor Economics, 1990, Vol. 8(2), pp. 175-201.

[10] Dittmar, A., J. Mahrt-Smith, and H. Servaes, “International Corporate Governance
    and Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
    2003,Vol. 28, pp. 111-133.

[11] Dumais, G., G. Ellison, and E. Glaeser, “Dynamic Concentration as a Dynamic
    Process”, 1997, NBER Working Paper no. 6270.


                                            22
[12] Duranton, G. and D. Puga, “Microfoundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies,”
    in J.Henderson and J. Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Vol.
    4. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004.

[13] Dvorak, T., “Do Domestic Investors Have an Information Advantage? Evidence from
    Indonesia,” Journal of Finance, 2005, Vol. 60, pp. 817-839.

[14] Ellison, G., and E. Glaeser, “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing In-
    dustries: A Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, Vol. 109, pp.
    889-927.

[15] Feng, L., and M. Seasholes, “Correlated Trading and Location,” 2004, Journal of Fi-
    nance, Vol, 59, pp. 2117-2144.

[16] Foley, C.F., J. Hartzell, S. Titman, and G. Twite, “Why do Firms Hold So Much Cash?
    A Tax-based Explanation,” Journal of Financial Economics 2007 (forthcoming).

[17] Fujita, M., P. Krugman,.and A. Venables, The Spatial Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT
    Press, 2001.

[18] Fujita, M., and J.F. Thisse, Economics of Agglomeration. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
    University Press, 2002.

[19] Glaeser, E., H. Kallal, J. Scheinkman and A. Shleifer, “Growth in Cities,” The Journal
    of Political Economy, 1992, Vol. 100, pp. 1126-1152.

[20] Glaeser, E., and J. Kohlhase, “Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transportation
    Costs,” Regional Science, 2004, Vol. 83, pp. 197-228.

[21] Graham, J., and C. Harvey, “The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence
    from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2001, Vol. 60, pp. 187-243.

[22] Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, “How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
    Stockholdings and Trades,” Journal of Finance, 2001, Vol.56, pp. 1053-1073.

[23] Harford, J., “Corporate Cash Reserves and Acquisitions,” Journal of Finance, 1999,
    Vol. 54, pp. 1969-1997.


                                            23
[24] Harford, J., S. Mansi, and W. Maxwell, “Corporate Governance and a Firm’s Cash
    Holdings,” 2005, Working Paper.

[25] Hart, O. and J. Moore, “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard Claims
    in Constraining Management,” American. Economic Review, 1995, Vol. 85, pp. 567-85.

[26] Holmes, T., “Localization of Industry and Vertical Disintegration,” Review of Eco-
    nomics and Statistics, 1999, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 314-25.

[27] Holmes, T., and J. Stevens, “Spatial Distribution of Economic Activities in North
    America,” in J.Henderson and J. Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Eco-
    nomics Vol. 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004.

[28] Israel, R., “Capital Structure and the Market for Corporate Control: The Defensive
    Role of Debt Financing,” The Journal of Finance, 1991, Vol. 46, pp. 1391-1409.

[29] Ivkovich, Z., and S. Weisbenner, “Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of the
    Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments,” Journal of Finance,
    2005, Vol. 60, pp. 267-306.

[30] Jaﬀe, A., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson, “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
    Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993,
    Vol. 108, pp. 577-598.

[31] Jensen, M., “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers,”
    American Economic Review, 1986, Vol. 76, pp. 323-29.

[32] Krugman, P., Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

[33] Kedia, S., V. Panchapagesan, and V. Uysal, “Geography and Acquirer Returns” 2007,
    Forthcoming Journal of Financial Intermediation.

[34] Lamont, O., “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets”
    Journal of Finance 1997, Vol. 52, pp. 57-82.

[35] Landier, A., V. Nair and J. Wulf, “Tradeoﬀs in Staying Close: Corporate Decision-
    Making and Geographic Dispersion” 2006, Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.


                                            24
[36] Lang, L., E. Ofek and R.Stulz, “Leverage, Investment, and Firm Growth” Journal of
    Financial Economics, 1996, Vol 40, pp. 3-29.

[37] Loughran, T., “Asymmetric Information, Firm Location, and Equity Issuance” 2007,
    Working paper.

[38] Maksimovic, V., and G. Phillips, “The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages in
    Mergers and Asset Sales and Are There Eﬃciency Gains?” Journal of Finance, 2001,
    Vol. 56, pp. 2019-2065.

[39] Malloy, C., “The Geography of Equity Analysis,” Journal of Finance, 2005, Vol. 60,
    pp. 719-755.

[40] Marshall, A., Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan, 1890.

[41] Myers, S., “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing” Journal of Financial Economics,
    1977, Vol. 5, pp. 147-175.

[42] Myers, S., and, N. Majluf, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms
    Have Information that Investors do not Have” Journal of Financial Economics, 1984,
    Vol. 13, pp. 187-221.

[43] Ono, Y., “Outsourcing Business Services and the Role of Central Administrative Of-
    fices”, Journal of Urban Economics, 2003, Vol. 53, No. 3, pp. 377-395, May,

[44] Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, “The Determinants and Impli-
    cations of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1999, Vol. 52,
    pp. 3-46.

[45] Petersen, M., and R. Rajan, “Does Distance Still Matter? The Information Revolution
    in Small Business Lending,” Journal of Finance, 2002, Vol. 57, pp. 2533-70.

[46] Pirinsky, C., and Q. Wang, “Does Corporate Headquarters Location Matter for Stock
    Returns?,” Journal of Finance, 2006, Vol. 61, pp. 1991-2015.

[47] Porter, M. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York : Free Press, 1990.




                                           25
[48] Myers, S., and R. Rajan, “The Paradox of Liquidity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    1998, pp. 733-771.

[49] Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, “What Do We Know about Capital Structure? Some
    Evidence from International Data,” Journal of Finance, 1995, Vol. 50, pp. 1421-1460.

[50] Rosenthal, S., and W. Strange, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
    Economics,” Syracuse University and University of Toronto, 2003.

[51] Saxenian, A. Regional Advantage. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.

[52] Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
    librium Approach,” Journal of Finance, 1992, Vol. 47, pp. 1343-1365.

[53] Stein, Jeremy C. “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment.” In: Constantinides,
    George, Milt Harris and René Stulz (eds.). Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
    Volume 1, Chapter 2, pp. 111-165. Amsterdam: North Holland. 2003.

[54] Titman, S. and R. Wessels, “The Determinants of Capital Structure Choice,” Journal
    of Finance, 1988, Vol. 43, pp. 1-19.

[55] Welch, I., “ Capital Structure and Stock Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004,
    Vol. 112, pp. 106-131.

[56] Williamson, O., “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance,
    1988, Vol. 43, pp. 567-592.




                                            26
                                                              Table I
                                                     Descriptive Statistics
                                                   Mean Values                                  Industry Adjusted Mean Values
                                Whole Sample        Cluster    Off-Cluster   Difference b       Cluster    Off-Cluster    Difference b


Sales                                1385            1281         1459           -178             244         -172            416
                                                                                (-0.77)                                      (2.72)
EBITDA / TA                         0.159            0.155        0.162         -0.007          -0.004        0.003         -0.007
                                                                                (-1.42)                                     (-1.84)
Market to Book                      2.201            2.741        1.820          0.922           0.181       -0.128          0.310
                                                                               (14.50)                                       (6.74)
Tangible Assets / TA                0.227            0.170        0.268         -0.097          -0.011        0.008         -0.018
                                                                               (-14.12)                                     (-4.08)
R&D / TA                            0.065            0.098        0.042          0.056           0.010       -0.007          0.018
                                                                               (18.83)                                       (7.70)
Capital Exp. / TA                   0.067            0.069        0.066          0.003           0.001       -0.001          0.001
                                                                                (1.53)                                       (0.80)
Stock Return                        0.254            0.317        0.209          0.108           0.023       -0.016          0.039
                                                                                (9.19)                                       (4.19)
Cash Flow Std. Dev.                 0.032            0.041        0.026          0.016           0.003       -0.002          0.005
                                                                               (12.50)                                       (5.72)
Firm Age                            18.264           14.562      20.884         -6.322          -0.702        0.497          -1.199
                                                                                (-8.71)                                     (-2.32)
Book Leverage                       0.476            0.436        0.504         -0.069          -0.008        0.006         -0.014
                                                                                (-7.33)                                     (-1.95)
Market Leverage                     0.322            0.247        0.374         -0.127          -0.018        0.013         -0.031
                                                                               (-13.08)                                     (-4.57)
Net Book Leverage                   0.285            0.152        0.379         -0.227          -0.044        0.031         -0.074
                                                                               (-14.98)                                     (-6.65)
Net Market Leverage                 0.227            0.118        0.305         -0.187          -0.032        0.023         -0.054
                                                                               (-16.72)                                     (-6.84)
Cash / n-TA                         0.323            0.526        0.180          0.346           0.085       -0.060          0.145
                                                                               (17.41)                                       (9.83)
Log(Cash / n-TA)                    -2.246           -1.381      -2.860          1.479           0.302       -0.214          0.516
                                                                               (21.62)                                      (10.39)
Rating                              0.035            0.041        0.030          0.011           0.009       -0.006          0.015
                                                                                (0.91)                                       (1.78)
Dividend                            0.340            0.187        0.447         -0.260          -0.032        0.023         -0.055
                                                                               (-11.13)                                     (-3.39)
Population                          15.085           15.849      14.545          1.304
                                                                               (21.98)


    NOTES
        a.   Details on the definition and construction of the variables reported in the table are available in the Data Appendix.
        b.   “Difference” is the difference between the mean value In-Cluster and Off-Cluster (robust and clustered by firm t-
             statistics are provided in parenthesis).
                             Table II Mergers & Acquisitions
                            Descriptive Statistics (Mean Values)
Panel A                                                              Whole Sample
                                           All-Firms      In-Cluster       Off-Cluster        Difference b
Ratio of acquirers                           0.164          0.192             0.144              0.047
                                                                                                 (7.30)
Ratio of local acquirers                     0.026           0.050            0.009              0.041
                                                                                                (14.80)
Acquisitions per firm                        0.207           0.251            0.175              0.076
                                                                                                 (8.14)
Local acquisitions per firm                  0.027           0.053            0.009              0.044
                                                                                                (14.57)
Total transaction value / TA                 0.056           0.073            0.044              0.029
                                                                                                 (8.71)
Total local transaction value / TA           0.005           0.009            0.001              0.008
                                                                                                (13.41)


Panel B                                                              Public Targets
                                           All-Firms      In-Cluster       Off-Cluster        “Difference”
Ratio of acquirers                           0.046          0.063             0.034              0.029
                                                                                                 (7.93)
Ratio of local acquirers                     0.008           0.019            0.001              0.018
                                                                                                (10.76)
Acquisitions per firm                        0.051           0.071            0.036              0.035
                                                                                                 (8.17)
Local acquisitions per firm                  0.009           0.019            0.001              0.018
                                                                                                (10.68)
Total transaction value / TA                 0.017           0.025            0.011              0.014
                                                                                                 (8.34)
Total local transaction value / TA           0.002           0.004            0.000              0.004
                                                                                                (10.73)

NOTES
a. Details on the definition and construction of the variables reported in the table are available in the Data
   Appendix.
b. “Difference” is the difference between the mean value In-Cluster and Off-Cluster (robust and clustered
   by firm t- statistics are provided in parenthesis).
                                                               Table III
                                                    Mergers & Acquisitions Regressions
                                                                       (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)
       Number of Firms in MSA / 10                                   0.006      0.006     0.001      0.005      0.015        0.032    0.003    0.019
                                                                     (2.42)     (3.94)    (0.59)     (3.09)     (3.11)       (4.38)   (0.53)   (2.52)
      Net Market Leverage                                                                 -0.123     -0.039                           -0.473   -0.687
                                                                                          (6.15)     (4.40)                           (7.47)   (6.30)
      Net Market Leverage x (Number of Firms in MSA / 10)                                 -0.034     -0.015                           -0.056   -0.054
                                                                                          (3.19)     (2.89)                           (1.94)   (1.25)
      Sales                                                                               0.039      0.024                            0.078     0.188
                                                                                          (9.29)    (11.05)                           (7.80)   (12.56)
      EBITDA/TA                                                                           0.085      0.023                            0.278    0.105
                                                                                          (2.59)     (1.27)                           (3.46)   (0.78)
      Average Stock Return                                                                0.064      0.018                            0.205    0.164
                                                                                          (6.87)     (3.75)                           (9.47)   (4.63)
      Firm Age                                                                            -0.002     -0.001                           -0.004   -0.005
                                                                                          (4.27)     (2.47)                           (3.82)   (2.82)
      Population                                                                          -0.002     -0.003                           -0.005   -0.032
                                                                                          (0.48)     (1.95)                           (0.55)   (2.29)


      Year Dummies                                                     Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes
      Industry Dummies                                                 Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes

      N                                                              13342     13342      13328      13328      13342        13342    13328    13328
        2
      R                                                               0.03      0.02       0.07       0.04

NOTES
a.   Details on the definition and construction of the variables reported in the table are available in the Data Appendix.
b.   Each column corresponds to a different regression. Reported are the estimated coefficients with their t-statistics in parenthesis (standard errors are
     robust and clustered by firm). For (1) and (3), dummy variable indicating an acquisition is the dependent variable. For (2) and (4), dummy variable
     indicating acquisition of a public target is the dependent variable. For (5) and (7) Total Transaction Value/TA is the dependent variable. For (6) and
     (8), Total Public Transaction Value/TA is the dependent variable.
                                                          Table IV
                                                 Leverage Regressions (OLS)
                                  Book        Market      Net Market      Book Market Net Market     Book Market Net Market
                                Leverage     Leverage      Leverage     Leverage Leverage Leverage Leverage Leverage Leverage
Number of Firms in MSA / 10      -0.007       -0.003        -0.009
                                 (3.66)       (2.41)        (4.99)

Ratio of Firms in MSA                                                    -0.178     -0.137      -0.302
                                                                         (3.28)     (3.00)      (5.36)

Cluster                                                                                                     -0.027    -0.020      -0.049
                                                                                                            (2.61)    (2.20)      (4.35)

Sales                             0.035       0.013         0.022         0.036     0.014       0.023       0.035      0.013      0.022
                                 (12.59)      (4.93)        (7.40)       (12.72)    (5.08)      (7.64)     (12.50)     (4.94)     (7.35)

EBITDA / TA                      -0.447        -0.396        -0.360       -0.441     -0.394     -0.353     -0.442     -0.394      -0.356
                                 (16.24)      (18.47)       (14.55)      (16.05)    (18.55)    (14.46)     (16.05)    (18.56)     (14.52)

Market to Book                   -0.007        -0.031        -0.026      -0.007      -0.031    -0.026       -0.007    -0.031      -0.027
                                 (2.57)       (17.60)       (12.53)      (2.84)     (17.59)    (12.66)      (2.96)    (17.85)     (13.08)

Tangible Assets / TA              0.081       0.072         0.208         0.080     0.070       0.203       0.082      0.072      0.208
                                  (2.12)      (2.07)        (5.32)        (2.06)    (1.98)      (5.15)      (2.15)     (2.05)     (5.31)

R&D / TA                         -0.280       -0.515        -0.700       -0.275     -0.502      -0.678      -0.289     -0.514     -0.700
                                 (4.19)       (10.19)       (11.11)      (4.07)     (9.86)     (10.73)      (4.32)    (10.18)     (11.1)

R&D Dummy                        -0.007       0.020         0.023        -0.005     0.021       0.025       -0.004     0.021      0.026
                                 (0.51)       (1.54)        (1.51)       (0.37)     (1.60)      (1.65)      (0.31)     (1.64)     (1.74)

Average Stock Return             -0.008        -0.092        -0.072      -0.009      -0.093    -0.073       -0.008     -0.092      -0.072
                                 (1.23)       (18.52)       (11.98)      (1.31)     (18.65)    (12.18)      (1.22)    (18.50)     (11.93)

Population                        0.006       0.002         -0.001        0.008     0.004       0.004       0.006      0.003      0.002
                                  (1.56)      (0.54)        (0.20)        (1.99)    (1.21)      (0.99)      (1.62)     (0.84)     (0.45)

Year Dummies                      Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Industry Dummies                  Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations                     13342        13342         13342        13342      13342       13342       13342      13342      13342
R2                                0.22         0.47          0.46         0.22       0.48        0.46        0.22       0.47       0.46


     NOTES
     a.   Details on the definition and construction of the variables reported in the table are available in the Data Appendix.
     b.   Each column corresponds to a different regression. Reported are the estimated coefficients with their t-statistics in
          parenthesis (standard errors are robust and clustered by firm). Also included in each regression are year and industry
          dummies.
                                Table V
                      Leverage Regressions (NLLS)
                            Book             Market           Net Book       Net Market
                          Leverage          Leverage          Leverage        Leverage
Cluster                     -0.010            -0.062            -0.083           -0.069
                            (0.62)            (3.05)            (4.23)           (2.88)

Sales                       0.037             0.014             0.057            0.024
                           (11.81)            (4.62)            (14.1)           (6.93)

EBITDA / TA                -0.465            -0.475             -0.448          -0.433
                           (13.69)           (17.14)            (11.21)         (13.71)

Market to Book              -0.008           -0.044             -0.040          -0.040
                            (2.96)           (16.15)            (10.29)         (13.17)

Tangible Assets / TA        0.082             0.068             0.373            0.202
                            (2.04)            (1.73)            (7.56)           (4.54)

R&D / TA                    -0.317           -0.659             -0.749          -0.905
                            (4.41)           (10.11)            (7.88)          (11.00)

R&D Dummy                  -0.005             0.015             0.020            0.020
                           (-0.39)            (1.08)            (1.14)           (1.16)

Average Stock Return        -0.008            -0.109            -0.031          -0.088
                            (1.20)           (16.89)            (3.39)          (11.86)

Population                  0.006             0.003             0.004            0.001
                            (1.57)            (0.82)            (0.72)           (0.34)

λ                           0.910             0.652             1.016            0.636
                            (1.30)           (11.10)            (0.27)           (9.57)

Year Dummies                 Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
Industry Dummies             Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes

Observations                13342             13342             13342            13342
R2                           0.22              0.49              0.42             0.47


NOTES
a. Details on the definition and construction of the variables reported in the table are
   available in the Data Appendix.
b. Each column corresponds to a different regression. Reported are the estimated
   coefficients with their t-statistics in parenthesis (standard errors are robust and
   clustered by firm). For λ, the reported t statistic corresponds to the test of
   hypothesis λ≠1.
                                             Table VI
                                          Cash Regressions
                                                                    OLS                                NLLS
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)
Number of Firms in MSA / 10           0.034      0.077
                                      (7.51)     (7.46)

Ratio of Firms in MSA                                       0.898      2.527
                                                            (7.27)     (7.38)

Cluster                                                                          0.137      0.460      0.805
                                                                                 (7.11)     (6.50)     (5.76)

Sales                                 -0.043     -0.064     -0.046    -0.075     -0.043     -0.067     -0.079
                                      (7.67)     (2.90)     (8.21)    (3.43)     (7.83)     (3.05)     (3.09)

Market to Book                        0.077      0.213      0.079      0.216      0.081      0.220      0.274
                                     (12.05)    (15.49)    (12.65)    (15.92)    (12.78)    (16.39)    (13.50)

R&D / TA                              1.324      4.898      1.317      4.784      1.381      4.902      5.899
                                      (9.73)    (12.45)     (9.56)    (12.14)    (10.22)    (12.50)    (11.24)

R&D Dummy                             -0.001     -0.218     -0.009    -0.235     -0.013     -0.248     -0.246
                                      (0.04)     (2.26)     (0.54)    (2.43)     (0.80)     (2.59)     (2.33)

Capital Exp / TA                      -0.776     -1.552     -0.784    -1.570     -0.780     -1.555     -1.837
                                      (8.06)     (4.22)     (8.14)    (4.26)     (8.05)     (4.23)     (4.35)

Debt Rating                           -0.086     0.035      -0.081     0.053     -0.094     0.015      0.046
                                      (2.64)     (0.19)     (2.29)     (0.28)    (2.85)     (0.08)     (0.20)

Dividend                              0.004      0.010      0.009      0.027     0.005      0.019      0.068
                                      (0.24)     (0.13)     (0.54)     (0.37)    (0.28)     (0.27)     (0.86)

Cash Flow Std. Dev.                   0.634      2.429      0.637      2.350     0.637      2.276      2.922
                                      (1.72)     (2.55)     (1.75)     (2.49)    (1.73)     (2.41)     (2.6)

Average Stock Return                  0.051      0.256      0.052      0.261     0.050      0.252      0.286
                                      (3.87)     (6.84)     (4.05)     (6.99)    (3.76)     (6.69)     (6.54)

Population                            0.008      0.064      -0.003     0.025     0.005      0.037      0.041
                                      (1.84)     (2.51)     (0.53)     (0.91)    (1.24)     (1.35)     (1.47)

λ                                                                                                      0.738
                                                                                                       (5.11)


Year Dummies                           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes
Industry Dummies                       Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes

Observations                          13342      13277      13342      13277     13342      13277      13342
    2
R                                      0.38       0.43       0.38         0.43    0.38       0.43          0.43


        NOTES

        a. Each column corresponds to a different regression. Reported are the estimated
           coefficients with their t-statistics in parenthesis (standard errors are robust and clustered
           by firm). For λ the reported t-statistic corresponds to the test of the hypothesis λ≠1.
           Coefficients that are significant at the 5% level are highlighted in bold.
        b. For (1), (3), and (5), Cash/n-TA is the dependent variable. For (2), (4), (6), and (7),
           LogCash/n-TA) is the dependent variable.
                                              Table VII Older Firm Regressions
                                                                             Panel A: M&A Regression Analysis
                                                          All Acquisitions    Public Acquisitions         All Acquisitions    Public Acquisitions
   Number of Firms in MSA / 10                                 0.005                   0.006                  -0.001                  0.004
                                                               (1.28)                  (2.45)                 (0.26)                  (1.61)

   Net Market Leverage                                                                                        -0.123                  -0.034
                                                                                                              (4.84)                  (3.13)

   Net Market Leverage. x (Number of Firms in MSA/10)                                                         -0.035                  -0.024
                                                                                                              (2.22)                  (3.20)

   Sales                                                                                                       0.071                  0.040
                                                                                                               (1.53)                 (1.47)

   EBITDA/TA                                                                                                   0.032                  0.022
                                                                                                               (6.67)                 (8.82)

   Average Stock Return (3)                                                                                    0.040                  0.013
                                                                                                               (3.16)                 (1.87)

   Firm Age                                                                                                   -0.001                  -0.001
                                                                                                              (2.27)                  (1.98)

   Population                                                                                                  0.001                  -0.003
                                                                                                               (0.13)                 (1.82)

   R-squared                                                   0.03                    0.02                    0.06                   0.05

                                                             Panel B: Leverage and Cash Regressions
                                        Book Leverage            Market Leverage              Net Market Leverage               Cash / n-TA
   Number of Firms in MSA / 10      -0.009                     -0.004                          -0.011                        0.043
                                    (3.30)                     (1.94)                          (4.06)                        (5.86)
   Ratio of Firms in MSA                        -0.178                       -0.109                          -0.275                     0.769
                                                (2.58)                       (1.81)                          (3.66)                     (4.93)
   Sales                            0.033       0.033           0.011        0.012              0.019        0.020           -0.029     -0.030
                                    (9.84)      (9.89)          (3.64)       (3.73)             (5.37)       (5.48)          (4.86)     (5.00)

   EBITDA/TA                        -0.499      -0.499          -0.451        -0.451             -0.401      -0.401
                                    (11.17)     (11.16)        (12.97)       (12.97)            (10.17)     (10.19)
   Market to Book                   -0.007      -0.007         -0.042        -0.042             -0.038      -0.038           0.079      0.081
                                    (1.64)      (1.73)         (14.14)       (14.05)            (11.24)     (11.19)          (8.03)     (8.17)
   Tangible Assets / TA             0.051       0.052           0.036        0.035              0.161        0.161
                                    (1.05)      (1.06)          (0.84)       (0.84)             (3.39)       (3.38)
   R&D / TA                         -0.339      -0.358         -0.476        -0.478             -0.667       -0.679          1.191      1.319
                                    (3.21)      (3.35)         (6.26)        (6.18)             (7.12)       (7.16)          (6.29)     (6.83)
   R&D Dummy                        -0.027      -0.025          0.007        0.008              0.004        0.006           0.015      0.008
                                    (1.60)      (1.50)          (0.43)       (0.49)             (0.19)       (0.31)          (0.80)     (0.42)
   Capital Exp / TA                                                                                                          -0.912     -0.964
                                                                                                                             (7.25)     (7.59)
   Debt Rating                                                                                                               -0.104     -0.098
                                                                                                                             (3.14)     (2.90)
   Dividend                                                                                                                  0.008      0.009
                                                                                                                             (0.48)     (0.56)
   Cash Flow Std. Dev.                                                                                                       1.410      1.489
                                                                                                                             (2.09)     (2.21)
   Average Stock Return             -0.005      -0.006         -0.101        -0.101             -0.086       -0.086          0.029      0.032
                                    (0.56)      (0.59)         (12.80)       (12.83)            (9.19)       (9.24)          (1.75)     (1.90)
   Population                       0.009       0.010           0.004        0.006              0.003        0.006           0.004      -0.001
                                    (2.09)      (2.29)          (1.07)       (1.33)             (0.55)       (1.16)          (0.85)     (0.18)
   R-squared                         0.22        0.22            0.48         0.48               0.44         0.44           0.38        0.37

Notes:
a) Older Firms are firms that did their IPO at least 10 years before; b) All regressions contain Year Dummies and Industry
Dummies; c) The number of firm-year observations is 8415; d). Standard errors are robust and clustered by firm.
                                                           Table VIII
                                                     Region Specific Controls
                                           Market Leverage                    Net Market Leverage                    Log(Cash/ n-TA)
                                   (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)
Number of Firms in MSA / 10 -0.003 -0.002 -0.002                       -0.009 -0.007 -0.007                 0.080     0.067    0.069
                                  (2.23)    (1.75)   (1.53)            (4.73) (4.01) (3.74)                 (7.02)    (6.32)   (6.01)
Ratio of Firms in MSA                                         -0.136                               -0.292                               2.414
                                                              (2.65)                               (4.66)                               (6.28)
Population Growth                 -0.698             -0.804 -0.882     -0.776             -0.962 -1.065     4.944              6.209    6.726
                                  (2.00)             (2.30) (2.53)     (1.86)             (2.31) (2.57)     (1.74)             (2.18)   (2.37)
MSA R&D / MSA TA                            -0.267 -0.350 -0.321                 -0.497 -0.615 -0.580                 3.587    4.077    3.964
                                            (2.32) (2.77) (2.54)                 (3.69) (4.08) (3.86)                 (4.19)   (4.07)   (3.93)
Sales                             0.013     0.013    0.013    0.013    0.023     0.022    0.022    0.023    -0.061 -0.065 -0.061 -0.073
                                  (4.58)    (4.86)   (4.48)   (4.66)   (7.04)    (7.30)   (6.91)   (7.17)   (2.51) (2.96) (2.54) (3.03)
EBITDA / TA                        -0.415 -0.394 -0.413 -0.412         -0.376 -0.356 -0.372 -0.369
                                  (15.89) (18.44) (15.83) (15.88)      (12.55) (14.50) (12.47) (12.47)
Market to Book                     -0.033 -0.031 -0.033 -0.033         -0.028 -0.026 -0.028 -0.028           0.218 0.211 0.215 0.217
                                  (15.74) (17.47) (15.62) (15.53)      (11.43) (12.37) (11.27) (11.26)      (13.29) (15.43) (13.20) (13.56)
Tangible Assets / TA              0.074     0.074    0.076    0.072    0.208     0.211    0.211    0.205
                                  (1.97)    (2.11)   (2.03)   (1.92)   (4.93)    (5.41)   (5.04)   (4.86)
R&D / TA                          -0.520 -0.489 -0.488 -0.472          -0.736 -0.652 -0.680 -0.654           5.004 4.577 4.674 4.551
                                  (9.06) (9.60) (8.42) (8.08)          (10.32) (10.23) (9.42) (9.05)        (11.32) (11.44) (10.36) (10.08)
R&D Dummy                         0.020     0.018    0.018    0.019    0.021     0.020    0.018    0.021    -0.208 -0.196 -0.186 -0.206
                                  (1.42)    (1.43)   (1.30)   (1.38)   (1.28)    (1.33)   (1.09)   (1.25)   (1.96) (2.03) (1.74) (1.93)
Average Stock Return               -0.086 -0.092 -0.086 -0.086         -0.066 -0.072 -0.066 -0.066          0.238     0.260    0.239    0.241
                                  (14.81) (18.60) (14.84) (14.91)      (9.58) (12.11) (9.64) (9.73)         (5.59)    (6.99)   (5.67)   (5.75)
Capital Exp/TA                                                                                              -1.848 -1.622 -1.963 -2.006
                                                                                                            (4.37) (4.43) (4.66) (4.77)
Debt Rating                                                                                                 0.020     0.035    0.017    0.038
                                                                                                            (0.11)    (0.19)   (0.09)   (0.20)
Dividend                                                                                                     -0.030 0.033 -0.002 0.017
                                                                                                            (0.40) (0.47) (0.02) (0.22)
Cash Flow Std. Dev.                                                                                         2.769     2.360    2.643    2.517
                                                                                                            (2.53)    (2.47)   (2.42)   (2.32)
Population                        0.001     0.003    0.001    0.005    -0.003    0.001    -0.001   0.005    0.074     0.054    0.063    0.021
                                  (0.12)    (0.77)   (0.36)   (1.04)   (0.60)    (0.15)   (0.25)   (0.86)   (2.41)    (2.16)   (2.06)   (0.65)


Year Dummies                       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Industry Dummies                   Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes

        Observations              10839     13342    10839    10839    10839     13342    10839    10839    10791     13277    10791    10791
                 2
                R                  0.47      0.48    0.47     0.47      0.45     0.46     0.46     0.46      0.43     0.43     0.44     0.44


           Notes:
           a.   Details on the definition and construction of the variables reported in the table are available in the Data Appendix.
           b.   Each column corresponds to a different regression. Reported are the estimated coefficients with their t-statistics in
                parenthesis (standard errors are robust and clustered by firm).
                                                           Data Appendix
Acquisitions per firm is the number of acquisitions per firm.

All Acquisitions is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if during that year the firm acquires another firm and of 0 otherwise.

Average Stock Return is the firm’s average stock return over the last three years.

Book Debt (BD) is TA minus BE.

Book Equity (BE) is defined as TA minus liabilities (Item 181) plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (Item35)
minus PS.
Book Leverage is BD over TA.

Capital Exp. / TA is capital expenditures (Item 128) over TA.

Cash Flow Std Dev. is the standard deviation of EBITDA/TA during the sample period.

Cash/ n-TA is cash and marketable securities (Item 1) over TA minus cash.

Cluster is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if there are 10 or more firms from the same industry within the Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) as identified by the U.S. Census Bureau in 1990 and of 0 otherwise.

Debt Rating takes the value of one if the firm has an S&P investment grade long-term debt rating.

Dividend takes the value of one if the firm pays dividend (Item 26).

EBITDA/TA is EBITDA (Item13) over lagged TA.

Local acquisitions per firm is the number of acquisitions within the same MSA per firm.

Market Equity (ME) is common shares outstanding (Item 25) times the stock price (Item 199).

Market Leverage is BD over MV.

Market-to-Book ratio is defined as MV over TA.

Market Value (MV) is defined as liabilities (Item181) minus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (Item 35) plus
PS plus ME.

MSA R&D / MSA TA is the ratio of total expenditures to total assets in the MSA.

Net Book Leverage is BD minus cash and marketable securities (Item 1) over TA.

Net Cash/ TA is cash and marketable securities (Item 1) minus short-term debt (Item 34) over TA.

Net Market Leverage is BD minus cash and marketable securities (Item 1) over MV.

Number of Firms in MSA is the number of firms within the same industry in an MSA.

Public Acquisitions is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if during that year the firm acquires another public firm and of 0 otherwise.

Population is the natural logarithm of population estimate of MSA.

Population Growth is annual population growth in the MSA.

Preferred Stock (PS) is equal to liquidating value (Item 10) if available, else redemption value (Item 56) if available, else carrying
value (Item 130).
Ratio of acquirers is the proportion of firms that acquire another firm.

Ratio of local acquirers is the proportion of firms that acquire another firm within the same MSA.

Ratio of local firms is the ratio of number of firms within the same industry to total number of firms classified in the same industry in the
U.S

R&D Dummy takes the value of one if COMPUSTAT reports R&D expense as missing.

Ratio of Firms in MSA is the number of firms within the same industry in an MSA divided by the total number of firms within the
same industry.

R&D / TA is defined as R&D expenses (Item 46) over TA.

Sales is the natural logarithm of sales (Item 12) in 1990 dollars.

Selling Exp. / TA is selling and administrative expenses (Item 189) over TA.

Stock Return is the firm’s annual stock return.

Tangible Assets / TA is net property, plant and equipment (Item 8) over TA.

Total Assets (TA) is measured as the book value of assets (Item 6)

Total transaction value / TA is the total value of the acquisitions over TA

Total local transaction value / TA is the total value of the local acquisitions over TA
