                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                DOES MEDICARE SAVE LIVES?

                                            David Card
                                           Carlos Dobkin
                                           Nicole Maestas

                                        Working Paper 13668
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13668


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2007




We thank the California Department of Health Services for providing us with the data used in the paper.
This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute for Aging. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Card, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Medicare Save Lives?
David Card, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas
NBER Working Paper No. 13668
November 2007
JEL No. H51,I11

                                              ABSTRACT

The health insurance characteristics of the population changes sharply at age 65 as most people become
eligible for Medicare. But do these changes matter for health? We address this question using data
on over 400,000 hospital admissions for people who are admitted through the emergency room for
"non-deferrable" conditions -- diagnoses with the same daily admission rates on weekends and weekdays.
Among this subset of patients there is no discernible rise in the number of admissions at age 65, suggesting
that the severity of illness is similar for patients on either side of the Medicare threshold. The insurance
characteristics of the two groups are much different, however, with a large jump at 65 in the fraction
who have Medicare as their primary insurer, and a reduction in the fraction with no coverage. These
changes are associated with significant increases in hospital list chargers, in the number of procedures
performed in hospital, and in the rate that patients are transferred to other care units in the hospital.
We estimate a nearly 1 percentage point drop in 7-day mortality for patients at age 65, implying that
Medicare eligibility reduces the death rate of this severely ill patient group by 20 percent. The mortality
gap persists for at least two years following the initial hospital admission.


David Card                                           Nicole Maestas
Department of Economics                              RAND Corporation
549 Evans Hall, #3880                                1776 Main Street
UC Berkeley                                          P.O. Box 2138
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER                                             Nicole_Maestas@rand.org
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Carlos Dobkin
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
cdobkin@ucsc.edu
       Medicare pays nearly one-fifth of total health care costs in the United States. Yet,

evidence on the health effects of the program is limited. Studies of aggregate death rates before

and after the introduction of Medicare show little indication of a program impact (Finkelstein

and McKnight, 2005). The age profiles of mortality and self-reported health in the population as

a whole are likewise remarkably smooth around the eligibility threshold at age 65 (Dow, 2004;

Card, Dobkin and Maestas, 2004). While existing research has shown that the utilization of

health care services increases once people become eligible for Medicare (e.g., Decker and

Rapaport, 2002, McWilliams et al., 2003, Card, Dobkin and Maestas, 2004; McWilliams et al.,

2007), the health impact of these additional services remains uncertain.

       This paper presents new evidence on the health effects of Medicare, based on differences

in mortality for severely ill people who are admitted to California hospitals just before and just

after their 65th birthday. Specifically, we focus on unplanned admissions through the emergency

room for “non-deferrable” conditions – those with similar weekend and weekday admission

rates. We argue that the decision to present at an emergency room is unlikely to depend on

insurance status for patients with these conditions. Consistent with this assertion, the arrival rate

is nearly identical for patients just under and just over age 65. In contrast, admission rates for all

causes jump 7% once people reach 65, and even total emergency room admissions rise by 3%.

       Focusing on non-deferrable admissions, we turn to an analysis of the age profiles of

patient characteristics and outcomes, testing for discontinuities at age 65. The demographic

composition and diagnosis mix of the sample trend smoothly through the age 65 barrier, as

would be expected under the assumption of no differential sample selection pre- and post-

Medicare eligibility. On the other hand, the fraction of patients with Medicare as their primary
insurer rises by about 50 percentage points, while the fraction with no insurance drops by 8

percentage points

       Associated with these changes in insurance we find a small but statistically significant

increase in the number of procedures performed in the hospital, and a similar rise in total list

charges. We also find a relatively large increase in the likelihood that patients are transferred to

other units within the same hospital (mainly skilled nursing facilities) and a reduction in the 28-

day readmission rate. Finally, using death records matched to our sample of hospital admissions,

we find a clearly discernable drop in mortality once people become eligible for Medicare.

Relative to people who are just under 65 when admitted, those who are just over 65 have about a

1 percentage point lower likelihood of death within a week of admission, or roughly a 20 percent

reduction in 7-day mortality. A similar absolute reduction in mortality is registered at 28 days

and 90 days, and persists for at least two years after admission, suggesting that the differential

treatment afforded to those with Medicare coverage has an important long-run impact on patient

survival.

       We conclude by discussing potential channels for the Medicare effect. One possibility is

that it reflects changes in treatment intensity and mortality for the small fraction (<10%) of

patients who move from uninsured to insured status once Medicare is available. In fact, the

magnitude of our estimated mortality effect is too large (and too widely distributed) to be driven

entirely by this group. We argue that a more plausible channel is the easing of case review

procedures and other restrictions as patients who were previously covered by private insurance

or Medicaid become Medicare-eligible at 65.

       The next section presents a brief overview of the Medicare program and existing research

on its impacts. Section III outlines our regression-discontinuity research design. Section IV



                                                      2
describes our procedure for identifying non-deferrable emergency room admissions, and

summarizes our tests for differential selectivity between patients just under and just over 65.

Section V presents our main analysis of the age profiles of treatment intensity and mortality for

the sub-sample of non-deferrable admissions. Section VI discusses potential channels for the

Medicare effect on treatment intensity and heath. Section VII concludes.



II. Medicare: Background and Previous Studies

a. Medicare Eligibility and Health Insurance

         Medicare is provided to people who are 65 or older and have worked at least 10 years in

covered employment.1 Medicare is also provided to people under 65 who are receiving Social

Security Disability Insurance (DI): currently about 12% of the population is already on the

program by the time they reach 65.2 Age-eligible individuals can enroll on the first day of the

month that they turn 65 and obtain Medicare hospital insurance (Part A) for free. Medicare Part

B, which covers doctor bills and some other charges, is available for a modest monthly premium.

         The onset of Medicare eligibility leads to sharp changes in health insurance status at age

65. Figure 1 illustrates the transition using data from the 1999-2003 National Health Interview

Surveys (NHIS) on four different dimensions of insurance coverage: Medicare coverage; any

insurance coverage; coverage by multiple policies; and having primary insurance coverage in a

managed care policy. The figure shows the means of each outcome by age (measured in

quarters), as well as the fitted age profiles from a simple regression that includes a quadratic in

age, a dummy for age over 65, and interactions of the dummy with age and age-squared.



1
  Spouses of people who qualify are also qualified. U.S. citizens and legal aliens with at least five years of
residency can also enroll in Medicare at age 65 by paying monthly premiums


                                                               3
        The fraction of people with Medicare coverage rises by about 60 percentage points at age

65.3 Apart from this, the age profile is relatively smooth and well-described by a simple

quadratic function. Associated with the rise in Medicare coverage is an increase of about 9

percentage points in the fraction of people with any coverage, leaving only about 3 percent of the

population over 65 uninsured, compared with about 13% of those under 65.

        The two other insurance characteristics shown in Figure 1 also change sharply at 65. The

fraction of the population covered by multiple policies rises by about 45%, as many of those with

privately insurance before 65 obtain a supplemental policy to “top up” their Medicare coverage.4

Conversely, the fraction of people covered by managed care in their primary policy falls by 30%.

This drop reflects the relatively high rate of managed care coverage in the pre-65 insurance

market, coupled with the relatively low fraction of Medicare recipients who choose managed

care over traditional fee-for-service insurance.5

        To summarize, the data in Figure 1 show striking changes in the heath insurance

coverage of the population at age 65. Within a few weeks of becoming eligible for Medicare,

nearly 80% of the population is enrolled in the program. In the process, about ¾ of those who

were previously uninsured obtain coverage. Many Medicare enrollees who were previously

covered by a private plan enroll in a supplemental policy, creating a sharp rise in the incidence of




2
  See Autor and Duggan (2003) for a recent analysis of trends in DI. A very small number of people who need
  kidney dialysis are also eligible.
3
  Other data sources (e.g., the Survey of Income and Program Participation and the Current Population Survey, show
  somewhat higher Medicare enrollment after age 65. We suspect that at least some of the over-65 respondents in
  the NHIS who do not report Medicare are actually covered. It is widely believed that the participation rate in
  Medicare Part A by people eligible for the program is close to 100% (Remler and Glied, 2003).
4
  Medicare Parts A and B include significant deductibles and require a co-insurance payment of 20% on many bills.
  Some individuals obtain supplementary coverage through a previous employer, while others purchase a private
  “Medigap” policy.
5
  In our NHIS sample about 85% of Medicare recipients are enrolled in traditional fee-for-service Medicare. Prior to
  2003 the only managed care option in Medicare was to enroll in a Medicare HMO plan.

                                                             4
multiple-coverage. And, since most Medicare recipients choose traditional fee-for-service

coverage, the fraction of the population with managed care is cut in half.



b. Impacts of Medicare

          Existing research has shown that the onset of Medicare age-eligibility leads to an increase

in the use of health services. Two early studies focus on changes in the use of medical screening

procedures by people who were less likely to have health insurance prior to 65. Decker and

Rapaport (2002) find a relative increase in mammogram screenings by less-educated and black

women after 65. McWilliams et al. (2003) find that medical screenings increase more for people

who lacked insurance coverage in the two years before reaching age 65. A study by Dow (2004)

compares changes in hospitalization rates from 1963 (3 years before the introduction of

Medicare) to 1970 (4 years after) for different age groups and finds a relative rise among those

65 and older. Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2007) examine the age profiles of hospital admissions

in California, Florida, and New York, and find large increases in hospitalization rates at age 65,

particularly for elective procedures like coronary bypass surgery (16% increase in admission

rates), and hip and knee replacement (23% increase). McWilliams et al. (2007) find that

hospitalizations and doctor visits rise among previously uninsured individuals with hypertension,

heart disease, diabetes, or stroke diagnosed before age 65.

          As is true for health insurance more generally (see Levy and Meltzer, 2004), it has

proven more difficult to identify the health impacts of Medicare.6 Most existing studies have




6
    Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b) find that Medicaid insurance for low-income pregnant women leads to
    improvements in health of newborns and a reduction in infant mortality.

                                                             5
focused on mortality as an indicator of health.7 An early study by Lichtenberg (2001) used

Social Security Administration (SSA) life table data to test for a trend-break in the age profile of

mortality at age 65. Although Lichtenberg identified a break, subsequent analysis by Dow

(2004) showed that this is an artifact of the interval smoothing procedure used to construct the

SSA life tables. Comparisons based on unsmoothed data show no evidence of a shift at age 65

(Card, Dobkin, Maestas, 2004). Finkelstein and McKnight (2005) explore trends in state-

specific mortality rates for people over 65 relative to those under 65, testing for a break around

1966 – the year Medicare was introduced. They also examine the correlation between changes in

relative mortality after 1966 and the fraction of elderly people in a region who were uninsured in

1963. Neither exercise suggests that the introduction of Medicare reduced the relative mortality

of people over 65.



III. A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Health Outcomes

           Like earlier studies, we use comparisons around the age threshold for Medicare eligibility

to measure the health impacts of the program. Unlike most existing studies, however, we attempt

to isolate a sub-population whose immediate mortality experience is more likely to be affected

by differences in health care services provided to people once they are eligible for Medicare.

Specifically, we focus on people who are admitted to the hospital through the emergency room

for relatively severe illnesses. Any extra services offered to the Medicare-eligible subset of this

population have at least a plausible chance of affecting short run mortality. By comparison,




7
    An exception is Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2004), where we look at age profiles of self-reported health status.
    These are relatively smooth around age 65. Decker (2002) examines the outcomes of breast cancer patients pre-
    and post Medicare eligibility and finds some evidence of better outcomes for those over 65.

                                                               6
Medicare-induced services would have to have a very large impact on mortality to generate a

detectable effect on a relatively healthy population.8

           Our analysis is based on a reduced form regression-discontinuity (RD) model of the

form:

(1)        yi = f(ai, α) + Post65i β + εi

where yi represents a health-related outcome for patient i, ai represents the patient’s age

(measured in days), f( ) is a function that is continuous at age 65 with parameters α (e.g., a

flexible polynomial), Post65i is an indicator for whether the patient has passed his or her 65th

birthday, and εi is an error term reflecting the influence of all other factors. If yi is a measure of

health care services provided to patient i, then we interpret β as a scaled estimate of the causal

effect of Medicare coverage on the provision of services. As in other “fuzzy” RD designs

(Hahn, Todd, and van de Klauuw, 2001), the scale factor is just the difference in the probability

of treatment on either side of the threshold, although in the case of Medicare, the treatment is

potentially multi-dimensional (see section VI).9 If yi is an indicator for mortality over some

time horizon, then we interpret β as a scaled estimate of the causal effect of Medicare coverage

on the likelihood of death in that time interval.

           We defer a detailed discussion of the possible channels leading to the reduced form

impact of Medicare coverage on health care services to Section VI. For now, we note that the

data in Figure 1 suggest at least three alternatives: (1) an effect attributable to the increase in the

overall fraction of the population with any health insurance; (2) an effect driven by people



8
    For example, in a randomized trial in which Medicare were made available to a treatment group of 65 year olds
    and withheld from the controls, the program would have to have a 7% impact on annual mortality to detect a
    statistically significant effect in a one-year follow-up, even with 100,000 observations in each group. The reason
    for the low power is that the baseline mortality rate of 65 year olds is only about 1.5% per year.



                                                                7
switching from an insurance carrier other than Medicare to a package that includes Medicare;10

(3) an effect attributable to the change from managed care coverage to indemnity insurance. For

example, hospitals may provide extra services if they know a patient is covered by Medicare and

supplemental insurance, rather than being uninsured, or covered by a typical pre-65 policy.

Alternatively, there may be a reduction in the delay in verifying insurance status for Medicare

patients, or in receiving approval for certain procedures that are limited by managed care

providers.

          As emphasized by Lee (2007), the key assumption underlying an RD analysis is that

assignment to either side of the discontinuity threshold (in our context, to being observed just a

few weeks older or younger than 65) is as good as random. In the context of equation (1) this

implies

          (2)      E[ εi | 65−δ < ai < 65] = E[ εi | 65 ≤ ai < 65+δ ]        for δ sufficiently small ,

which ensures that a simple comparison of the mean of yi on either side of the age 65 threshold

yields a consistent estimate of the parameter β.

          In a sample of hospital admittees the assumption that patients close to age 65 are “as

good as randomly assigned” to either side of the age threshold may fail if insurance status affects

the probability a patient is admitted to the hospital. Since previous work has found that the onset

of Medicare eligibility leads to an increase in hospitalization rates (Card, Dobkin, and Maestas,

2007) this is a serious threat to an RD analysis of the health outcomes of patients. Figure 2

illustrates the difficulty using counts of hospital admissions based on California discharge

records from 1992 to 2002. (The sample is described more precisely below). At age 65 the



9
    See Imbens and Lemieux (2007) for an overview of recent work on regression-discontinuity methods. The causal
    effect is only identified for the subset of people whose status is changed at age 65.


                                                             8
number of non-Emergency Room admissions jumps by approximately 12%, while the number of

Emergency Room admissions rises by 3%. Assuming that the additional patients are not as sick

as those who would enter hospital regardless of Medicare eligibility, the average health of

patients rises discretely at age 65.

        In this paper we attempt to solve the sample selection problem by focusing on a subset of

patients who are admitted through the emergency room (ER) for a relatively severe set of

conditions that require immediate hospitalization. Specifically, we identify a set of admission

diagnosis codes with similar ER admission rates on weekdays and weekends.11 We then test the

assumption that there is no remaining selection bias associated with the age 65 boundary by

looking for discontinuities in the number of admissions at 65 and the characteristics of patients

on either side of the boundary. Importantly, our procedure for identifying an unselected sample

is unrelated to the age of patients. Thus, our tests for selection bias are unaffected by “pre-test

bias,” and provide a reasonable degree of confidence in the validity of our inferences.

        As a check on inferences from this sample, we also use a simple bounding procedure

(Horowitz and Manski, 1995) to estimate a lower bound (in magnitude) for the impact of

Medicare eligibility on other patient samples, including the overall population of hospital

admissions. This bound is fairly tight because the relative size of the group of “extra” patients

who only enter the hospital if they are over 65 is modest (at most 12%) and because the gap

between actual mortality experience of all patients and the “worst case” bound for the extra

patient group is small. For example, the average 28-day mortality rate of all people admitted to



10
   Arguably, one could break out this effect into an effect associated with Medicare coverage per se, and an effect
  associated with coverage by multiple policies.
11
   Hospital admissions are typically much lower on weekends than weekdays, in part because of staffing constraints.
  Dobkin (2003) shows that mortality rates for patients admitted on the weekend for diagnoses with a constant daily
  admission rate are the same as for patients admitted during the week.

                                                             9
the hospital who are just over 65 is 4.6%, whereas the lower bound on the mortality of the extra

patients is 0. As we discuss below, this means that the “worst case” bias created by the selective

inflow of patients after 65 is −0.3 percent – a relatively small bias.

        Even if there is no differential selection around the discontinuity threshold, inferences

from an RD design can be compromised if there are other factors that change at the threshold.

One concern is retirement: 65 is a traditional retirement age, and studies have shown that health

is affected by employment status (Ruhm, 2000). Nevertheless, we believe the confounding

effect of retirement is relatively minor. First, as shown in Appendix Figure A, recent data show

no discontinuity in the likelihood of working at exactly age 65.12 Second, the admission

diagnoses included in our non-deferrable sample are relatively severe, and would normally

preclude an immediate return to work. But the mortality gap we observe in this sample at age 65

emerges within 7 days of initial admission to the hospital, and thus is unlikely to reflect

differences in survival between people who return to work and those who do not.

        Another concern with the age 65 threshold is that recommended medical practices may

change at this age. Until recently, for example, U.S. government agencies recommended

different influenza vaccination policies for people over and under 65 (Smith et al, 2006). Again,

however, we think this is unlikely to affect the characteristics or treatment of patients admitted

through the ER for non-deferrable conditions.




12
  This figure shows employment rates by quarter of age, using data from the 1992-2003 National Health Interview
 Surveys. The spike in retirement at age 65 has largely disappeared in the past two decades (von Wachter, 2002),
 reflecting the elimination of mandatory retirement and the availability of Social Security benefits at age 62.

                                                           10
IV. Sample Construction and Validation

       Our sample is drawn from the universe of records for patients discharged from hospitals

regulated by the State of California between January 1, 1992 and December 31, 2002. To be

included in the sample patients must have been admitted; thus, those who were sent home after

treatment in the emergency room do not appear in the sample.13 As explained in the Data

Appendix (available on request), we drop discharge records for patients admitted before January

1, 1992, or on or after December 1, 2002, to avoid length-biased sampling problems.

       The discharge dataset includes basic patient information (month of discharge, age in days

at the time of discharge, gender, race/ethnicity, and zip code of residence) as well as medical

information, including the principal cause of admission (which we call the “admission

diagnosis”), whether the admission was planned or unplanned, the route into the hospital (ER

versus non-ER), the patient’s primary health insurance provider, the length of stay, and a list of

all procedures performed in the hospital. It also includes a scrambled version of the patient’s

Social Security Number, which can be used to track patients who are transferred within or

between hospitals, and to link mortality records. The Data Appendix describes our procedures

for consolidating the records for patients who were transferred to new units in the same hospital,

or to another hospital. It also describes the linked discharge-mortality file that we merge with

the initial discharge file in order to determine the date of death for patients in the sample.

       One notable data issue is that approximately 5% of 64-year old patients in our sample

have a missing SSN, compared with about 4% of those just over 65. Given that the in-hospital

mortality rate of patients with a missing SSN is much higher than that of patients with a valid

SSN (10.4% v. 6.3%), we believe that the ability to match longer-term mortality outcomes for




                                                      11
1/5th of this group once they reach 65 will tend to bias down any observed mortality

improvements at 65. In any case, in Section V.e we present evidence showing that the mortality

effects we estimate are unlikely to have arisen mechanically as a result of merging procedures or

selectively missing data.

       As discussed in the previous Section, a critical step in our analysis is to select a subset of

patients whose admission to the hospital is independent of insurance status. We do this by

identifying a set of admission diagnosis codes (classified by 5-digit ICD-9) that have similar

unplanned admission rates through the ER on weekdays and weekends. Arguably, these

diagnoses are “non-deferrable,” and patients with these conditions will present at the ER at the

same rate just before and just after their 65th birthday, irrespective of Medicare coverage.

       Figure 3 shows how the distribution of the fraction of weekend admissions for different

diagnosis codes changes as we focus on more restrictive subsets of admissions. The density for

all admission diagnoses is centered on 0.24, far below the 2/7=0.29 rate expected if admissions

were equally likely on weekends and weekdays. Clearly, there are many ICD-9 codes with

lower admission rates on the weekend than during the week. The density for the subset of

emergency admissions has a mode near 2/7 but is still skewed to the left, suggesting that even

among ER admissions there are many diagnoses with an under-representation of weekend

admits. Finally, the spiked density in Figure 3 shows the distribution of the fraction of weekend

admits among unplanned ER admits, limiting the set of ICD-9 codes to those for which the t-

statistic for a test of similar weekend and weekday admission rate (i.e., the fraction of weekend

admits= 2/7) is less than 0.965. This distribution is tightly centered around 2/7.




13
  According to a national survey of hospitals conducted by the General Accounting Office (2003), approximately
 15% of the patients seen in an emergency room are admitted to the hospital.

                                                          12
       Table 1 summarizes the 10 most common admission diagnoses codes in this subsample

of 425,315 “non-deferrable” admissions. The largest diagnosis category is obstructive chronic

bronchitis with acute exacerbation. (This includes chronic bronchitis with emphysema, known as

“chronic obstructive pulmonary disease” – a common diagnosis for smokers and ex-smokers).

Patients with this condition have an average hospital stay of 6.23 days, an average of 1.21

procedures performed during their stay, and a 4.7% 28-day mortality rate. Most of the other

relatively common admission codes result in even longer stays, more procedures, and a higher

death rate. On average, it appears that diagnoses with the same admission rates on weekdays and

the weekend are extremely acute and often life-threatening.

       To test that patients’ inclusion in the “non-deferrable” admissions subsample is

independent of whether they are under or over 65, we conducted a regression discontinuity

analysis of the count of admissions by age. This procedure is similar to the test of manipulation

proposed by McCrary (2007), though we have a discrete running variable (age, measured in

days) and we use a parametric rather than a non-parametric approach. Figure 4 shows the age

profiles of the log of the daily admission count for four groups of ER admissions, based on the

magnitude of the t-statistic for the test of a constant weekday/weekend admission rate. The

groups of admission diagnoses with t-statistics in the top two quartiles (t>6.62, and 2.54<t<6.62)

show clear evidence of a jump at age 65, whereas the age profile for diagnoses in our preferred

group, with |t| < 0.965, shows no visible evidence of an increase in admissions.

       Formal testing results are summarized in Table 2. Each of the 6 panels in this table

presents two different RD specifications for the log of the number of admissions by age (in days)

of the admitted patient. We focus on people between the ages of 60 and 70, resulting in 3,652

observations – one for each potential value of age in days. Both specifications include a dummy



                                                   13
for age over 65 and a quadratic polynomial fully interacted with the post-65 dummy. We have

also fit the models with cubic polynomials and found no significant differences in the estimated

values of the post-65 effects (see Appendix Table B).

       A limitation of our data set is that although we know each patient’s age in days at the

time of admission, we do not know birthdates or exact admission dates.14 Since Medicare

eligibility begins on the first day of the month that a person turns 65, people who are admitted in

the period up to 31 days before reaching their 65th birthday may or may not be eligible for

Medicare. Appendix Figure C shows the fraction of admitted patients in our non-deferrable

sample who are recorded as having Medicare as their primary insurance provider, by age in days

for a narrow window around age 65. This fraction is relatively flat for people up to a month

before their 65th birthday, then rises linearly in the 31 days before reaching age 65, as would be

expected given Medicare eligibility rules and a uniform distribution of birthdates.

       Because we do not know the Medicare eligibility status of patients who are admitted

within 31 days of their 65th birthday, the second specification reported in each panel of Table 2

includes a dummy for these observations. The addition of this dummy has relatively little impact

on the estimated coefficients.15 Looking at the first two panels, we estimate that non-ER and

planned ER admissions rise by about 12% at 65, while unplanned ER admissions rise by 2.5%.

The remaining four panels report the results for the four quartiles of unplanned ER admissions

shown in Figure 4. As suggested by the graph, the estimated models show no discernable rise in

admissions for our preferred subgroup of diagnoses with the lowest t-statistic for the comparison

between weekday and weekend admission rates.



14
  This restriction was imposed by the California Department of Health and Human Services as a condition for
 access to the discharge files.


                                                           14
           We have also checked for discontinuities in the case mix and demographic composition

of the non-deferrable subsample at age 65. Tests for jumps in the racial composition, gender,

and fraction of Saturday or Sunday admissions (available on request) are all far below

conventional critical values. To increase the power to detect differences in patient health, we

used all the available covariates for an admission (including age, race/ethnicity, gender, year,

month, and day of admission, and admission diagnosis fixed effects) to fit linear probability

models for mortality over 7, 14, 28, 90 and 365 days. We then took the predicted mortality rates

from these models and conducted an RD analysis, looking for any evidence that the mortality

characteristics shift at age 65. The results for 7-day and 28-day predicted mortality are shown in

Appendix Figure D. (Results for other windows are very similar and are available on request).

The age profiles of predicted probability are extremely smooth, and show no jump at age 65. In

an RD specification with a quadratic in age and a dummy for over 65, interacted with the linear

and quadratic terms, the t-statistics for the post-65 coefficient are 0.4 (7 day mortality) and 0.25

(28 day mortality), providing no evidence that the observable health of the sample changes at age

65. In light of these testing results, we proceed under the assumption that patient health in the

non-deferrable subsample trends smoothly at age 65.



V. Shifts in Insurance, Health Services, and Mortality at 65

a. Insurance

           We now turn to the impact of the Medicare eligibility age on health-related outcomes.

We begin by looking at health insurance coverage. Figure 5 shows the age profiles of the

fractions of people with various primary insurers (private, Medicaid, Medicare, other, and none)



15
     The bottom row of each sub-panel shows the p-value for a test that this additional variable has no effect. In all six

                                                                 15
in the non-deferrable admissions subsample. Consistent with the patterns in Figure 1 for the

overall population, we see a big increase in the fraction of patients with Medicare as their

primary insurer at 65, coupled with a decline in the fraction with no insurance. RD models for

health insurance outcomes are presented in Table 3. This table has the same format as Table 2,

although we now include a set of covariates (year, month and day of admission, race/ethnicity,

gender, and admission diagnosis fixed effects) in the specifications in columns 2 and 3 of each

panel. For reference, the specification in the first column excludes these controls and also

excludes the dummy for admissions in the 31 days before a patient’s 65th birthday.16

         The regression results confirm the visual impressions conveyed in Figure 5. At age 65,

the fraction of patients with Medicare as their primary insurer rises by about 47 percentage

points, while the fractions with private insurance and Medicaid both fall.17 Note that in the

sample of non-deferrable admissions the Medicare coverage rate at age 64 is 24%, substantially

higher than in the overall population (shown in Figure 1). Presumably this reflects the fact that

many of these patients are chronically ill and on DI prior to 65. The fraction with no insurance at

64 is correspondingly a little lower than in the overall population (10% versus about 13%), and

the reduction in the rate of non-insurance at 65 is a little smaller (-8% in the nondeferrable

subsample, versus -9.5% for the population as a whole). Nevertheless, as in the population as a

whole, patients with non-deferrable conditions have much different insurance coverage just after

age 65 than just before.




  panels the p-value is well above the usual critical value.
16
   As in Table 2, the bottom row of each sub-panel shows the p-value for a test of joint significance of the additional
  variables included in the specification in column 2 (relative to column 1) and in column 4 (relative to column 3).
17
   Unfortunately we have no information on secondary coverage. We suspect that many of the 45% who have
  private coverage prior to age 65 enroll in Medicare and a supplementary policy at 65.

                                                              16
b. Services

        We have three basic measures of patient services: length of stay, number of procedures

performed, and total hospital list charges.18 Figure 6 shows the age profiles for these measures,

while Table 4 presents RD models similar to the specifications in Table 3. The age profile for

mean length of stay is somewhat noisier than the other two profiles, but all three profiles suggest

an upward jump at 65. The estimation results in Table 4 show that mean length of stay increases

by 0.4 days (or about 4.5%) at 65, though the estimated gain is only marginally significant.

Similarly, the number of procedures jumps by 0.1, or approximately 4% (with a t-ratio around 4),

while log list charges jump by 3 percent (with a t-ratio of around 3). These increases, although

modest in size, are consistent with the findings in earlier work, and confirm that the onset of

Medicare eligibility leads to increased use of medical services. Importantly, we are finding these

increases for a sample of acutely ill patients arriving at the hospital for emergency treatment,

rather than for elective procedures (as in Card, Dobkin, and Maestas, 2007) or preventive care

screenings (as in Decker and Rapaport, 2002, or McWilliams et al., 2003).

        We also performed a more detailed analysis of the changes in the use of specific

procedures at age 65 for two major sets of diagnoses: obstructive chronic bronchitis with acute

exacerbation (the largest ICD-9 in our non-deferrable sample, shown in row 1 of Table 1); and

acute myocardial infarction (AMI), which combines the various detailed AMI diagnoses in our

non-deferrable sample. The results are summarized in Table 5. Looking first at AMI, we see a

relatively large and precisely estimated increase in the overall number of procedures at age 65 (a

rise of 0.44 on a base rate of 5.0 among 64 year-olds, or approximately 9%) and significant



18
  We sum the duration of stay, list charges, and number of procedures for all consecutive stays. List charges are
 accounting charges, and do not represent the charges actually billed to insurers or patients. They also exclude


                                                             17
increases of about 4% in the use of several important diagnostic procedures, including coronary

arteriography, cardiac catheterization, and angiocardiography.19 In contrast, for obstructive

chronic bronchitis patients, we see no change in the overall number of procedures, and small

increases or decreases in the incidence of specific procedures. This analysis suggests that the

relatively small increase in the overall number of procedures for all admission diagnoses in Table

4 is masking larger increases for certain “procedure intensive” diagnoses, like AMI, and near

constancy for other diagnoses. Unfortunately, the sample sizes for other diagnoses are too small

to permit a more extensive investigation. We conclude, however, that the onset of Medicare

eligibility is associated with an increase in the use of specific potentially life-saving procedures.



c. Transfers

         Patients who are initially admitted for acute care may be transferred (i.e., discharged and

immediately re-admitted) to another care/treatment unit in the same hospital, to another hospital,

or to non-hospital care (e.g., nursing homes).20 Because our data are derived from hospital

discharge records, we cannot measure transfers to stand-alone skilled nursing facilities (SNF’s)

or to other care options that may be substitutable with post-acute care in a hospital setting.

Nevertheless, it is interesting to ask whether Medicare eligibility is associated with any change in

the likelihood of patient transfer to other care units in the same hospital, or to a second hospital.

         Figure 7 shows the age profiles of these two outcomes. Both within- and between-




  charges for physician services, and are not reported for patients at Kaiser-run hospitals. We interpret list charges
  as a convenient “price-weighted” summary of services rendered, albeit at somewhat artificial prices.
19
   Cutler and McClellan (2001) have estimated that invasive diagnosis and treatment procedures as a whole
  (including catheterization, angioplasty, and bypass surgery) are cost-effective in the treatment of AMI. The
  efficacy of specific procedures is less clear: see e.g., McClellan, McNeil and Newhouse (1994) and Cutler,
  McClellan and Newhouse (1999)
20
   Note that to avoid double counting we have collapsed all consecutive hospital stays to a single record.

                                                               18
hospital transfer rates rise at age 65, with a particularly large rise in within-hospital transfers.

Corresponding RD regression models are presented in the upper panel of Table 6, and confirm

that the within-hospital transfer rate rises by about 1 percentage point (on a base level of about

4% among 64 year olds) once patients are over 65.

        Further analysis (not shown) indicates that the rise in within-hospital transfers at 65 is

driven by a jump in the transfer rate to skilled nursing facilities (SNF’s) in the same hospital.

Until 1998, post-acute care delivered in skilled nursing facilities, rehabilitation units, and home

health care agencies was reimbursed on a cost-basis, whereas acute care was covered by

prospective payments (Cotterill and Gage, 2002). Newhouse (1996, 2002) argues that the more

generous reimbursement system for post-acute care contributed to the rapid growth in SNF’s

(both within hospitals and in free-standing units), and to a relatively high rate of transfer of

Medicare patients to SNF’s following their initial hospitalization. The discontinuity in within-

hospital transfers at age 65 is consistent with this argument.

        Medicare reimbursement for post-acute care was switched to a prospective payment

system in 1998, leading to a sharp reversal in the growth rate of hospital-based SNF’s (Dalton

and Howard, 2002). To check whether this change led to a shift in the transfer rate of Medicare

patients to hospital-based SNF’s, we estimated separate RD models for within- and between-

hospital transfers for 1992-98 period and the 1999-2002 period. Although the RD in between

hospital transfers is essentially the same in the two period, the RD in within-hospital rates falls

substantially, from 1.2 percentage points in the pre-1998 period (standard error 0.3) to 0.6

percentage points in the post-1998 period (standard error 0.3). This provides further confirmation

that hospitals were responding to the payment incentives in the pre-1998 system by transferring




                                                       19
patients to hospital-based SNF’s, and that the elimination of these incentives led to reduced use

of hospital-based SNF’s for Medicare patients.

       Finally, Figure 8 and the RD models in the lower panel of Table 6 address the likelihood

that a patient is re-admitted to the hospital (after at least 1 day out of the hospital). This outcome

could be interpreted as a measure of the “quality” of treatment in the initial hospital stay,

although this interpretation is clouded by the impact of Medicare eligibility on mortality (since

people who die cannot be readmitted). We focus on re-admission within 7 and 28 days of

discharge. The figures suggest that the readmission rate after 7 days is relatively flat through the

age 65 threshold, while the readmission rate after 28 days drops significantly. The RD models

suggest that the 28-day readmission rate is about 0.6% lower for people just over 65, though the

sampling error is relatively large. We return to discuss this impact in more detail after we have

presented the mortality impacts in the next subsection.



d. Mortality

       Figure 9 plots the age profiles for the probability of death within 7, 14, 28, 90, 180, and

365 days of admission to the hospital, while Table 7 presents estimates from the RD regression

models corresponding to each of these outcomes. Inspection of Figure 9 shows that each of the

mortality measures shows a drop on the order of 1 percentage point at age 65. The regression

estimates in Table 7 confirm this: we observe a reduction in 7-day mortality of about 1

percentage point which persists over the longer follow-up periods. The effect is relatively

precisely measured in the shortest time intervals but has an increasing sampling error as the

follow-up window is extended, yielding t-ratios of about 5 at 7 days, about 3 at 28 days, and

around 1.8 at 365 days. Figure 10 shows the estimated post-65 coefficients from RD regression



                                                     20
models at all possible follow-up windows from 1 day to 2 years, along with the associated 95%

confidence intervals.21 The estimated mortality effect of Medicare eligibility on our sample of

non-deferrable admissions is relatively stable at about 1 percentage point over the entire range of

follow-up periods.

         Our estimate of the mortality effect of Medicare eligibility is relatively large: it represents

a 20% reduction in 7-day mortality, a 9% reduction in 28-day mortality, and a 3-4% reduction in

1-year mortality relative to death rates among 64 year olds with similar conditions at admission.

The fact that the effect emerges within 7 days and persists for two years suggests that the extra

services or changes in the quality of services provided to Medicare-eligible admittees have an

immediate life-saving effect, and lead to a significant gain in the duration of life.

         It is worth noting that the mortality reductions estimated in Table 7 appear to reflect

changes in the treatment of patients with Medicare within the same hospital, rather than patient

sorting to higher-quality hospitals at 65. The fractions of patients entering different kinds of

hospitals show only small changes at age 65. The largest change is a reduction of about 3

percentage points in the fraction of non-deferrable admissions entering county hospitals.

Interestingly, the 28-day mortality rate for 63-64 year olds is actually lower at county hospitals

(6.8%) than at non-profit (9.2%), for-profit (9.0%), or district hospitals (9.7%) in our data, so it

is implausible that such a small shift in patients out of these hospitals could have much affect on

average mortality.22 Thus, it does not appear that Medicare reduces mortality by shifting patients

to better hospitals.



21
   These estimates are from our base specification with no additional controls (i.e., the first specification in each
  panel of Table 7).
22
   To see that the effect of a small amount of sorting is negligible, note that even if (contrary to fact) the mortality
  rate at county hospitals were 50 percent larger than that of private hospitals, it could account for at most a
  negligible amount of the estimated mortality gain: 0.03*0.045=0.00135 percentage points.

                                                                21
       In view of the relatively large mortality effects associated with Medicare eligibility, it is

worth re-considering the estimated impacts on hospital re-admission rates. A re-admission at

some time interval (say 28 days) can only be observed if the patient is still alive: i.e.,

       P(re-admission) = P(re-admission|alive) × P(alive).

At age 64, the average 28-day death rate for our sample of non-deferrable patients is 9.8%, while

the unconditional re-admission rate after 28 days is 17.1%. This implies that the re-admission

rate for people just under 64, conditional on being alive after 28 days, is 18.96%. Our estimated

RD models show a drop in the unconditional readmission rate of -0.63% (Table 6, 4th panel.

specification (3)), and a drop in the mortality rate of -0.9% (Table 7, 3rd panel, specification (3)).

Adding these to the base rates at age 64, the conditional re-admission rate for living patients rises

to 18.08% at age 65. Thus, correcting for the bias caused by mortality, the implied effect of

Medicare eligibility on the 28-day conditional re-admission rate is -0.88% -- 40% larger (in

absolute value) than the impact on the unconditional re-admission rate. This is a relatively large

impact and suggests that Medicare eligibility not only reduces mortality but also morbidity

among surviving patients.



e. Robustness of Mortality Estimates

       To further probe our estimated mortality effects we used a simple bounding procedure to

obtain lower-bound estimates of the (absolute) mortality effect of Medicare eligibility on broader

samples of hospital admissions, including the entire patient population. The basis of this

procedure is the observation that in any sample of sick people close to age 65 there are two

subgroups: one group (which we index with subscript 1) who enter the hospital regardless of

whether they are Medicare eligible or not; and a second group (indexed by subscript 2) who will



                                                      22
only enter the hospital if they are over 65. Let α ≥ 0 represent the sample fraction of the second

group. We have argued that among people with non-deferrable conditions, α = 0. In more

general patient populations, however, α >0, and a comparison of mortality between patients just

over and just under 65 contains a selectivity bias.

       Let m1 denote the mortality rate of the first group if they enter the hospital just before

their 65th birthday and let m1′ denote the mortality rate if they enter after 65. The causal effect of

Medicare eligibility for group 1 is Δ = m1′- m1. The observed mortality rate of the patient

population who are just over 65 is an average for groups 1 and 2:

       ⎯ = (1-α)m1′ + αm2 = (1-α)( m1 + Δ ) + αm2 ,
       m

where m2 is the post-65 mortality rate of group 2. Using this expression it is easy to show that:

(3)    m                        ⎯ − m2 ) .
       ⎯ − m1 = Δ − α/(1−α) × ( m

Thus, the mortality differential between the post-65 patient population and the pre-65 patient

population is equal to Δ, the causal effect of Medicare eligibility on group 1, plus a bias term:

                            ⎯ − m2 ) ,
       Bias = − α/(1−α) × ( m

which depends on the fraction of group 2, and the deviation of their post-65 mortality rate from

the average of groups 1 and 2. Since m2 > 0, a lower bound on the absolute value of the bias

caused by the presence of group 2 in the post-65 patient population is

(4)                                 ⎯ .
       Worst-case Bias = −α/(1−α) × m

                                                    ⎯ .
This bias tends to 0 as α→0, and is proportional to m

       Table 8 presents estimates of the various terms in equation (3) for the 28-day mortality

rate of various patient populations, including all patients (column 1); those who enter the hospital

via a route other than the emergency room, or for a planned hospitalization (which we call

“elective” admissions, in column 2); those who enter via the ER for an unplanned hospitalization


                                                      23
(column 3); and the four subgroups of the unplanned-ER group, based on admission diagnoses

with different ranges of weekend versus weekday admissions (i.e., the four subgroups graphed in

Figure 4) in columns 4-7. The first row of Table 8 presents the estimated RD in the log of the

number of hospital admissions at age 65, which is an estimate of α/(1−α).23 Row 2 shows the

                                                                                    ⎯ − m1),
estimated change in the mortality rate of patients at age 65 (i.e., the estimate of m

obtained from a RD model with an interacted quadratic function of age fit to aggregated

mortality rates by age in days.24 Row 3 shows an estimate of the constant in the mortality

regression, which is our estimate of the mortality rate for people just under 65. (The implied

            ⎯ is therefore the sum of the entries in rows 2 and 3). Row 4 shows our estimate of
estimate of m

the worst-case selectivity bias, based on equation (4), while row 5 shows our lower bound

estimate of the effect of Medicare eligibility on the patient population, and row 6 shows an

estimated sampling error for this bound. Finally, for reference, row 7 shows the fraction of

patients in each subgroup.

         Three key conclusions emerge from the table. First, the lower-bound estimate of the

overall effect of Medicare on the 28 day death rate of the entire patient population is -0.13% (and

only marginally significant). This is about one-tenth as large as our estimate of the effect on the

non-deferrable admission group, who represent 12% of the overall patient population. Second,

for “elective” admissions (column 2), our point estimate of the lower bound mortality effect is

actually positive (as it is for the top quartile of diagnoses with lowest weekend admission rates in



23
   If α is the share of all potential patients who are only admitted after age 65, then the proportional increase in
  admissions at age 65 is (1 – (1- α))/(1-α) = α/(1-α), so the RD in log admissions is an estimate of α/(1-α).
24
   To construct a standard error for our lower bound we need to construct a standard error for Δ + α/(1- α) ⎯m , where
  Δ is the estimated RD in mortality, α/(1- α) is the estimated RD in log admissions, and ⎯m is the estimated
  mortality rate for those just over 65, which can be estimated as the constant in the mortality regression (assuming
  age is normalized to 0 at age 65) plus the value of the RD in mortality. Since we need the covariance between the


                                                              24
column 5). For these admissions we cannot rule out that selection bias explains the entire

(relatively small) drop in mortality we see after age 65. Even for the two middle quartiles of

weekend/weekday admission codes the estimated lower bounds on the Medicare effect are small.

Thus, virtually all of the (lower bound) mortality effect we observe for the overall patient sample

is attributable to the reduction in mortality for the non-deferrable subgroup.

        A third observation is that the unadjusted change in mortality at age 65 for the top

quartile diagnosis group (column 4) is actually positive (+0.27%). This is reassuring in two

ways. First, it proves there is no mechanical data problem that is causing us to measure lower

death rates for all patients over 65.25 Second, the diagnoses in this quartile are relatively non-

life-threatening. In particular, the 28-day mortality rate for 64- year-old patients in this group is

only 2.7%, somewhat below the death rate for patients admitted on an elective basis. It would be

surprising if Medicare eligibility had much effect on mortality for such a relatively healthy

group, and the estimates imply that it does not.



VI. Discussion

        Our empirical results point to a significant positive effect of Medicare eligibility on the

intensity of treatment for acutely ill patients with non-deferrable conditions, a negative effect on

re-admission rates, and a negative effect on patient mortality. In this section we discuss the

possible channels for this effect. To aid in this discussion it is helpful to consider a simplified

causal model in which Medicare eligibility affects insurance characteristics, insurance affects



 estimated parameters from the mortality and admissions models, we fit the two RD’s as seemingly unrelated
 regressions using grouped age cells, and use the delta method to construct the sampling error.
25
  We believe that any such data problems are likely to bias the results in the opposite direction. In particular,
 because the in-hospital mortality rate of people without SSNs is higher, at worst we would add to the sample at 65


                                                            25
health care services, and health services affect mortality. Building on the analysis in Section II,

suppose that patient i has a health insurance package with a vector of characteristics zi, including

whether i has any coverage, whether he or she has Medicare or some other form of primary

coverage, and (possibly) other characteristics. Assume the age profile for zi is generated by a

model of the form:

        (5)      zi =     g(ai, γz) + Post65i π + υzi ,

where g is a smooth function of age (ai) with parameters γz, υzi is an error term that is mean-

independent of the dummy Post65i, and π represents the vector of discontinuities in insurance

characteristics at age 65. Suppose that health care services delivered to patient i, (Si) depend on

age, an error term υsi, and the characteristics of the insurance package: 26

        (6)      Si     = h(ai, γs) + θ′zi + υsi .

Finally, assume the likelihood of death of patient i (yi=1) depends on age and on health services:

        (7)      yi = k(ai, γs) + λ Si + υyi .

Equations (5), (6) and (7) yield reduced form models like equation (1), with a discontinuity in

health care services at age 65 equal to

        (8a)     βs = θ′π ,

and a discontinuity in mortality equal to:

        (8b)     βy = λ θ′π .

        In this simplified setup, each element of the insurance package represents a separate

“channel” that contributes additively to the reduced form effects on services and mortality. For

example, the kth element of zi contributes θk πk to the RD in services and λ θk πk to the RD in



 a small group with higher potential mortality, which would lead to a rise in the measured death rate for people over
 65.


                                                             26
mortality. Unfortuntately, we have no information on the individual components of θ, and only

limited information on the vector π of insurance changes at age 65. For example, we do not

observe secondary coverage, or whether the primary insurance is managed care. Nevertheless, it

is possible to shed some light on the mortality effect associated with one key insurance

characteristic: whether the patient has any insurance coverage or none.

         In particular, note that the maximum contribution of the “any coverage” channel cannot

exceed πc (the jump in coverage at 65) times the average mortality rate of uninsured 64-year

olds, because the extension of coverage to the previously uninsured group can only reduce their

mortality rate to 0. The average 7-day mortality rate of uninsured patients who are just under 65

years of age in our nondeferrable admission subsample is 0.05, while πc=0.08 (Table 3). Thus

the maximum reduction in mortality attributable to the reduction in the number of people with no

health insurance is 0.004 – about 40% of the 7-day mortality effect we estimate. This is an

extreme bound because it is based on the assumption that none of the previously uninsured

would die if they were covered. A more plausible bound is that insurance coverage reduces the

death rate by no more than one-half: in this case the “any coverage” channel can explain at most

20% of the total mortality effect.

         In principle we can gain some additional insight by comparing changes in health

insurance, the intensity of treatment, and mortality for different subgroups of patients.27

Unfortunately, the limited demographic variables in our discharge data make this a challenging

exercise. Comparisons across race/ethnicity groups are uninformative, because the sample sizes



26
   This equation simplifies health care services to a single dimension. In fact, changes in insurance can cause some
  types of services to rise and use of other services to fall (or stay constant).
27
   In particular, assume that π varies by subgroup, with a value of π(g) for subgroup g. If the parameters λ and θ are
  constant across groups then the discontinuity in services for group g is θ′π(g) and the discontinuity in mortality is λ


                                                               27
for blacks (n=41,000) and Hispanics (n=66,280) are too small to obtain useful estimates. We

also tried dividing patients into two groups based on the average fraction of 55-64 year-old

patients from the same zip code who had no insurance coverage. Even here, we were unable to

estimate systematic differences in the changes in treatment intensity or mortality outcomes at age

65 between residents from “low insurance” and “high insurance” zip codes. (Results are

available on request). We do find significant increases in the numbers of procedures and

significant reductions in mortality even for patients from the high-insurance zip codes (who have

only a very small gain in the probability of insurance coverage at age 65), suggesting that a

increase in insurance coverage per se is not the explanation for the impacts of Medicare.

        Instead, we suspect that the measured mortality effects arise because Medicare imposes

fewer restrictions than private insurance or Medicaid, leading to more (and possibly higher-

quality) services to Medicare patients. This interpretation is similar to the conclusion reached in

Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2007), where we note that Medicare eligibility leads to increases in

hospitalization rates for a wide range of procedures, with bigger increases for whites than blacks

or Hispanics, even though whites tend to have higher rates of insurance coverage prior to age 65.



VII. Summary and Conclusions

        A longstanding question in health economics is whether health insurance affects health.

This question is particularly relevant for Medicare, the largest medical insurance program in the

country, which provides nearly universal coverage to people once they turn 65. We focus on

measuring the health effects of Medicare eligibility for a relatively sick population – specifically,

people who are admitted to the hospital through the emergency room with diagnoses that have



 θ′π(g). By comparing the relative sizes of the discontinuities in insurance, treatment intensity, and mortality across

                                                              28
similar admission rates on weekdays and weekends. In contrast to elective hospitalizations, there

is no jump in these “non-deferrable” hospital admissions at age 65. Moreover, the predicted

mortality rate of admitted patients (based on demographics and admission diagnoses) trends

smoothly. These findings suggest that the underlying health of patients admitted with non-

deferrable conditions is very similar whether the patients are just under or just over 65.

        In light of this conclusion, we use a regression discontinuity approach to measure the

impacts of reaching age 65 on the intensity of treatment in the hospital, and on mortality for up

to two years after the hospital admission. We find modest but statistically significant increases

in several measures of treatment intensity at age 65, including the number of procedures

performed in hospital, total list charges, and the likelihood of transfer to other care units in the

hospital. Associated with these changes we find relatively large reductions in patient mortality

at age 65. Medicare eligibility reduces 7-day mortality by about 1 percentage point, with similar

sized reductions at 14 days, 28 days, 90 days, and through the end of our follow-up period. We

probe the robustness of these findings by using a bounding procedure to evaluate the lower-

bound effect of Medicare eligibility on the entire hospital patient population. The bounds for the

overall population are consistent with the magnitude of the effect we estimate for patients with

non-deferrable conditions, providing further credence to our basic results.

        The magnitude of the estimated mortality effect of Medicare eligibility is too large to be

driven solely by changes among the 8% of the patient population who move from no health

insurance coverage to Medicare when they reach 65. Instead, our findings point to a more

widespread effect of Medicare on treatment intensity and mortality, including patients who were

insured prior to 65. We argue that this pattern is consistent with an “insurance generosity”



 subgroups it is possible to judge whether the data are consistent with a “1-channel” explanation.

                                                             29
channel, reflecting increased services (or the more timely delivery of services) for patients who

are covered by Medicare and supplemental insurance relative to the typical insurance package

held by people just under 65.

       Finally, it is worth noting that the reduction in mortality is achieved with only a modest

rise in hospital list charges (around 4%). This is an incomplete measure of the total cost increase

associated with Medicare eligibility because it excludes doctor bills and charges for other non-

hospital personnel. If these unobserved costs also rose by 4% we suspect that the implied cost-

benefit analysis for making Medicare available to people admitted for non-deferrable conditions

would be very favorable. However, Medicare eligibility also leads to large increases in the use

of services by other, less sick, patients for whom the effects on mortality are very small, or even

zero. Whether the overall cost of the system is justified by the gains in health therefore remains

an important issue for further research.




                                                    30
                                        References

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118(1), pp. 157-205.

Card, David; Dobkin, Carlos and Maestas, Nicole. "The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
Coverage on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare." NBER Working
Paper No. 10365, March 2004.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. "The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare. UC Santa Cruz Unpublished
Working Paper, January 2007.

Cotterill, Philip G. and Barbara J. Gage. "Overview: Medicare Post-Acute Care Since the
Balanced Budget Act of 1997." Health Care Financing Review, 2002, 24(2), pp. 1-6.

Currie, Janet and Gruber, Jonathan. "Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111(2), pp. 431-66. (1996a).

Currie, Janet and Gruber, Jonathan. "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women." Journal of Political Economy, 1996,
104(6), pp. 1263-96. (1996b).

Cutler, David; and Mark McClellan. "Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It? Health
Affairs, 2001, 20(5), pp. 11-29.

Cutler, David; McClellan, Mark and Newhouse, Joseph. "The Costs and Benefits of Intensive
Treatment for Cardiovascular Disease," J. E. Triplett, Measuring the Prices of Medical
Treatments. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1999.

Dalton, Kathleen and Hilda A. Howard. "Market Entry and Exit in Long-Term Care: 1985-
2000." Health Care Financing Review, 2002, 24(2), pp. 17-32.


Decker, Sandra. “Medicare and Inequalities in Health Outcomes: The Case of Breast Cancer.”
Contemporary Economic Policy 20 (2002): 1-11.

Decker, Sandra and Rapaport, Carol. "Medicare and Disparities in Women's Health,"
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 8761, 2002.

Dobkin, Carlos. "Hospital Staffing and Inpatient Mortality." UC Santa Cruz Unpublished
Working Paper, June 2003.

Dow, William H. "The Introduction of Medicare: Effects on Elderly Health," University of
California, Berkeley, 2004.


                                                 31
Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight. "What Did Medicare Do (And Was It Worth It)?"
NBER Working Paper No. 11609, September 2005.

General Accounting Office (GAO). "Hospital Emergency Departments: Crowded Conditions
Vary among Hospitals and Communities," United States General Accounting Office, 2003.

Hahn, Jin, Petra Todd and Wilber van der Klaauw. "Identification and Estimation of
Treatment Effects with a Regression Discontinuity Design." Econometrica 69 (1) January 2001,
pp. 201-209.
Horowitz, Joel L. and Charles F. Manski. "Identification and Robustness with Contaminated
and Corrupted Data." Econometrica, 1995 58(1), pp. 281-302.

Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux. "Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice." NBER Working Paper No. 13039, April 2007. Forthcoming in Journal of
Econometrics, 2007.

Lee, David. "Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U.S. House Elections."
Forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics, 2007.

Levy, Helen and Meltzer, David. "What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance
Affects Health?" In Catherine McLaughlin (Editor), Health Policy on the Uninsured: Setting the
Agenda. Washington DC: Urban Institute Press, 2004.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. "The Effects of Medicare on Health Care Utilization and Outcomes."
Frontiers in Health Policy Research, 2001, 5(1), pp. 27-52 (26).

Manning, W. G.; Newhouse, J. P.; Duan, N.; Keeler, E. B.; Leibowitz, A. and Marquis, M.
S. "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized
Experiment." The American Economic Review, 1987, 77(3), pp. 251-77.

McClellan, M.; McNeil, B. J. and Newhouse, J. P. "Does More Intensive Treatment of Acute
Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality? Analysis Using Instrumental Variables."
JAMA, 1994, 272(11), pp. 859-66.

McCrary, Justin. "Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test." NBER Technical Working Paper No. T0334, January 2007.
Forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics, 2007.

McWilliams, J. M.; Meara, E.; Zaslavsky, A. M. and Ayanian, J. Z. "Use of Health Services
by Previously Uninsured Medicare Beneficiaries." N Engl J Med, 2007, 357(2), pp. 143-53.

McWilliams, J. M.; Zaslavsky, A. M.; Meara, E. and Ayanian, J. Z. "Impact of Medicare
Coverage on Basic Clinical Services for Previously Uninsured Adults." Journal of the American
Medical Association, 2003, 290(6), pp. 757-64.



                                                 32
Newhouse, Joseph P. "Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers: Efficiency in
Production Versus Selection." Journal of Economic Literature, 1996, 34(3), pp. 1236-1263.

Newhouse, Joseph P. Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. Walras-Pareto
Lectures. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 2002.

Remler, Dahlia K. and Sherry A. Glied. “What Other Programs Can Teach Us: Increasing
Participation in Health Insurance Programs” American Journal of Public Health 2003, 93(1), pp.
67-74.

Ruhm, Christopher J. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2000, 115(2), pp. 617-650.

Smith, Nicole M. et al. “Prevention and Control of Influenza: Recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Influenza Practices.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports
(MMRW) July 28, 2006. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5510a1.htm

Von Wachter, Till M. "The End of Mandatory Retirement in the US: Effects on Retirement and
Implicit Contracts." Center for Labor Economics Working Paper No. 49, University of California
Berkeley, 2002.




                                                 33
                                    Figure 1: Changes in Health Insurance at Age 65, National Health Interview Data

                 1

                                     Any Insurance: + 9.7% (0.5)
                0.9


                0.8                                                                                                         Have Medicare: + 64.5% (0.7)


                0.7


                0.6
                                                                                                                          Multiple Policies: + 47.3% (1.0)
    Fractions




                0.5
                           Any Insurance                     Any Insurance Fitted
                           Managed Care                      Managed Care Fitted
                0.4        Have Medicare                     Have Medicare Fitted
                           Multiple Policies                 Multiple Policies Fitted

                0.3


                0.2
                                                                                                                   Managed Care: − 30.8% (1.1)

                0.1


                 0
                      60     61                62           63              64              65              66              67              68              69              70
                                                                                    Age In Quarters



Notes: Estimated discontinuities (and standard errors) at age 65 from fully interacted quadratic shown. Models include dummy for uncertainty of eligibily status of people assigned to age=65.0.
This point has been dropped from the figure.
                                        Figure 2: Hospital Admission by Route of Admission (California 1992-2002)

                     6.6


                     6.5         ER Admission                      ER Admission Fitted

                                 Non ER admission                  Non ER admission Fitted
                     6.4


                     6.3


                     6.2
   Log(Admissions)




                     6.1


                      6


                     5.9


                     5.8


                     5.7


                     5.6
                           60   61           62             63               64              65              66              67              68              69               70
                                                                                     Age in Months



Notes: The points are the log of the average admission count. The fitted values are from regressions that include a second order polynomial in age fully interacted with a dummy for age >= 65
and a dummy variable for the month before people turn 65.
                                       Figure 3: Proportion of Admissions that Occur on the Weekend by ICD-9

           0.16



           0.14



           0.12



            0.1
    f(x)




           0.08



           0.06

                                                                                                                  All Admissions

           0.04                                                                                                   ER Admissions

                                                                                                                  ER Admissions for ICD-9s With No Selection In
                                                                                                                  Favor of Weekday Admissions
           0.02



             0
             0.171   0.186 0.201        0.217     0.232    0.247 0.262        0.278    0.293 0.308        0.323    0.339 0.354        0.369    0.385     0.400 0.415
                                                                    Proportion of Admissions on the Weekend



Notes: To create the figures above we computed the proportion of patients admitted on the weekend for each ICD-9. We then computed the KDE of the weekend admissions proportions over
the ICD-9s. We repeated the process for admissions through the ER.
                                                                         Figure 4: Admission Through the ER by Quartile of Weekend Proportion of ICD-9

                                                              5.2                                                                                                       5.5


                                                              5.1             t-stat 2.54-6.62         t-stat 2.54-6.62 Fitted                                          5.4
                                                                              t-stat 0.96-2.54         t-stat 0.96-2.54 Fitted




                                                                                                                                                                              Log (Daily Admissions) for Quartile with Z-Ratio (0-0.96)
    Log (Daily Admissions) for Quartile with Z-Ratio (0.96-




                                                               5              t-stat 0-0.96            t-stat 0-0.96 Fitted                                             5.3
         2.54) and Quartile with Z-Ratio (2.54-6.62)




                                                                              t-stat above 6.62        t-stat above 6.62 Fitted




                                                                                                                                                                                       and Quartile with Z-Ratio (above 6.62)
                                                              4.9                                                                                                       5.2


                                                              4.8                                                                                                       5.1


                                                              4.7                                                                                                       5


                                                              4.6                                                                                                       4.9


                                                              4.5                                                                                                       4.8


                                                              4.4                                                                                                       4.7


                                                              4.3                                                                                                       4.6


                                                              4.2                                                                                                       4.5
                                                                    60   61              62       63           64                65   66   67   68   69            70
                                                                                                                      Age in Months


Notes: See notes from Figure 2. For the sample of ER admissions the age profiles above are created by computing the t-statistic for the test that an ICD-9 has a weekend to weekday ratio of
2:5. The admissions into quartiles based on the t-statistic.
                                                                 Figure 5: Primary Insurance Coverage

                              1


                             0.9


                             0.8


                             0.7
                                                                                                             Private                             Private Fitted
  Proportion with Coverage




                                                                                                             Medicare                            Medicare Fitted
                             0.6                                                                             Medicaid                            Medicaid Fitted
                                                                                                             Other Insurance                     Other Insurance Fitted
                                                                                                             Uninsured                           Uninsured fitted
                             0.5


                             0.4


                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1


                              0
                                   60   61   62           63              64              65              66              67                68              69            70
                                                                                 Age at Admission




Notes: Coverage is the expected primary payers. These figures are derived from the 425,315 admissions that show no evidence of selection.
                                              Figure 6: Three Measures of Within Hospital Treatment Intensity

                  10                                                                                                                                                        10


                 9.95
                                                                                                                                                                            9

                  9.9
                                                                                                                                                                            8
                 9.85




                                                                                                                                                                                 Days and Number of Procedures
                                                                                                                                                                            7
                  9.8
   Log Charges




                 9.75                                                                                                                                                       6


                  9.7
                                                                                                                                                                            5

                 9.65                                                                             Log Charges                   Log Charges Fitted

                                                                                                  Length of Stay                Length of Stay Fitted                       4
                  9.6                                                                             Procedures                    Procedures Fitted


                                                                                                                                                                            3
                 9.55


                  9.5                                                                                                                                                       2
                        60    61             62              63             64              65             66              67             68              69
                                                                                  Age at Admission



Notes: See notes from Figure 2. Charges are unavailable for 13.4% of the sample. At age 65 there is a discrete 0.6% decrease in the number of records where charges are unavailable.
Individuals without a SSN have been dropped.
                                                            Figure 7: Transfer After Admission to the Hospital

                0.09


                0.08


                0.07



                0.06



                0.05
   Proportion




                0.04


                0.03

                                                                                                                Transfer Across Hospital
                0.02                                                                                            Transfer Across Hospital Fitted
                                                                                                                Transfer Within Hospital
                                                                                                                Transfer Within Hospital Fitted
                0.01


                  0
                       60      61               62              63               64           65           66       67           68           69   70
                                                                                        Age at Admission




Notes: Inidividuals without SSNs are not included in the figure as they can't be tracked.
                                                                    Figure 8: Readmitted to Hospital
                  0.2


                 0.18


                 0.16


                 0.14


                 0.12
                                                                                                                 Readmit 28 Days
    Proportion




                                                                                                                 Readmit 28 Days Fitted
                  0.1                                                                                            Readmission 7 Days
                                                                                                                 Readmit 7 Days Fitted
                 0.08


                 0.06


                 0.04


                 0.02


                   0
                        60    61              62             63              64             65              66             67           68   69   70
                                                                                   Age at Admission




Notes: See notes from Figure 5. Days to readmission are computed from date of discharge. Individuals without a SSN have been dropped.
                                                              Figure 9: Died Either in or Out of Hospital

                 0.3
                            Death 365 Days         Death 365 Days Fitted
                            Death 180 Days         Death 180 Days Fitted
                            Death 90 Days          Death 90 Days Fitted
                            Death 28 Days          Death 28 Days Fitted
                0.25        Death 14 Days          Death 14 Days Fitted
                            Death 7 Days           Death 7 Days Fitted




                 0.2
   Proportion




                0.15




                 0.1




                0.05




                  0
                       60        61          62             63             64              65             66             67              68             69              70
                                                                                  Age at Admission




Notes: See notes from Figure 5. These deaths are coded based on death certificate data. They are linked to the hospital records based on SSN. Records without SSNs were dropped.
                                        Figure 10: RDD in Mortality for the Three years After Hospital Admission

                      0.03




                      0.02



                                                                                                                 RDD in Mortality
                      0.01                                                                                       95% Confidence Interval
   RDD in Mortality




                         0
                              0   0.2        0.4            0.6             0.8              1             1.2            1.4             1.6            1.8              2



                      -0.01




                      -0.02




                      -0.03
                                                                         Death within x years of Admission




Notes: Evolution of RDD and 95 percent confidence interval. Due to how the datasets were merged there is substantial censoring of deaths occurring more than 2 years after admission.
                                                 Table 1: Ten Most Common ICD-9s in Non-deferrable Admission Sample
                                                                                                                                                   Transfer
                                                                                                                Length of                  List     Across    Died within
                                                                                     ICD-9        Admissions      Stay      Procedures   Charges   Hospital    28 Days
Obstructive chronic bronchitis with acute exacerbation                               491.21         61,558        6.23         1.21       23,835     2.8         4.7
Respiratory failure                                                                  518.81         24,328        13.67        3.70       65,459      9.5        22.5
Acute myocardial infarction of other inferior wall first episode                     410.41         21,192        7.23         5.13       52,798     26.0        6.9
Acute myocardial infarction of other anterior wall first episode                     410.11         15,727        7.82         5.31       56,684     24.6        10.6
Intracerebral hemorrhage                                                              431           10,755        17.77        3.63       61,870     15.0        29.6
Chronic airway obstruction, not elsewhere classified                                  496           9,102         6.46         1.47       18,868     3.1         7.7
Fracture of neck of femur Intertrochanteric section                                  820.21          6,868        14.15        2.66       39,614      9.8         2.9
Cerebral artery occlusion, unspecified                                               434.9          5,782         15.15        3.68       26,863     14.1        8.1
Convulsions unknown Cause                                                            780.39         5,338         5.13         1.25       21,850     4.2         3.1
Asthma, unspecified with status asthmaticus                                          493.91          5,095         4.61        1.09       15,651      1.7         0.9
Note: Length of stay, procedure count and hospital list charges are totals for all sequential hospital stays.
         Table 2: Changes in Admissions at Age 65 for California Hospital Admissions 1992-2002
                                 Non ER or Planned                            ER and Unplanned
Age Over 65 (x100)             11.9              12.0                        2.4              2.6
                               [0.5]             [0.5]                      [0.5]            [0.5]
Dummy Just Under 65              N                 Y                          N                Y
Observations                  3,652             3,652                      3,652            3,652
R-Squared                      0.87              0.87                       0.81             0.81
P-Value                                          0.16                                        0.28

                                          Weekend t-stat > 6.62                                 Weekend t-stat 2.54-6.62
Age Over 65 (x100)                        3.2                3.3                                  3.6               3.7
                                         [1.0]              [1.1]                                [0.9]             [1.0]
Dummy Just Under 65                        N                  Y                                    N                 Y
Observations                             3,652             3,652                                3,652             3,652
R-Squared                                0.39               0.39                                 0.54              0.54
P-Value                                                     0.76                                                   0.56

                                        Weekend t-stat 0.96-2.54                                   Weekend t-stat < 0.96
Age Over 65 (x100)                        2.7               3.0                                    0.6                0.6
                                         [0.9]             [1.0]                                  [0.9]              [0.9]
Dummy Just Under 65                        N                 Y                                      N                  Y
Observations                            3,652             3,652                                  3,652              3,652
R-Squared                                0.63              0.63                                  0.52                0.52
P-Value                                                    0.20                                                      0.85
Notes: Standard errors in square brackets. Table reports coefficient estimates from models fit to data on log number of admissions by
single day of age. Sample is restricted to people admitted from home to California hospitals between January 1, 1992 and November
30, 2002. All models include a quadratic polynomial in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age over 65. Dummy for just under 65 is
set to 1 for people admitted in the 31 days before their 65th birthday. P-values reported in column 2 of each sub-panel are for the test
that the coefficient of the dummy for just under 65 is equal to zero.
              Table 3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Changes in Insurance Coverage
                                       Medicare                                   Uninsured
                           (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (1)       (2)       (3)   (4)
Age Over 65 (x100)        43.9      47.6       47.5      45.8        -7.4      -8.1      -8.0  -7.9
                          [0.4]     [0.4]      [0.4]     [0.6]       [0.2]     [0.2]     [0.2] [0.3]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun          N         Y          Y         Y           N         Y         Y     Y
Race and Gender             N         Y          Y         Y           N         Y         Y     Y
Dummy Just Under 65         N         Y          Y         Y           N         Y         Y     Y
Condition FE                N         N          Y         Y           N         N         Y     Y
Cubic Polynomial            N         N          N         Y           N         N         N     Y
Mean Age 64-65 (x100)     24.0      24.0       24.0      24.0         9.7       9.7       9.7   9.7
Observations             425,315 425,315 425,315 425,315           425,315 425,315 425,315 425,315
P-Value                             0.00                 0.00                  0.00            0.00

                                                Private                                              Medicaid
                                    (1)     (2)         (3)    (4)                         (1)     (2)       (3)    (4)
Age Over 65 (x100)                -24.8   -26.9       -26.8  -26.0                       -10.1   -10.9     -10.8   -9.8
                                   [0.4]   [0.4]       [0.4]  [0.6]                       [0.3]   [0.3]     [0.3] [0.35]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun                   N       Y           Y      Y                           N       Y         Y      Y
Race and Gender                      N       Y           Y      Y                           N       Y         Y      Y
Dummy Just Under 65                  N       Y           Y      Y                           N       Y         Y      Y
Condition FE                         N       N           Y      Y                           N       N         Y      Y
Cubic Polynomial                     N       N           N      Y                           N       N         N      Y
Mean Age 64-65 (x100)              43.3    43.3        43.3   43.3                        20.5    20.5      20.5   20.5
Observations                     425,315 425,315 425,315 425,315                        425,315 425,315 425,315 425,315
P-Value                                    0.00               0.15                                0.00             0.00
Notes: Standard errors in square brackets. Table reports coefficient estimates from linear probability models fit to data on sample of
people admitted from home to California hospitals between January 1, 1992 and November 30, 2002. All models include a quadratic
polynomial in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age over 65. Dummy for just under 65 is set to 1 for people admitted to the hospital
in the 31 days before their 65th birthday. Race and gender represent dummies for race/ethnicity and gender. Condition FE represents a
set of fixed effects for primary admission diagnosis. Mean age 64-65 represents the mean of dependent variable among people with
64<= age<65. P-values reported in column 2 of each sub-panel are for test that coefficients of additional covariates relative to the model
in column 1 are jointly equal to zero. P-values reported in column 4 of each sub-panel are for test that coefficients of additional
covariates relative to model in column 3 are jointly equal to zero.
                                        Table 4: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Changes in Treatment Intensity
                                        Length of Stay                            Procedure Count                           Log Charges
                                 (1)     (2)        (3)      (4)          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (1)    (2)      (3)     (4)
Age Over 65                     0.37    0.36       0.35     0.39         0.09      0.10      0.11      0.13        0.024   0.026    0.026   0.036
                               [0.24]  [0.26]     [0.26]   [0.35]       [0.03]    [0.03]    [0.03]    [0.04]      [0.011] [0.011]  [0.010] [0.013]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun                N       Y          Y        Y            N         Y         Y         Y            N      Y        Y       Y
Race and Gender                   N       Y          Y        Y            N         Y         Y         Y            N      Y        Y       Y
Dummy Just Under 65               N       Y          Y        Y            N         Y         Y         Y            N      Y        Y       Y
Condition FE                      N       N          Y        Y            N         N         Y         Y            N      N        Y       Y
Cubic Polynomial                  N       N          N        Y            N         N         N         Y            N      N        N       Y
Mean Age 64-65                  8.12    8.12       8.12     8.12         2.50      2.50      2.50      2.50        9.757   9.757    9.757   9.757
Observations                  407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386          407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386           352,652 352,652 352,652 352,652
P-Value                                0.000               0.266                  0.000               0.558                0.000            0.537
Notes: See notes to Table 3. Standard errors in square brackets.
              Table 5: Changes in the use of Specific Procedures for the Two Most Common Causes of Admission in the Non-deferrable Sample
                                             Principle Diagnosis: Acute Myocardial Infarction
            Number of       No    Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure
            Procedures Procedures   88.56     37.22       88.53     36.01      88.72        99.29  36.06   89.54    39.61     37.23
Age Over 65     0.44      -1.89      3.79      3.41        4.04       0.67      2.15         1.52    0.72    2.59    1.82      0.11
               [0.12]     [0.82]    [1.54]    [1.56]      [1.57]     [1.43]    [1.41]       [1.19]  [1.08]  [1.09]  [1.09]    [1.02]
Mean 64-65      5.00       7.90     53.76     47.78       45.46     29.08      28.01        19.07  17.58    14.11   13.22     11.74
Observations 39,170      39,170    39,170    39,170      39,170     39,170    39,170       39,170  39,170  39,170  39,170    39,170
R-squared       0.01       0.00      0.05      0.03        0.01       0.03      0.03         0.10    0.21    0.05    0.01      0.01
                                  Principle Diagnosis: Obstructive Chronic Bronchitis with Acute Exacerbation
            Number of       No     Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure
            Procedures Procedures    93.94       89.65      93.96      89.54       88.72       96.04     96.71  96.72   89.52   38.93
Age Over 65     0.00       2.01       -2.22      -0.07      -1.20        0.91       0.18       -0.04     -0.20    0.46   -0.60   -0.12
               [0.05]     [1.26]      [0.89]     [0.85]     [0.69]      [0.66]     [0.65]      [0.61]    [0.48]  [0.43]  [0.46]  [0.35]
Mean 64-65      1.19      55.38      14.66       13.56       8.13        7.00       6.80        6.18      3.80    2.68    3.34    1.89
Observations 60,514      60,514      60,514     60,514     60,514      60,514     60,514      60,514    60,514  60,514  60,514  60,514
R-squared       0.02       0.04        0.03       0.10       0.03        0.03       0.00        0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00

Notes: Standard errors in square brackets. All models include a quadratic polynomial in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age over 65. Dummy for just under 65 is set to 1 for people
admitted to the hospital in the 31 days before their 65th birthday. Race and gender represent dummies for race/ethnicity and gender. Table reports coefficient estimates from linear probability
models for total number of procedures (column 1), event of no procedures (column 2) and indicators for specific procedures (columns 3-12) fit to subsamples of admissions with indicated
principle admission diagnoses. Coefficient estimates for event of no procedures and for individual procedures (identified by procedure codes in column headings) are multiplied by 100, as are
associated means for people with 64<=age<65. The procedures in the order they appear are: 88.56 Coronary arteriography using two catheters, 37.22 Left heart cardiac catheterization,
88.53 Angiocardiography of left heart structures, 36.01 Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, 88.72 Diagnostic ultrasound of heart, 99.29 Injection or infusion of other therapeutic
or prophylactic substance, 36.06 Insertion of non-drug-eluting coronary artery stent(s), 89.54 Electrographic monitoring, 39.61 Extracorporeal circulation auxiliary to open heart surgery, 37.23
Combined right and left heart cardiac catheterization, 93.94 Respiratory medication administered by nebulizer, 89.65 Measurement of systemic arterial blood gases, 93.96 Other oxygen
enrichment, 89.54 Electrographic monitoring, 88.72 Diagnostic ultrasound of heart, 96.04 Insertion of endotracheal tube, 96.71 Continuous mechanical ventilation for less than 96 consecutive
hours, 96.72 Continuous mechanical ventilation for 96 consecutive hours or more, 89.52 Electrocardiogram, 38.93 Venous catheterization, not elsewhere classified.
       Table 6: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Changes in Transfer and Readmission Probabilities
                                     Across Hospitals                            Within Hospital
                            (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)          (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)
Age Over 65 (x100)         0.35       0.40       0.48      0.86         0.91     0.97      0.93        0.94
                          [0.24]     [0.25]     [0.24]    [0.33]       [0.20]   [0.20]    [0.20]      [0.27]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun           N          Y          Y         Y            N        Y         Y           Y
Race and Gender              N          Y          Y         Y            N        Y         Y           Y
Dummy Just Under 65          N          Y          Y         Y            N        Y         Y           Y
Condition FE                 N          N          Y         Y            N        N         Y           Y
Cubic Polynomial             N          N          N         Y            N        N         N           Y
Mean Age 64-65 (x100)      6.87       6.87       6.87      6.87         4.02     4.02      4.02        4.02
Observations             407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386             407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386
P-Value                              0.000                0.236                 0.000                 0.436

                      Readmission Within 7 Days of Discharge                        Readmission Within 28 Days of Discharge
                         (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)                            (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
Age Over 65 (x100)     -0.36     -0.18      -0.16     -0.48                          -0.92     -0.61      -0.63      -0.79
                       [0.24]   [0.24]     [0.24]     [0.34]                         [0.36]    [0.37]     [0.37]    [0.50]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun        N         Y          Y         Y                              N         Y          Y         Y
Race and Gender           N         Y          Y         Y                              N         Y          Y         Y
Dummy Just Under 65       N         Y          Y         Y                              N         Y          Y         Y
Condition FE              N         N          Y         Y                              N         N          Y         Y
Cubic Polynomial          N         N          N         Y                              N         N          N         Y
Mean Age 64-65 (x100)   6.59      6.59       6.59      6.59                          17.02     17.02      17.02     17.02
Observations          407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386                               407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386
P-Value                         0.000                 0.310                                    0.000                0.800
Notes: See notes to Table 3. Standard errors in square brackets. Admissions with missing Social Security Numbers cannot be tracked and
are dropped from the sample used in this table
                                      Table 7: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Changes in Mortality Rates
                           Died Within 7 Days of Admission             Died Within 14 Days of Admission           Died Within 28 Days of Admission
                          (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
Age Over 65 (x100)       -1.1       -1.1       -1.0      -0.7         -1.0      -1.0      -0.8      -0.7         -1.1      -1.0      -0.9      -0.6
                        [0.2]      [0.2]       [0.2]     [0.3]       [0.2]      [0.2]     [0.2]     [0.3]        [0.3]     [0.3]     [0.3]     [0.4]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun         N          Y          Y         Y            N         Y         Y         Y            N         Y         Y         Y
Race and Gender            N          Y          Y         Y            N         Y         Y         Y            N         Y         Y         Y
Dummy Just Under 65        N          Y          Y         Y            N         Y         Y         Y            N         Y         Y         Y
Condition FE               N          N          Y         Y            N         N         Y         Y            N         N         Y         Y
Cubic Polynomial           N          N          N         Y            N         N         N         Y            N         N         N         Y
Mean Age 64-65 (x 100)    5.1        5.1        5.1       5.1          7.1       7.1       7.1       7.1          9.8       9.8       9.8       9.8
Observations           407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386             407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386             407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386
P-Value                            0.000                0.311                  0.000               0.860                  0.000               0.598


                          Died Within 90 Days of Admission                            Died Within 180 Days of Admission                   Died Within 365 Days of Admission
                          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                            (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)                    (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)
Age Over 65 (x100)       -1.1      -1.0      -0.9      -0.9                           -1.2      -1.1     -0.8      -0.9                   -1.0      -0.9     -0.7      -0.4
                        [0.3]      [0.3]     [0.3]     [0.4]                          [0.4]     [0.4]    [0.3]     [0.5]                  [0.4]     [0.4]    [0.4]     [0.5]
Year/Month/Sat/Sun         N         Y         Y         Y                              N         Y        Y         Y                      N         Y        Y         Y
Race and Gender            N         Y         Y         Y                              N         Y        Y         Y                      N         Y        Y         Y
Dummy Just Under 65        N         Y         Y         Y                              N         Y        Y         Y                      N         Y        Y         Y
Condition FE               N         N         Y         Y                              N         N        Y         Y                      N         N        Y         Y
Cubic Polynomial           N         N         N         Y                              N         N        N         Y                      N         N        N         Y
Mean Age 64-65 (x 100)  14.7       14.7      14.7     14.7                           18.4       18.4     18.4      18.4                   23.0      23.0     23.0      23.0
Observations           407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386                              407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386                     407,386 407,386 407,386 407,386
P-Value                           0.000               0.466                                    0.000              0.154                            0.000              0.104
Notes: See notes to Table 3. Standard errors in square brackets. Admissions with missing Social Security Numbers cannot be linked to death records and are dropped from the sample used
in this table
    Table 8: Lower Bound Estimates of Effect of Medicare Eligibility on 28-day Mortality for Various Samples
                                                                   ER and               ER and Unplanned
                                         All         Elective
                                                                  Unplanned ( > 6.62) (2.54-6.51) (0.96-2.54) ( < 0.96)
1. RD in Admissions %                    7.12         11.85            2.43           3.23           3.57           2.70           0.56
2. RD in Mortality                      -0.46         -0.29           -0.49           0.27          -0.63          -0.45          -1.09
3. Just Under 65 death rate              5.10          3.29            6.86           2.68           7.41           6.87          10.25
4. Worst Case Bias                      -0.33         -0.36           -0.15          -0.10          -0.24          -0.17          -0.05
5. Lower Bound Estimate                 -0.13          0.06           -0.33           0.37          -0.39          -0.27          -1.04
6. SE on Lower Bound                     0.07          0.09            0.12           0.16           0.25           0.24           0.29
7. Share of Obs                          1.00          0.50            0.50           0.11           0.13           0.12           0.12
Notes: See text for discussion of lower bound formula. All terms are expressed as percentages. Entry in row 1 is estimated regression
discontinuity (RD) in log admissions at age 65 (multiplied by 100). Entry in row 2 is estimated RD in 28-day mortality at age 65 (in
percents). Entry in row 3 is estimated 28-day mortality rate for people just under 65 (in percents). Entry in row 4 is estimated worst-case
bias in 28 day mortality caused by selective increase in admissions rates after age 65 (in percents). Entry in row 5 is lower bound
estimate of effect of Medicare eligibility on 28-day mortality rate (in percents). Entry in row 6 is estimated standard error of lower-bound
mortality effect (in percents) estimated by delta method. Entry in row 7 is share of total sample included in column sub-sample. Sub-
samples in columns 4-8 do not add up to overall sub-sample of ER and unplanned admissions in column 3 because admissions whose
primary diagnosis accounts for less than 100 observations in the overall sample have been dropped.
                                         Appendix A: Employment Rates by Age (1992-2003 NHIS)

                    0.8



                    0.7



                    0.6

                                                                          Men and Women         Men and Women Fitted

                                                                          Men                   Men Fitted
                    0.5
Fraction Employed




                                                                          Women                 Women Fitted


                    0.4



                    0.3



                    0.2



                    0.1



                     0
                          60   61   62        63        64       65        66             67      68           69      70
                                                                 Age
               Appendix B: RDD in Admissions Estimated With a Cubic Polynomial
                                                                               Weekend t-stat >
                                 Non ER or Planned     ER and Unplanned
                                                                                     6.62
Age Over 65                       0.12028 0.13144       0.02568 0.03825       0.0332      0.0564
                                 [0.00493] [0.00693]   [0.00498] [0.00692]   [0.01069] [0.01465]
Dummy Age 64.91-65                   Y         Y           Y         Y           Y           Y
Cubic Polynomial                     N         Y           N         Y           N           Y
Observations                       3,652     3,652       3,652     3,652       3,652       3,652
R-Squared                           0.87      0.87        0.81      0.81        0.39       0.39

                                   Weekend t-stat        Weekend t-stat        Weekend t-stat <
                                       2.54-6.62             0.96-2.54               0.96
Age Over 65                       0.0369 0.04436        0.03045 0.04183       0.00608 0.01932
                                 [0.00974] [0.01357]   [0.00982] [0.01378]   [0.00924] [0.01270]
Dummy Age 64.91-65                   Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
Cubic Polynomial                     N          Y          N          Y          N          Y
Observations                       3,652      3,652      3,652      3,652      3,652      3,652
R-Squared                           0.54       0.54       0.63       0.63       0.52      0.52
Notes: See notes from Table 2.
                                                             Appendix C: Proportion on Medicare by Age in Days

                              1


                            0.9


                            0.8


                            0.7

                                                             65*365.24 - 31
   Proportion on Medicare




                            0.6


                            0.5
                                                                                                                                         Medicare
                                                                                                   65*365.24
                            0.4


                            0.3


                            0.2


                            0.1


                              0
                                 8   1   4   7   0   3   6   9   2   5   8   1   4   7   0   3   6   9   2   5   8   1   4   7   0   3   6   9    2
                             3 55 357 358 359 361 362 363 364 366 367 368 370 371 372 374 375 376 377 379 380 381 383 384 385 387 388 389 390 392
                            2     2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2
                                                                                     Age in Days



Note: People become eligible for Medicare on the 1st day of the month in which they turn 65. The youngest age at which a person can be eligible is 365.24*65 - 30. Everyone is eligible after
their 65th birthday 65*365.24.
                                                                Appendix D: Predicted Mortality Probabilities

                                                                                                                                                                        0.107

                               0.052


                                                                                                                                                                        0.102
                                0.05



                               0.048                                                                                                                                    0.097




                                                                                                                                                                                Predicted 28 Day Mortality
   Predicted 7 Day Mortality




                               0.046
                                                                                                                                                                        0.092


                               0.044                                                                                                 Predicted 7 Day Mortality
                                                                                                                                     Predicated 28 Day Mortality        0.087

                               0.042


                                                                                                                                                                        0.082
                                0.04



                               0.038                                                                                                                                    0.077
                                       60   61   62             63              64              65              66              67              68        69       70
                                                                                                Age




Notes: Mortality predicted from a quadratic in age, condition FE, gender, race, ethnicity, year, month and day of week of arrival to the hospital.
