                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FIRST IN THE CLASS? AGE AND THE EDUCATION PRODUCTION FUNCTION

                                        Elizabeth Cascio
                                  Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach

                                        Working Paper 13663
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13663


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




We thank Bruce Sacerdote for helpful conversations. We are also grateful to Joshua Angrist, Sandra
Black, Kristin Butcher, David Card, Damon Clark, Ethan Lewis, Jens Ludwig, Heather Royer, Douglas
Staiger, and seminar participants at Case Western Reserve University, Dartmouth College, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the University of Florida, Wellesley College, the Association for Public
Policy Analysis and Management Fall Conference, and the Society of Labor Economists Annual Meeting
for comments on an earlier draft. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2007 by Elizabeth Cascio and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
First in the Class? Age and the Education Production Function
Elizabeth Cascio and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 13663
December 2007, Revised July 2012
JEL No. I20,J18,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of having more mature peers using data from an experiment where children
of the same age were randomly assigned to different kindergarten classrooms. Exploiting this experimental
variation in conjunction with variation in expected kindergarten entry age to account for negative selection
of older school entrants, we find that exposure to more mature kindergarten classmates raises test scores
up to eight years after kindergarten, and may reduce the incidence of grade retention and increase the
probability of taking a college-entry exam. These findings are consistent with broader peer effects
literature documenting positive spillovers from having higher-scoring peers and suggest that – contrary
to much academic and popular discussion of school entry age – being old relative to one’s peers is
not beneficial.


Elizabeth Cascio
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
elizabeth.u.cascio@dartmouth.edu

Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Annenberg Hall, Room 205
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu
I.      Introduction

        In 1968, only four percent of U.S. six year olds were not in first grade. By 2010 this

figure had risen to almost 20 percent.1 Only one-third of the recent trend is estimated to be

explained by increases in the minimum kindergarten entry ages established by U.S. states; the

rest is thought to be due to teachers deeming more kindergartners unready to progress to

first grade, and to more parents choosing to delay their child’s entrance into school (Deming

and Dynarski, 2008). Estimates over the past fifteen years put the rate of delay as high as 9

to 10 percent (e.g., West, Meek, and Hurst, 2000).

        Anecdotally, the parental decision to delay is motivated by concerns that a child will

be permanently disadvantaged if not among the biggest and brightest of his peers when he

starts kindergarten. Being old or mature relative to one’s classmates can matter for

achievement over the long term if children are tracked early on the basis of skill, which is

strongly correlated with age when children are young. Placement in the top academic track

can be self-reinforcing, since it may tackle more advanced material and move more quickly

through a given curriculum. At the same time, older school entrants might become relatively

more motivated for school or self-confident because of their relative standing in the class.

Importantly, the implied result is zero-sum: when older students gain, younger students lose,

becoming less engaged with school, being placed on lower academic tracks, etc. This can

create an unsustainable “race to the top” (see Gootman, 2006, and Weil, 2007).

        Is there any evidence to support such zero-sum consequences of delayed school

entry? Older school entrants do perform better on tests than younger school entrants in the

same grade, even as late as middle school.2 However, this performance differential alone is


1 These are the authors’ tabulations from the 1968 and 2010 October Current Population Survey (CPS) School

Enrollment Supplements. For the purposes of this calculation, we record the small number of individuals in
second grade or higher as being in first grade.
2 Bedard and Dhuey (2006) show this for a number of countries using data on fourth and eighth graders from

the 1995 and 1999 Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). Similar findings have been
documented in country-specific studies of the United States (Datar, 2006; Elder and Lubotsky, 2009), Sweden


                                                    1
not conclusive evidence that relative age matters: Older kindergartners have greater

preparation for school in an absolute sense, not just in relation to their peers; age also signals

cognitive development as well as the flow of investments made in a child over his lifetime,

so that older entrants’ edge on tests, even in middle school, may not even have anything to

do with school per se.3 Direct estimates of relative age effects call for information on the ages

of a child’s peers, which is generally lacking in the survey data frequently used in this

literature. As a result, there is limited evidence to date on whether children are better

positioned to succeed if they are old relative to their peers when they start school.

         We address this identification problem using data from one of the largest educational

experiments ever undertaken in the United States – Tennessee’s Project STAR (Student-

Teacher Achievement Ratio). Though designed to study the effects of reduced class size

(Schanzenbach, 2007), Project STAR is well suited for estimating the effects of relative age.4

In particular, the design of Project STAR allows us to observe children who entered school

at the same age, but were randomly assigned to kindergarten classmates with different ages

on average. We can also follow these children over time. While such an exercise would be

feasible in other data, such as matched student-teacher administrative data, Project STAR

helps to ensure that variation in relative age is random. In a non-experimental setting, by

contrast, concerned parents may lobby to have their children placed in kindergarten

classrooms where they would be relatively old. Our empirical strategy also accounts for the

possible negative selection of delayed school entrants by exploiting variation across students


(Fredriksson and Öckert, 2006), Chile (McEwan and Shapiro, 2008), and Germany (Puhani and Weber, 2005),
among others.
3 In fact, the impossibility of separately estimating the effects of age at school entry and age at test or

observation on elementary school test scores is cited by Angrist and Pischke (2009, p. 7) as an example of a
“fundamentally unidentified question.” Black et al. (2011) separate the effects of age at school entry and age at
test or observation by estimating these for army entrance exams given to young adults.
4 We are not the first to exploit the random assignment of children and teachers in Project STAR to classes, not

just to class sizes, to gain insights into the education production function (Dee, 2004; Dee and Keys, 2004;
Whitmore, 2005; Schanzenbach, 2006; Chetty et al., 2011). Others have also exploited the random assignment
of students and teachers to classes of different sizes to estimate peer effects (Boozer and Cacciola, 2001;
Graham, 2008).


                                                       2
in anticipated school entry age given exact date of birth and Tennessee’s birthday cutoff for

kindergarten entry. Our estimates therefore isolate the effects of variation in maturity across

students of different ages in kindergarten, separately from variation in their innate ability.

         We find little evidence to support the hypothesis that there are benefits to being

relatively mature at the start of school. Children who are more mature relative to their

kindergarten classmates appear to lose out along every observed dimension: they score worse

on achievement tests, both at the end of kindergarten and in middle school, are more likely

to have been retained in grade by middle school, and are less likely to take a college-entrance

exam, though the latter effects are estimated less precisely. Thus, our findings suggest, on

net, positive spillovers from having more mature classmates in kindergarten. Maturity could

have positive spillover effects through several channels. As noted above and also shown

below, more mature children score higher on tests, particularly at the start of school. In

addition, more mature children should be more ready for a given curriculum and are

therefore potentially less disruptive.5 While our findings are surprising from the perspective

of academic and popular discussion of school entry age effects, they are therefore broadly

consistent with the peer effects literature.

II.      Background

         Our analysis will focus on test performance and several other academic outcomes of

one school entry cohort. The model of interest is:

(1)       y it   0t   1t a i   2t f a i ,  i    it

where yit represents an outcome for individual i in year t, and ai is his observed age (in years)

in the fall of kindergarten. In this application, as in most in this literature, ai is perfectly


5 A number of studies have found that exposure to higher-achieving or less disruptive peers has benefits for a

child’s own achievement and behavior. On the effects of exposure to higher-achieving peers, see Hanushek et
al. (2003), Ding and Lehrer (2007), Duflo et al. (2011), and Kugler et al. (2012). Figlio (2007) and Carrell and
Hoekstra (2010), provide evidence that exposure to more disruptive peers can be harmful. See Sacerdote (2011)
for a complete review of this literature.


                                                                 3
correlated with the age at which an outcome is measured, ait. We therefore refer to their

combined effect, β1t, as the “absolute age effect.” f , represents relative age, taking as

arguments own age ai and the vector of ages of child i’s peers, А-i; we refer to its coefficient,

β2t, as the “relative age effect.” Thus, relative age is some function of a child’s own age and

the ages of his peers. it represents unobserved determinants of the outcome of interest.

         Most studies to date have lacked data on А-i, and hence have omitted relative age

when estimating model 1. As a result, most existing estimates of the coefficient on ai are

reduced-form, capturing the effects of both absolute age and relative age. This has generated

considerable uncertainty about correct interpretation in the literature. The interpretation of

this reduced-form coefficient nevertheless has important implications. If the coefficient on

age is truly a relative age effect, the implications of delaying school entry are zero-sum: the

decision to delay one student’s entry into school improves his standing in the class at the

expense of lowering everyone else’s. On the other hand, if the reduced-form coefficient on

age represents an absolute age effect, such negative spillovers from the decision to delay do

not exist.

         We tackle the question of interpretation by using a data set where we observe the

ages of each respondent’s peers at the start of school.6 Thus, we are able to measure relative

age and control for it when estimating model 1. Yet, two questions arise in specifying this

model.

         First, what is the correct way to measure a child’s relative age? For simplicity and

consistency with closely related literature on the United States (Elder and Lubotsky, 2009),

we assume that f a i ,   i   a i  a  i , where a  i represents the average age of a i’s peers.


6An alternative approach would be to impose functional form restrictions to support one interpretation over
another. For example, in one of the earliest papers in this literature, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) argue that their
positive estimates of the coefficient on age for eighth-grade test scores capture the effect of relative age – not
age at school entry – on the basis of a model where the effect of age at school entry is assumed non-linear.


                                                         4
Thus, we assume that relative age is linear, continuous, increasing in own age, and decreasing

in the average age of peers. This captures the zero-sum implications of manipulating relative

age. For example, in order for a given student to become relatively old, another student must

become relatively young. Alternatively, if a child who would have otherwise been the

youngest among his peers waits an additional year to start school, he becomes the oldest

only by virtue of making his peers relatively younger. As defined, relative age thus has

implications for the distribution of achievement, but not its level.

            Second, which peers determine relative age effects? Because of data constraints

described below, we focus on relative age in the kindergarten classroom. A drawback of this

definition is that we are only able to detect whether within-classroom interactions in

kindergarten drive relative age effects, not whether relative age effects exist at all. For

example, if age in relation to classmates determines placement into reading groups, but

children do not learn to read until first grade or later, we may not detect relative age effects

when they truly exist, or our estimates of relative age effects could be biased downward. We

explore the sensitivity of our estimates to the choice of peer group by estimating models

where relative age is defined in relation to a child’s first-grade classmates, and the results are

little changed.7 We also consider models where relative age is defined in relation to other

children in the entire entry cohort of a child’s elementary school, and not just his own class.

The latter models capture the possibility that children who are relatively young in their

cohorts are likely to be among the youngest in their classrooms at some point during their

elementary-school careers, and potentially repeatedly. They also capture the possibility that

school administrators, not just teachers, target the youngest students in a cohort for lower

academic tracks. These estimates rely less on the experimental variation in class assignment




7   This is not surprising, as relative age in the kindergarten and first grade classroom has a correlation of 0.96.


                                                            5
in our data – in the latter case, no experimental variation is used at all – but they do provide

potential insights into causal mechanisms.

         Our approach is similar to Elder and Lubotsky’s (2009) study using survey data from

the U.S. in which they measure relative age at the school cohort level in kindergarten, not the

classroom level.8,9 However, they also address a fundamentally different question by using a

different source of identifying variation in relative age. Elder and Lubotsky rely primarily on

variation across states in the minimum age at school entry to generate variation across

individuals in the average age of peers, and hence relative age. By contrast, our identification

is based off of transitory (and random) fluctuations in the age distributions of kindergarten

classrooms within schools, hence holding minimum age at school entry regulations constant.

We describe how the source of identifying variation might affect interpretation when we

present estimates of peer effects at the school cohort level below.

III.     Empirical Strategy

         Our primary estimates focus on a child’s relative age in his kindergarten classroom

and, for ease of estimation and to parallel the peer effects literature, are based on the

following model:

(2)       y itk   0 t   1t a i   2 t a i ,k  x ik  t   itk .

yitk now represents the outcome of individual i in year t who was assigned to classroom k in

kindergarten, and ai remains his observed age at the start of kindergarten. Given that Project

STAR included only one academic cohort and all students were tested (or observed) at the

same time, ai is perfectly correlated with the age at which outcomes are measured. We are

therefore only able to identify their combined effect, as noted above. a  i ,k is the average age

8 Fredriksson and Öckert (2006) use administrative data from Sweden to estimate a version of model 1 where
relative age is measured as child’s rank in the age distribution of his ninth-grade school cohort.
9 In principle, there are other situations where relative age varies while absolute age remains constant. For

example, changes in the minimum age at school entry change the expected relative age of some children
without changing the year in which they should enter school (see Bedard and Dhuey, 2012).



                                                               6
of a child’s kindergarten classmates; xik is a vector including fixed (predetermined)

characteristics of the individual, other (predetermined) characteristics of his kindergarten

classmates, characteristics of his teacher, and class size; and εitk denotes unobserved

determinants of outcomes.

        As shown in Elder and Lubotsky (2009), the effect of relative age, a i  a i ,k , can be

obtained simply by re-expressing model 2:

(2′)                                                  
          y itk   0 t   1t a i   2 t a i  a i ,k  x ik t   itk

where 0t   0t , 1t  1t   2 t and  2 t   2 t . Thus, the relative age effect is  2 t   2 t ,

where  2 t is the effect of peer average age on outcomes at time t from model 2. The

expectation is that  2 t  0 . In words, holding constant own (entry) age, being relatively old

improves academic outcomes; alternatively, holding constant own (entry) age, having older

peers lowers outcomes on average (  2 t  0 ). The absolute age effect,  1t   1t   2 t , is the

sum of the coefficients on own and peer average age in model 2. Thus, if the relative age

effect is positive, we would expect the coefficient on ai to fall relative to its value in the more

commonly estimated specification where relative age is omitted from the model.

        A comparison of models 2 and 2′ makes clear that a relative age effect is

indistinguishable from the effect of having less mature peers. Having less mature peers may

improve a child’s position in the classroom “pecking order” – the positive spillover that we

conceive of as a “relative age effect.” But it may also have negative spillovers, e.g., by

exposing a child to lower-performing or more disruptive peers. Thus, even though we can

re-express the parameters in model 2 to derive a relative age effect – as in model 2′ – the

coefficient  2 t is inherently a reduced-form one, capturing the net effect of these competing

spillovers. It is important to keep this reduced-form interpretation in mind as we proceed.




                                                                 7
         Two identification problems arise when estimating model 2, both of which we can

address. First, because kindergarten retention and delay are at the discretion of parents and

teachers, older kindergartners may differ in unobservable ways from younger kindergartners,

leading ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of  1t to be biased. In particular, children

delayed or retained are likely negatively selected, imparting a downward bias on OLS

estimates. We take the same empirical approach as previous researchers to this identification

problem, constructing an instrument for ai using information on a child’s birthday and the

date by which new school entrants are to reach a specified age.10 In particular, children in

the Project STAR cohort were to have turned age five on or before September 30. As a

result, a child who turned five on September 30 should have enrolled in kindergarten a

month before, while her counterpart who turned age five on October 1 is expected to have

entered kindergarten about one month before her sixth birthday.

         The solid line in Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between birthday and this

“expected” age at the start of kindergarten, eai, under the assumption that the school year

begins September 1. The figure shows clearly that actual age on September 1, 1985 (daily

averages of which are represented by the hollow circles) is strongly but not perfectly related

to eai. Two-stage least squares (TSLS) estimates of  1t will be consistent if eai is uncorrelated

with unobserved determinants of achievement, or if Eea i  itk | x ik  t   0 .11 While we

cannot test this assumption directly, we show below that expected age at the start of

kindergarten generally does not predict a child’s observed characteristics.


10 See, for example, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) and Elder and Lubotsky (2009), among others. A similar

approach can be used to construct an instrument for years of completed schooling in models of youth test
scores (e.g., Gormley and Gayer, 2005; Cascio and Lewis, 2006) and of adult outcomes (e.g., Dobkin and
Ferreira, 2010; McCrary and Royer, 2011).
11 A sufficient condition for this assumption to be satisfied is that birthday is randomly assigned, but it is

possible to identify 1t under weaker assumptions, e.g., under the assumption that expected school-entry age is
randomly assigned conditional on some flexible function of birthday that is smooth through the cutoff date.
We have estimated a model like this as a robustness check and found similar results to those reported below
(results available on request).


                                                       8
        Second, there is likely to be sorting of children across kindergarten classrooms,

possibly on unobservable characteristics related to the ages of other children. Our use of

experimental data implies that no such sorting should have taken place, in which case

                 
E a  i , k itk | x ik  t  0 . However, even with random assignment, older peers may be on

average relatively low ability because some of these children will have been held back by

their parents or teachers on the basis of their perceived school readiness. Thus, OLS

estimates of  2 t pick up the effects of having lower-ability peers in addition to the effects of

having more mature peers.

        To ensure that the peer effect we identify derives from maturity rather than ability,

we combine the identification strategy described above with the random variation in

classroom assignment from Project STAR. Specifically, we instrument for a i ,k with the

average expected age of a child’s peers, ea  i ,k . Given the strong correlation between eai and ai

shown in Figure 1, it is not surprising that we find a strong correlation between these

variables. This instrument should also be valid because variation in the birthday composition

of a child’s classmates should be uncorrelated with his latent academic potential due to the

experimental design. As above, we can informally test this assumption by examining the

relationship between ea  i ,k and observables.

        Thus, while the OLS and TSLS estimates of  2 t are in principle both unbiased, they

are estimates of different parameters. The explanation is intuitive: given that older classmates

may have been delayed or previously retained in kindergarten, OLS estimates of  2 t pick up

not just the effect of having more mature classmates in kindergarten, but also the effect of

having “overage” classmates in kindergarten, who are likely of below average ability. By

contrast, the TSLS estimates identify how having peers of the same innate ability but different




                                                  9
levels of maturity at the start of school affects the average child’s academic performance.

The TSLS estimates therefore have a cleaner interpretation.

IV.      Data

A.       Sample and Summary Statistics

         Project STAR was an experiment designed to study the effects of class size on

student achievement. Kindergarten students and teachers in 79 Tennessee schools were

randomly assigned to three different class types – small (with target enrollment of 13-17

students), regular (with target enrollment of 22-25 students), and regular with a full-time

teacher’s aide – in the fall of 1985.12 This cohort was to have maintained its class type

through third grade, after which all participants were returned to regular-sized classes.

Random assignment of children to class types took place within schools.

         Our analysis exploits the fact that most, if not all, Project STAR participants would

have been randomly assigned to classrooms, not just class types, as a result of the

experimental design. We focus on peers in the kindergarten classroom because non-random

transitions across class types (and classrooms) were less problematic in kindergarten than

they would later become.13 However, we do estimate model 2 at the first grade classroom

level in a robustness check. We also estimate model 2 at the school-cohort level for

comparison to Elder and Lubotsky (2009), but these estimates do not rely in any way on the

experiment.




12 Children entering the experiment in grades one through three, either by moving into the school or having

been retained in grade the previous year, were also added to existing classes through random assignment. Each
of the 79 schools had enrollment sufficient to accommodate at least one class of each type and were thus
slightly larger than the state average. To ensure sufficiently large samples of poor and minority children, Project
STAR schools were also disproportionately drawn from inner cities. A comparison of Project STAR schools to
other Tennessee schools is provided in Schanzenbach (2007).
13 Using administrative data for 18 Project STAR schools, Krueger (1999) found that only five of 1581

participants did not attend their initially assigned class type in kindergarten. As the experiment continued,
however, ten percent of students made transitions across class types. Anecdotally, these class switches were
largely the result of student misbehavior, which might plausibly be related to age at school entry or the average
age of kindergarten classmates.


                                                        10
         We restrict our estimation sample to participants for whom each of the available

background characteristics (birthday, race, gender, free lunch status in kindergarten) and

kindergarten teacher characteristics (experience, education, and race) is observed.14 However,

to construct average age and other characteristics of kindergarten classmates, we use all

available data on the Project STAR kindergarten cohort, not just those individuals with non-

missing outcomes data.

         Table 1 gives summary statistics on these students and their teachers in our

estimation sample. As has been found in nationally-representative data, children in our

sample tend to be older at the start of kindergarten than expected (5.43 years old versus 5.38

years old), as shown in Panel A. However, the sample is not nationally representative. As

shown in Panel B, nearly half of Project STAR participants received free or reduced-price

lunch in kindergarten, and 33 percent were black (Panel B). By comparison, only 15.4

percent of five year olds in the U.S. were black in fall 1985.15 About 17 percent of

kindergarten teachers were black, 35 percent had master’s degrees, and 10 percent had less

than 2 years of experience (Panel D). Students were roughly equally divided across class size

types (Panel E).

         Our main outcomes come from tests administered to STAR participants through the

end of high school. In the spring of kindergarten, STAR participants were administered the

Stanford Achievement Test.16 For participants still attending public school in Tennessee, we

have scores on the Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills (CTBS) in grades 5 through 8,




14 This results in us dropping only 75 observations. The observations dropped are not significantly predicted,
individually or jointly, by the instrumental variables for age and average age of peers.
15 There are authors’ calculations from the 1985 October CPS School Enrollment Supplement.
16 Scores on the Stanford Achievement Test are also available for STAR participants in grades 1 through 3 who

did not leave a STAR school or repeat or skip a grade during the experiment. Unfortunately, our instrumental
variables are related to attrition during the experiment, so we are unable to use these data. This is most likely
driven by the relationship of these variables to grade repetition (shown below), but we are not able to observe
the reason that children attrite from the sample, so we cannot confirm this.


                                                       11
regardless of year attended.17 Both tests are multiple-choice standardized tests with reading

and math components. We average the reading and math scale scores on each test, then

standardize this average to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one using data

on all STAR participants with non-missing test scores in a given year. Thus, coefficient

estimates in the test-score models are in standard deviation (σ) units. The last panel of Table

1 shows that the kindergartners in our sample are slightly positively selected from the pool

of all Project STAR participants, scoring on average 0.12σ above the mean in spring 1994.

This positive selection may arise because it was not mandatory for the Project STAR cohort

to attend kindergarten, and kindergarten attendees may have been positively selected.

         Our analysis focuses on test scores at the end of kindergarten (in spring 1986) and in

spring 1994, when STAR participants progressing through school normally would have been

completing eighth grade. We choose spring 1994 because many existing studies have

considered the relationship between age and test scores in eighth grade. We present

estimates for the year that the cohort was expected to be in eighth grade instead of eighth-

grade test scores because our sample includes individuals in the same school-entry cohort,

and we wish to have our estimates be consistently interpretable across tests taken at different

points in time. Because either one of the treatment variables may have affected grade

progression, we also estimate separate models for whether a child was enrolled below eighth

grade when tested in spring 1994. One quarter of students tested are deemed to have been

retained by this measure (Panel F).

         Our final outcome measure is an indicator for whether a respondent took the ACT

or SAT college-entrance exam. College-entry test information on STAR participants was

collected from graduating classes through 1999 (i.e. for students who graduated early, on-


17 This is true as long as a child attended grades 5 through 8 at some point between 1990-91 and 1996-97. Test
scores were also collected in 1989-90, but are not available for a large, non-random subset of children who
attended school in Memphis because the tests were not universally given there in that year.


                                                      12
time, or no later than one year behind “normal” grade progression) from all high schools in

the U.S.18 Perhaps not surprisingly, individuals in our sample are less likely to have taken the

ACT or SAT (47 percent) than individuals in the U.S. overall (lower panel of Table 1).19

B.       Is Variation in the Instruments Exogenous?

         Before turning to the estimates, it is useful to demonstrate that expected age at

school entry appears to be randomly assigned and to establish that the experiment generated

random variation in the average expected age of a child’s kindergarten classmates. To this

end, Table 2a gives the coefficients on eai and ea  i ,k , along with their joint significance, in

models where observed characteristics are the dependent variables. In Table 2b, we present

the results from a similar exercise where the dependent variables are instead indicators for

whether several key outcomes are observed.20 The underlying regressions also include school

fixed effects, because random assignment of children to class types took place within

schools. Standard errors are consistent for heteroskedasticity and correlation of error terms

among children in the same kindergarten classroom.

         The estimates are consistent with random assignment. As shown in Table 2a, in only

one case does expected age predict an observed correlate of test scores (column 1,

respondent receipt of free or reduced price lunch), and in no instance does the average

expected age a respondent’s peers significantly predict his own background or the average

background of his peers, or his kindergarten teacher or class characteristics (column 2).21 The

instruments are jointly significant for only three of thirteen variables, and in one of these

18 See Krueger and Whitmore (2001) for more information about how the CTBS and college entrance exam

data were collected. Observation of other outcomes, like high school grades, is selected on our instrumental
variables.
19 For example, using the National Longitudinal Educational Study, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) report an

ACT/SAT test-taking rate of 60 percent.
20 ACT or SAT test-taking is observed for all Project STAR participants.
21 The specification checks in Chetty et al. (2011), which include a wider range of background characteristics

that are not available to us in this study, also support random assignment to kindergarten classrooms in Project
STAR. We have also re-estimated our models on students attending the only kindergarten class of its size
within their schools (where assignment should have been random). The estimates are noisier, but broadly
consistent with those reported below for the full sample (results available on request).


                                                      13
cases (teacher race), only marginally so (column 3). As shown below, including these

variables as controls has little impact on the TSLS estimates. Table 2b shows that the

instruments also do not predict observation of our dependent variables. This suggests that

observations with missing values of dependent variables are random with respect to the

identifying variation in ai and a i ,k , and that the estimates presented below are not biased by

sample selection.

V.      Results

A.      Conventional Estimates

        Table 3 presents OLS and TSLS estimates of the coefficients on own age and peer

average age from model 2. The dependent variable is the standardized average of math and

reading scores at the end of kindergarten. Unless otherwise noted, all specifications hereafter

include fixed effects for school attended in kindergarten, and estimation accounts for

heteroskedasticity and arbitrary correlation of error terms within kindergarten classrooms.

        We first present estimates of the coefficient on age at kindergarten entry from a

version of model 2 that excludes a  i ,k . This model is the same as that widely estimated in

the school entry age literature, and so provides a useful benchmark. The OLS estimates,

shown in Panel A, imply that STAR participants who were one year older at the start of

kindergarten scored on average 0.24σ higher on a standardized test at the end of

kindergarten (column 1). However, these estimates will be biased if children previously

retained or delayed in entering kindergarten are selected on unobservables. As described

above, we confront this possibility by comparing children who should have entered

kindergarten with a one-year difference in age, given their birthdays; if birthday is randomly

assigned, these children will be on average identical in all other ways. As shown in Panel B of

the same column, TSLS estimates using expected age at kindergarten entry as an instrument




                                                14
imply that the test-score differential between two otherwise identical children who enter

kindergarten with a one-year difference in age is a significantly higher 0.71σ.22

         These estimates are comparable to those previously found in nationally-

representative data for the U.S. For example, applying a similar identification strategy to data

on a more recent kindergarten cohort, Elder and Lubotsky (2009) find that an additional year

of age at school entry is associated with a 0.87σ difference in math test performance and a

0.61σ difference in reading test performance in the spring of a child’s kindergarten year.23

Like us, Elder and Lubotsky (2009) and Bedard and Dhuey (2006) also find that OLS

estimates of the coefficient on age are significantly lower than their TSLS counterparts,

suggesting that students who are older by actual age (but not predicted age) are negatively

selected. When we estimate similar models for test scores at the end of eighth grade, we also

obtain findings that are quite similar to those previously documented for the U.S.24 Unlike

Bedard and Dhuey (2006), however, we do not find that older school entrants are more

likely to take a college entrance exam.25 In general, however, the consistency of our

estimates with the existing literature suggests the possible broader applicability of inferences

made from our data.


22 First-stage estimates for the specifications in Table 3 are presented in Table A1.
23 When we estimate separate models by subject on our data, we arrive at TSLS estimates (with additional
controls) of 0.69σ and 0.524σ for math and reading, respectively, at the end of kindergarten.
24 In particular, our TSLS estimates imply that a one-year increase in age at school entry is associated with a

0.215σ boost in test scores nine years later – a substantially smaller difference than that observed at the end of
kindergarten – and a 18.9 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being below grade when tested. Elder
and Lubotsky (2009) and Bedard and Dhuey (2006) find math test score differences of approximately 4
percentile points, or roughly 0.13σ, between eighth graders who entered school in the late 1970s with a one-
year difference in age. When we re-estimate the model for actual eighth grade test scores (regardless of year
attended), we find that a one-year difference in entry age is associated with a 0.12σ difference in math test
performance. Elder and Lubotsky (2009) also find that a one-year increase in age at school entry lowers the
likelihood of having been retained by eighth grade by 15.1 percentage points.
25 Bedard and Dhuey (2006) find that being one year older (in eighth grade) raises the probability of taking the

ACT or SAT by 11.1 percentage points. By contrast, we find that being one year older (at the start of
kindergarten) raises the probability of taking the ACT or SAT by only 0.2 percentage points (standard
error=0.024). However, it is important to note that their estimates are for individuals who were in eighth grade
in the same year, not individuals who started kindergarten at the same time, so our estimates may not be strictly
comparable. Our sample also has a higher minority share and is poorer than the national average (Table 1), and
the reduced-form relationship between age and longer-term outcomes may be stronger in a nationally
representative sample.


                                                       15
B.       Full Model Estimates

         As discussed above, the estimates presented in column 1 confound the effects of

absolute age with the effects of relative age. In column 2, we add the average age of a child’s

kindergarten classmates to the column 1 specification; in Panel B, we instrument for this

average using the average expected age of a child’s kindergarten classmates, ea  i ,k . First,

notice that regardless of the method of estimation, the addition of a i ,k to the model

changes the coefficient on age at the start of kindergarten very little. The stability of the own

age coefficient is consistent with random assignment of a child’s kindergarten classmates.

         Second, the TSLS estimate of the effect of having older peers is statistically

significant (Panel B), while the OLS estimate is not (Panel A). The TSLS estimate isolates the

effect of having more mature peers; the OLS estimate conflates the effect of having more

mature peers with the effect of having peers who are of lower innate ability. The estimates

thus imply that having peers who are older but on average the same ability as younger peers

has a greater positive impact on end-of-kindergarten test scores than having peers who are

older but on average lower scoring; said differently, peers who are “overage” for grade

appear to have negative spillovers.26 Consistent with this interpretation, the estimates shown

in column 3, which add controls to the model from column 2, suggest that the OLS estimate

picks up the effects of other peer attributes that might be correlated with delay or retention.

In particular, the OLS coefficient on a i ,k falls by 37 percent (from 0.178 to 0.112), largely

as a result of controlling for the fraction of kindergarten classmates who are black, eligible

for free or reduced-price lunch, or female. By contrast, the TSLS coefficient falls only 14

percent (from 0.847 to 0.724) with the inclusion of controls.

26 Consistent with this idea, Lavy et al. (2012) use the fraction of an individual’s peers who are repeaters or

delayers in grade cohorts of Israeli high schools as a measure of his exposure to lower-ability peers. They find
that higher exposure to low-ability peers, so defined, is associated with lower test scores. When we estimate
similar models at the kindergarten classroom level in Project STAR, we arrive at the same conclusion (results
available on request).


                                                       16
        Finally, as shown in column 2 of Panel B, TSLS estimates of  2 k are statistically

significant and positive (0.847σ). From model 2′, recall that the implied effect of relative age

on test scores at the end of kindergarten (t=k) is   2 k (or -0.847σ), while the effect of

absolute age on test performance is the sum of the coefficients on own and peer average age,

 1k   2k (0.716σ + 0.847σ = 1.563σ). The estimates in column 2 thus imply that the effect

of relative maturity on test performance at the end of kindergarten is negative. On the flip

side, these estimates imply that omission of relative age from model 2 leads to an

understatement of the absolute age effect. Indeed, our TSLS estimates reject the hypothesis

that the relative age effect at the end of kindergarten is positive and also strongly reject the

null hypothesis that the true absolute age effect at the end of kindergarten is zero, or that

 1k   2k . Our findings are thus inconsistent with the interpretation of existing estimates

of reduced-form age effects, such as those presented in column 1, as relative age effects.

        While this might be surprising from the perspective of the literature on (and popular

discussion of) school entry age, our findings of (net) positive spillovers from more mature

classmates are consistent with studies showing that students benefit from exposure to

higher-scoring peers. Indeed, when we use the average expected age of a child’s kindergarten

classmates as an instrument for their average test performance at the end of kindergarten –

instead of their true average age at the start of the year – the TSLS point estimates are in the

middle of the (wide) range of prior estimates in the literature (see Sacerdote 2011, Table 4.2).

        How large is the positive spillover from having more mature kindergarten

classmates? To interpret magnitudes, note that the typical child is unlikely to have the option

of enrolling in a kindergarten classroom where his classmates were a full year older. Indeed,

the standard deviation of a-i,k is only 0.09 years (Table 1). Thus, for the average kindergartner

in our sample, assignment to peers one standard deviation older on average is associated



                                                17
with a 0.076σ improvement in test performance at the end of kindergarten (0.09*0.874σ).

With the inclusion of additional controls (column 3), the effect size falls only slightly to

0.065σ (0.09*0.724σ).

         Panel A of Table 4 presents TSLS estimates of the coefficients on age at the start of

kindergarten and the average age of a child’s kindergarten classmates for later outcomes –

test scores and grade retention eight years after the end of kindergarten, and whether the

respondent took the ACT or SAT. For later test scores (column 1), the TSLS coefficient on

classmate average age is smaller than it was in kindergarten, but is still a marginally significant

0.43σ (implying an effect size of approximately 0.039σ). More mature kindergarten

classmates are also associated a higher likelihood of taking a college-entrance exam and a

lower probability of being below grade, but these results are not significant at conventional

levels. However, the estimates remain precise enough to rule out even small positive effects

of being relatively old.27 We also reject the hypothesis that absolute age has no impact for

most post-kindergarten outcomes, and in the one case where we do not (took ACT or SAT

in column 3), the p-value is 0.103.

C.       Interpretation

         These findings are different than those previously documented for the U.S. by Elder

and Lubotsky (2009), who estimate the effects of having older schoolmates in kindergarten.

They find that having more mature peers at the school level increases the likelihood that a

child will be retained in grade and has effects on end-of-kindergarten and later test scores

that are smaller than those estimated above. What can account for the differences in our

findings?



27 For example, the lower bound on the 95 percent confidence interval on the TSLS coefficient on a  i ,k in
column 3 is -0.032. Applying the same metric for calculating effect sizes as above, we conclude that relative age
is highly unlikely to have truly generated more than a 0.0029 percentage point increase in the probability of
taking a college-entrance exam (0.032*0.09).


                                                       18
         To examine whether estimation of peer effects at the classroom instead of school

level generates the differences in findings across studies, the remaining columns of Table 3

and Panel B of Table 4 present estimates where average age of peers is calculated at the

school level, once again in kindergarten. We omit school fixed effects from these models and

now cluster standard errors at the school, instead of classroom, level. We continue to

instrument for the average age of a child’s kindergarten schoolmates with their average

expected age; we also include a vector of average kindergarten schoolmate characteristics

(fraction female, fraction black, and fraction free lunch) among the additional controls

(column 5 of Table 3, all columns in Table 4). The TSLS coefficients on peer average age

from these models follow the same pattern as those on average kindergarten classmate age.

Though the estimated effect of having more mature schoolmates is systematically larger than

that of having more mature kindergarten classmates, it is impossible for us to rule out that

the effects of more mature peers in kindergarten classrooms drive the effects of more

mature peers at the school level.28

         Thus, a different definition of the relevant peer group is not the factor underlying the

differences between our findings. An alternative explanation, mentioned above, may lie in

our use of different sources of variation in peer average age. We exploit idiosyncratic

variation in birthday distributions across classrooms within schools, while Elder and

Lubotsky combine variation in birthday distributions across schools with differences across

states in school-entry cutoff dates. Thus, Elder and Lubotsky’s estimates might represent the

effects of peers who are more mature because of policy, while ours might represent the

effects of more mature peers holding the policy regime fixed. When peers are more mature


28 We lack sufficient data to estimate the peer effects at the kindergarten school cohort and kindergarten
classroom level simultaneously. Also note that these estimates are not identified using experimental variation,
so should be viewed with caution. Indeed, when we perform the tests in Table 2a substituting the average
expected age of kindergarten schoolmates for the average expected age of kindergarten classmates (and
excluding school fixed effects), average expected age of kindergarten schoolmates is a highly significant
predictor of six observables.


                                                       19
because of school-entry regulations, not because of variation in birthdays, curricula may be

more advanced and expectations of students may be heightened. In this case, any learning

advantages that come from having more mature peers may be counterbalanced if not

overwhelmed by potential for more advanced curricula to draw attention to a relatively

young child’s inability to keep up.29

         Bearing this reduced-form interpretation of our estimates in mind, it is possible that

our models overstate the learning advantages of having older peers – or understate relative

age effects – by focusing on kindergartners, for whom the mechanisms for perpetuating

relative age effects (like ability tracking) are not yet in place. Indeed the goal of kindergarten

has historically been socialization, not the acquisition of academic skills. To examine this

possibility, we re-estimated our models using variation in classroom age distributions in first

grade, when children have historically been first exposed to reading (and ability grouping).30

The estimates (available on request) are broadly consistent with those reported in Table 3

and Table 4; for example, they imply that having older peers (or being relatively young) raises

end of first grade and 1994 test scores and SAT/ACT taking rates and reduces the

probability of subsequent grade retention. However, the positive spillovers of older first

grade classmates are generally smaller than those from having older kindergarten classmates.

VI.      Heterogeneity

         As earlier noted and as the above discussion makes evident,  2t is in practice a

reduced-form parameter. It captures the net result of the competing achievement effects of

being relatively old and of having more mature peers. Our estimates suggest that, on average,

the positive spillovers from more mature peers win out. Thus, while an effect of being


29 Alternatively, Elder and Lubotsky’s estimates may be subject to more attenuation bias from measurement
error than those presented here. They observe only some of a given student’s schoolmates, while we observe all
kindergartners in a given classroom or school. However, this hypothesis cannot explain the sign difference on
our estimates for grade retention.
30 All specification checks that we employed in Tables 2a and 2b pass for the first-grade classroom analysis.




                                                     20
relatively old might exist, it is on average overwhelmed by the benefits of having more

mature classmates.

        A brief analysis of heterogeneity in our estimates helps to further support this

interpretation. The likelihood of delayed school entry is more common for some subgroups

in the population. For example, boys are much more likely to be held back than girls.

Children from higher-income families are also more likely to start kindergarten at an age

older than expected (West, Meek, and Hurst, 2000). Relative age effects may be more

important for these groups. If this is the case, the positive spillovers of having more mature

kindergarten classmates found in the full sample should be less evident – or not evident at all

– for these groups.

        To investigate this possibility, we estimated separate models by gender and free or

reduced-price lunch status in kindergarten. We present the TSLS estimates by gender in

Table 5 and by free lunch status in Table 6. The estimates suggest that being relatively old

may have a greater benefit for boys than for girls and for higher-income children than for

lower-income children. In particular, the positive effects of more mature peers tend to be

larger and more often statistically significant for girls – particularly for test scores and the

ACT/SAT taking rate (Table 5, Panel B) – and for children receiving free or reduced-price

lunch (Table 6, Panel B). The difference in TSLS coefficients on  2t between lower-income

and higher-income children is starker than that between boys and girls, and in the case of

taking the ACT or SAT, it is in fact statistically significant.

        While the estimates are somewhat too imprecise to draw strong conclusions, they are

consistent with the existence of a relative age effect. Yet, even for these boys and higher-

income children, the net effect of exposure to more mature peers is positive.




                                                 21
VII.    Conclusion

        In this paper, we have estimated the net effects of having more mature peers – and

being young relative to one’s peers – using data from an experiment where children of the

same biological age were randomly assigned to different classrooms at the start of school.

We find that children who were young relative to their kindergarten classmates generally

performed no worse on achievement tests, were no more likely to be retained, and were no

less likely to take the ACT or SAT. In fact, having more mature classmates appears to have

made the average child better off, consistent with the broader peer effects literature

documenting the positive spillovers from having higher-scoring peers. We arrive at similar

conclusions when we use a child’s kindergarten schoolmates as a peer group, but the

estimates are less precise. The benefits of having older peers also appear to be weaker for

boys and higher-income children, consistent with the existence of larger relative age effects –

and the higher incidence of delay – among these groups.

        These findings suggest the reduced-form age effects that have frequently been

estimated in the literature on school entry age are better interpreted as absolute age effects

than relative age effects. In other words, while our data do not allow us to determine

whether the age effects reflect differences in developmental trajectories, age at observation,

or true effects of entering school later, there is something about being older in an absolute

sense that drives the observed positive impacts. The driving factor does not appear to be

being one of the oldest in the classroom.

        In practice a parent’s decision to delay a child’s school entry increases his absolute

age but exposes him to younger peers, and we cannot conclusively say whether this decision

will help or harm him on net. We can conclude, however, that one student’s choice to delay

will not harm other children, and may in fact help them.




                                               22
References

Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
        Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey. 2006. “The Persistence of Early Childhood Maturity:
       International Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
       121(4): 1437-1472.

Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey. 2012. “School Entry Policies and Skill Accumulation
       Across Directly and Indirectly Affected Men.” Journal of Human Resources 47(3): 643-
       683.

Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes. 2011. “Too Young to Leave the Nest?
        The Effects of School Starting Age.” Review of Economics and Statistics,93(2): 455-467..

Boozer, Michael A. and Stephen E. Cacciola. 2001. “Inside the ‘Black Box’ of Project STAR:
       Estimation of Peer Effects Using Experimental Data.” Yale University Economic
       Growth Center Working Paper 832.

Carrell, Scott and Mark Hoekstra. 2010. “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
         Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids.” American Economic Journal:
         Applied Economics 2(1): 211-228.

Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ethan G. Lewis. 2006. “Schooling and the Armed Forces
        Qualifying Test: Evidence from School Entry Laws,” The Journal of Human Resources
        41(2): 294-318.

Chetty Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzenbach, and
       Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your
       Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1593-
       1660.

Datar, Ashlesha. 2006. “Does Delaying Kindergarten Entrance Give Children a Head Start?”
       Economics of Education Review 25: 43-62.

Dee, Thomas S. 2004. “Teachers, Race, and Student Achievement in a Randomized
       Experiment.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 195-210.

Dee, Thomas S. and Benjamin J. Keys. 2004. “Does Merit Pay Reward Good Teachers?
       Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
       23(3): 471-488.

Ding, Weili and Steven F. Lehrer. 2007. “Do Peers Affect Student Achievement in China’s
       Secondary Schools?” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2): 300-312.

Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira. 2010. “Do School Entry Laws Affect Educational
      Attainment and Labor Market Outcomes?” Economics of Education Review 29(1): 40-54.




                                               23
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas and Michael Kremer. 2011. “Peer Effects, Teacher
       Incentives, and the Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in
       Kenya.” American Economic Review 101: 1739-1774.

Elder, Todd E. and Darren H. Lubotsky. 2009. “Kindergarten Entrance Age and Children’s
        Achievement: Impacts of State Policies, Family Background, and Peers.” Journal of
        Human Resources 44(3): 641-683.

Figlio, David. 2007. “Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Students and Their Peers.” Education
        Finance and Policy 2(4): 376-94.

Fredrikksson, Peter and Björn Öckert. 2006. “Is Early Learning Really More Productive?
       The Effect of School Starting Age on School and Labor Market Performance.”
       IFAU Working Paper 2006:12. Uppsala: Institute for Labour Market Policy
       Evaluation.

Gootman, Elissa. 2006. “Preschoolers Grow Older as Parents Seek an Edge.” The New York
     Times (October 19, 2006).

Gormley, William T. and Ted Gayer. 2005. “Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma: An
      Evaluation of Tulsa’s Pre-K Program.” The Journal of Human Resources 40(3): 533-558.

Graham, Bryan S. 2008. “Identifying Social Interactions through Conditional Variance
      Restrictions.” Econometrica 76(3): 643-660.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman and Steven G. Rivkin. 2003. “Does
      Peer Ability Affect Student Achievement?” Journal of Applied Economics 18: 522-544.

Krueger, Alan B. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2): 497-532.

Krueger, Alan B. and Diane M. Whitmore. 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small Class in
      the Early Grades on College Test-Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence
      from Project STAR,” The Economic Journal 111: 1-28.

Kugler, Adriana, Scott Imberman, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2012. “Katrina’s Children: Evidence
        on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees.” American Economic
        Review, forthcoming.

Lavy, Victor, M. Daniele Paserman, and Analia Schlosser. 2012. “Inside the Black Box of
       Ability Peer Effects: Evidence from Variation in the Proportion of Low Achievers in
       the Classroom.” The Economic Journal 122(559): 208-237.

McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2011. “The Effect of Maternal Education on Fertility
      and Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth.”
      American Economic Review 101(1): 158-195.

McEwan, Patrick and Joseph Shapiro. 2008. “The Benefits of Delayed Primary School
     Enrollment: Discontinuity Estimates using Exact Birth Dates.” The Journal of Human
     Resources 43(1): 1-29.


                                            24
Puhani, Patrick A. and Andrea M. Weber. 2005. “Does the Early Bird Catch the Worm?
       Instrumental Variable Estimates of Educational Effects of Age at School Entry in
       Germany.” IZA Discussion Paper 2005. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2011. “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big are
       They, and How Much Do We Know Thus Far?” in Hanushek, Eric A., Stephen
       Machin and Ludger Woessman, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Education, North
       Holland: Elsevier.

Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore. 2006. “Classroom Gender Composition and Student
       Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Mimeo, University of
       Chicago.

Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore. 2007. “What Have Researchers Learned From Project
       STAR?” Brookings Papers on Education Policy, 2006/07, pp. 205-228.

Weil, Elizabeth. 2007. “When Should a Kid Start Kindergarten?” The New York Times
        Magazine. (June 3, 2007).

West, Jerry, Anne Meek, and David Hurst. 2000. “Children Who Enter Kindergarten Late
        or Repeat Kindergarten: Their Characteristics and Later School Performance.”
        NCES 2000-039. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

Whitmore, Diane M. 2005. “Resource and Peer Impacts on Girls’ Academic Achievement:
      Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” American Economic Review 95(2): 199-203.




                                            25
   Figure 1. Expected and Average Kindergarten Entry Age by Birthday
                               Project STAR Kindergarten Cohort
6.15
                                           expected entry age
                                           average entry age
5.9
5.65
5.4
5.15
4.9




       Jan 1              Apr 1                  Aug 1                   Oct 1                  Dec 31
                                                Birthday


Notes: Figure plots the age at which Project STAR participants born on each day of the calendar year
would have been expected to enter kindergarten, given Tennessee’s regulation that entering
kindergartners must be aged five by September 30 (darkened circles). Figure also plots the average age
of Project STAR participants on September 1, 1985 (hollow circles).




                                                  26
                  Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics for Project STAR Kindergarten Cohort

                                                                                  Standard
                                                                    Mean          deviation          N
                                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)

A. Age variables
  Expected age at the start of kindergarten                          5.38            0.28           6248
  Age in at the start of kindergarten                                5.43            0.35           6248
  Average expected age of kindergarten classmates                    5.38            0.07           6248
  Average age of kindergarten classmates                             5.43            0.09           6248

B. Demographic/SES variables
  Female                                                             0.49             -             6248
  Black                                                              0.33             -             6248
  Free/reduced-price lunch (in kindergarten)                         0.49             -             6248

C. Other characteristics of kindergarten classmates
  Fraction Female                                                    0.49            0.12           6248
  Fraction Black                                                     0.33            0.41           6248
  Fraction Free/Reduced-Price Lunch (in K)                           0.49            0.28           6248

D. Kindergarten teacher characteristics
  Black                                                              0.17             -             6248
  Has MA                                                             0.35             -             6248
  Has <2 Years Experience                                            0.10             -             6248

E. Kindergarten class characteristics
  Small                                                              0.30             -             6248
  Regular with Aide                                                  0.35             -             6248

F. Outcome variables
  Standardardized test score, end of kindergarten                    0.00            1.00           5719
  Standardardized test score, 8 years later                          0.12            0.99           4436
  Ever retained, 8 years later                                       0.25              -            4508
  Took ACT/SAT                                                       0.47              -            6248

Notes: Sample includes individuals with non-missing demographic/SES variables, kindergarten
classmate characteristics, kindergarten teacher characteristics, and kindergarten class characteristics. See
text for more details.




                                                      27
               Table 2a - Predictive Power of Instrumental Variables for Background Characteristics

                                                              Coefficient (standard error) on:
                                                                                  Expected
                                                             Expected age at average age of K          P on joint
                                                               start of K         classmates          significance
Dependent variable:                                                (1)                (2)                  (3)

Demographic/SES variables
 Female                                                            0.013           -0.013                0.826
                                                                  (0.022)          (0.095)
  Black                                                            0.007            0.019                0.732
                                                                  (0.010)          (0.041)
  Free/reduced-price lunch (in kindergarten)                    -0.054 ***         -0.077                0.018
                                                                  (0.019)          (0.092)
Other characteristics of kindergarten classmates
  Fraction female                                                -0.002            -0.024                0.878
                                                                 (0.005)           (0.091)
  Fraction black                                                  0.001             0.02                 0.885
                                                                 (0.002)           (0.040)
  Fraction free/reduced-price lunch (in kindergarten)            -0.004            -0.127                0.028
                                                                 (0.005)           (0.091)
Kindergarten teacher characteristics
  Black                                                          -0.018            -0.315                0.096
                                                                 (0.012)           (0.220)
  Has MA                                                         -0.016            -0.303                0.616
                                                                 (0.019)           (0.352)
  Has <2 years experience                                        -0.003            -0.047                0.781
                                                                 (0.015)           (0.274)
Kindergarten class characteristics
  Small                                                           0.032             0.562                0.226
                                                                 (0.024)           (0.440)
  Regular with aide                                               0.009             0.127                0.296
                                                                 (0.024)           (0.435)

Notes: Each row represents a different regression. All regressions are based on 6248 observations and
include school fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on kindergarten classroom. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                        28
          Table 2b - Predictive Power of Instrumental Variables for Observation of Dependent Variables

                                                                Coefficient (standard error) on:
                                                                                    Expected
                                                               Expected age at average age of K         P on joint
                                                                 start of K         classmates         significance
Dependent variable is dummy=1 if observed:                           (1)                (2)                 (3)

Standardardized test score, end of kindergarten                      0.009              0.073             0.376
                                                                    (0.012)            (0.061)
Standardardized test score, 8 years later                            0.031             -0.033             0.293
                                                                    (0.020)            (0.075)
Ever retained, 8 years later                                         0.031             -0.019             0.297
                                                                    (0.020)            (0.075)

Notes: Each row represents a different regression. All regressions are based on 6248 observations and include
school fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on kindergarten classroom. ***, **, and * represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                         29
                  Table 3 - Estimated Effects of Entry Age and Peer Average Entry Age on
                                   Test Scores at the End of Kindergarten

                                                             Dependent Variable:
                                                  Average Test Score, End of K (Standardized)
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)

                                                            A. Ordinary Least Squares

Age at start of kindergarten            0.242***      0.244***      0.283***    0.250***    0.277***
                                         (0.038)       (0.039)       (0.037)     (0.045)     (0.038)
Average age of peers:
  in kindergarten classroom                             0.178         0.112
                                                       (0.267)       (0.251)

   in kindergarten school cohort                                                  0.907         -0.258
                                                                                 (0.871)        (0.767)

R-squared                                 0.23            0.23       0.30         0.01          0.12
Root MSE                                  0.885           0.885      0.844        0.997         0.942
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers                        0.129      0.133        0.194         0.981

                                                           B. Two-Stage Least Squares†

Age at start of kindergarten            0.707***      0.716***      0.683***    0.732***    0.699***
                                         (0.057)       (0.058)       (0.055)     (0.061)     (0.057)
Average age of peers:
  in kindergarten classroom                            0.847**       0.724*
                                                       (0.407)       (0.374)

   in kindergarten school cohort                                                 2.538*          2.314
                                                                                 (1.351)        (1.531)

Root MSE                                  0.900         0.901         0.856       1.017         0.963
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers                     0.0003        0.0004       0.021         0.057

Observations                              5,719           5,719      5,719        5,719         5,719
Controls‡?                                  N               N          Y            N             Y
School fixed effects?                       Y               Y          Y            N             N

Notes: Each column and panel of the table presents estimates from a different regression. The
dependent variable in all regressions is the standardized average of reading and math Stanford
Achievement Test scores at the end of kindergarten. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on
kindergarten classroom in columns 1 to 3 and on school attended in kindergarten in columns 4 and 5.
***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
† The instrument for a child's age at the start of kindergarten is his expected age given his birthday
and the September 30th kindergarten entry cutoff birthdate in Tennessee. The instrument for the
average age of child's peers is their average expected age.
‡ Dummies for whether child is female, black, or received free/reduced-price lunch in K; fractions of
K classmates with these characteristics; whether the kindergarten teacher is black, has an MA, or has 0
to 1 years of experience; and dummies for whether kindergarten class is small or regular sized with
teacher's aide. The specifications in column 5 also include the fractions of a child's schoolmates in
kindergarten who were female, black, or received free or reduced-price lunch.




                                                     30
   Table 4 - TSLS Estimates of the Effects of Entry Age and Peer Average Entry Age on Later
                                           Outcomes

                                                             Dependent Variable:
                                                     Eight Years Later:
                                                              Retained in Any Took ACT or
                                               Average Score       Grade         SAT
                                                    (1)              (2)          (3)

                                                  A. Entry Age + Classroom Level Peer Effect

Age at start of kindergarten                      0.221 ***         -0.191 ***            0.004
                                                   (0.065)            (0.026)            (0.024)
Average age of peers in K classroom                0.430 *            -0.136              0.172
                                                   (0.248)            (0.115)            (0.106)

Root MSE                                            0.890              0.405              0.465
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers                  0.010              0.006              0.103

                                                    B. Entry Age + School Level Peer Effect

Age at start of kindergarten                      0.225***           -0.192***            0.004
                                                   (0.069)            (0.025)            (0.027)
Average age of peers in K school cohort             0.789              -0.459             0.205
                                                   (0.630)            (0.316)            (0.279)

Root MSE                                            0.902             0.413               0.469
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers                  0.116             0.0431              0.456

Observations                                        4,436              4,508              6,248

Notes: Each column and panel of the table presents estimates from a different regression. All
models are estimated using two-stage least squares. The specification in Panel A is the same as
that in Table 3 column 3. The specification in Panel B is the same as that in Table 3 column 5.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on kindergarten classroom in Panel A and on
school attended in kindergarten in Panel B. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                 31
          Table 5 - TSLS Estimates of the Effects of Entry Age and Peer Average Entry Age, by Gender

                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                                                  Eight Years Later:
                                         Average Score                     Retained in Any       Took ACT or
                                           End of K         Average Score       Grade               SAT
                                              (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)

                                                                         A. Male

Age at start of kindergarten                0.645***          0.343***             -0.279***         0.059
                                             (0.073)           (0.101)              (0.042)         (0.038)
Average age of peers in K classroom           0.627             0.190                -0.154         -0.003
                                             (0.459)           (0.381)              (0.162)         (0.142)

Root MSE                                     0.843              0.978               0.445            0.463
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers           0.009              0.174               0.009            0.693
Observations                                 2,936              2,191               2,234            3,213

                                                                        B. Female

Age at start of kindergarten                0.708***            0.122              -0.115***         -0.048
                                             (0.077)           (0.075)              (0.034)         (0.033)
Average age of peers in K classroom         0.824**            0.613**               -0.062         0.331**
                                             (0.407)           (0.308)              (0.152)         (0.160)

Root MSE                                     0.868              0.799               0.362            0.468
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers           0.000              0.019               0.250            0.079
Observations                                 2,783              2,245               2,274            3,035

P for age: αmale = αfemale                   0.000              0.007               0.000            0.046
P for average age: αmale = αfemale           0.586              0.771               0.482            0.290

Notes: Each column and panel of the table presents estimates from a different regression. All models are
estimated using two-stage least squares and are based on the specification presented in Table 3, column 3.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on kindergarten classroom. ***, **, and * represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                       32
                 Table 6 - TSLS Estimates of the Effects of Entry Age and Peer Average Entry Age,
                               by Free/Reduced-Price Lunch Status in Kindergarten

                                                                  Dependent Variable:
                                                                   Eight Years Later:
                                          Average Score                     Retained in Any      Took ACT or
                                            End of K         Average Score       Grade              SAT
                                               (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)

                                                          A. Not Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Age at start of kindergarten                 0.773***          0.231***         -0.188***            0.029
                                              (0.081)           (0.086)          (0.034)            (0.036)
Average age of peers in K classroom            0.555             0.267            0.003             -0.003
                                              (0.413)           (0.297)          (0.124)            (0.154)

Root MSE                                      0.892              0.850            0.347              0.473
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers            0.002              0.097            0.151              0.870
Observations                                  2,951              2,398            2,420              3,217

                                                              B. Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Age at start of kindergarten                 0.601***           0.186*          -0.193***            -0.000
                                              (0.075)           (0.095)          (0.043)            (0.038)
Average age of peers in K classroom           0.900*             0.429            -0.318            0.345**
                                              (0.494)           (0.459)          (0.205)            (0.150)

Root MSE                                      0.805              0.925            0.461              0.454
P : αage = - αaverage age of peers            0.005              0.193            0.013              0.026
Observations                                  2,768              2,038            2,088              3,031

P for age: αlunch = αno lunch                 0.012              0.487            0.034              0.730
P for average age: αlunch = αno lunch         0.183              0.549            0.127              0.043

Notes: Each column and panel of the table presents estimates from a different regression. All models are
estimated using two-stage least squares and are based on the specification presented in Table 3, column 3.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on kindergarten classroom. ***, **, and * represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                        33
                                   Table A1 - First-Stage Estimates for Table 3 TSLS Models

                                                               (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)

                                                                        A. Dependent variable: Age at start of K

Expected age at start of K                                  0.812***       0.813***    0.816***     0.816***       0.818***
                                                             (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.016)        (0.016)
Average expected age peers in K classroom                                    0.067       0.062
                                                                            (0.052)     (0.051)
Average expected age of peers in K school cohort                                                      0.225         0.099
                                                                                                     (0.195)       (0.186)

Partial F -stat on instrument(s)                              2916          1506         1523        1334           1298
Observations                                                  5,719         5,719        5,719       5,719          5,719

                                                                      B. Dependent variable: Average Age of Peers

Expected age at start of K                                                   0.001       0.001       0.005*         0.003
                                                                            (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.002)
Average expected age peers in K classroom                                  0.855***    0.855***
                                                                            (0.050)     (0.050)
Average expected age of peers in K school cohort                                                    1.104***       0.953***
                                                                                                     (0.183)        (0.174)

Partial F -stat on instrument(s)                                            1075         1087        107.7          154.2
Observations                                                                5,719        5,719       5,719          5,719

Controls‡?                                                     N              N            Y           N              Y
School fixed effects?                                          Y              Y            Y           N              N

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on kindergarten classroom in columns 1 to 3 and on school
attended in kindergarten in columns 4 and 5. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.
‡ Dummies for whether child is female, black, or received free/reduced-price lunch in K; fractions of K classmates with
these characteristics; whether the kindergarten teacher is black, has an MA, or has 0 to 1 years of experience; and
dummies for whether kindergarten class is small or regular sized with teacher's aide. The specifications in column 5 also
include the fractions of a child's schoolmates in kindergarten who were female, black, or received free or reduced-price
lunch.




                                                             34
