                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LABOR OUTFLOWS AND LABOR INFLOWS IN PUERTO RICO

                                           George J. Borjas

                                        Working Paper 13669
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13669


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




I am grateful to Gary Becker, Mark Bils, Isaac Ehrlich, Gordon Hanson, Petra Todd, and two referees
for helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper, to Trent Alexander of the Minnesota Population
Center for generously supplying the Puerto Rican census microdata files, and to Jason Richwine for
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Labor Outflows and Labor Inflows in Puerto Rico
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 13669
December 2007
JEL No. J60,J61

                                            ABSTRACT

Although a sizable fraction of the Puerto Rican-born population moved to the United States, the island
also received large inflows of persons born outside Puerto Rico. Hence Puerto Rico provides a unique
setting for examining how labor inflows and outflows coexist, and measuring the mirror-image wage
impact of these flows. The study yields two findings. First, the skills of the out-migrants differ from
those of the in-migrants. Puerto Rico attracts high-skill in-migrants and exports low-skill workers.
Second, the two flows have opposing effects on wages: in-migrants lower the wage of competing workers
and out-migrants increase the wage.


George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
                                                          2


       LABOR OUTFLOWS AND LABOR INFLOWS IN PUERTO RICO

                                              George J. Borjas*


                              BERNARDO: I think I'll go back to San Juan
                              ANITA: I know a boat you can get on
                              BERNARDO: Everyone there will give big cheer
                              ANITA: Everyone there will have moved here
                                                ⎯Stephen Sondheim, West Side Story


I. Introduction

         In the landmark article that placed migration decisions firmly within the context of the

nascent human capital framework, Larry Sjaastad (1962, pp. 81-82) wrote:1



         Migration poses two broad and distinct questions for the economist. The first, and

         the one which has received the major attention, concerns the direction and

         magnitude of the response of migrants to labor earnings differentials over space.

         The second question pertains to the connection between migration and those

         earnings, that is, how effective is migration in equalizing inter-regional earnings

         of comparable labor? The latter question has received much less attention than the

         latter. It is also the more difficult of the two.




         * Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy at the John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University; and Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research. I am
grateful to Gary Becker, Mark Bils, Isaac Ehrlich, Gordon Hanson, Petra Todd, and two referees for helpful
comments on a previous draft of this paper, to Trent Alexander of the Minnesota Population Center for generously
supplying the Puerto Rican census microdata files, and to Jason Richwine for research assistance.

         1 The hypothesis that migration is determined by regional wage differences dates back at least to Hicks. In
The Theory of Wages (1932, p. 76), Hicks argued that “differences in net economic advantages, chiefly differences
in wages, are the main causes of migration.”
                                                  3


         These two questions have, in fact, dominated the study of regional labor flows over the

past half-century. Much of the internal migration literature in the United States documents how

regional wage differentials determine the size and direction of the migrant stream (Greenwood,

1997). In contrast, an important part of the international migration literature focuses on the latter

question: measuring the impact of immigrants on the receiving country’s wage structure

(Friedberg and Hunt, 1995). The textbook model of a competitive labor market has clear and

unambiguous implications about how wages and employment opportunities in a particular region

should adjust to migration-induced labor supply shifts, at least in the short run. In particular,

labor inflows should lower the wage of competing workers, while labor outflows should increase

the wage. The prediction that inter-regional labor flows help to equalize wages between sending

and receiving areas gives migration a central role in any discussion of labor market equilibrium

and efficiency (Blanchard and Katz, 1992).

         Despite the common-sense intuition behind these implications of the laws of supply and

demand, the international migration literature has found it difficult to document the predicted

inverse relation between immigration-induced supply increases and wages in receiving countries.

It turns out that the nature of the empirical exercise used to measure the wage impact determines

the outcome: Studies that relate wage differences across cities to immigration-induced labor

supply shocks tend to find little impact (Card, 1991, 2005), while studies that examine the link

between immigration and the evolution of the national wage structure find larger effects (Borjas,

2003).
                                                         4


         This paper examines the determinants and consequences of migration flows in Puerto

Rico.2 These migration flows are of interest for at least two reasons. First, Puerto Rico, with a

land area of 8,959 km2 and 3.9 million inhabitants, is smaller than Los Angeles County (which

has a land mass of 10,518 km2 and a population of 9.8 million). In Puerto Rico, the local labor

market is the national labor market. As a result, one can avoid the technical uncertainty that

plagues the existing literature about how to best measure the labor market impact of

immigration.

         Secondly, even though a sizable fraction of the Puerto Rican-born population moved to

the United States in the past few decades, the island was concurrently the recipient of large

inflows of persons born outside Puerto Rico.3 The Puerto Rican context, therefore, provides a

unique setting that should allow us to: (a) examine the economic factors that permit sizable labor

inflows and labor outflows to coexist; and (b) observe the predicted mirror-image impact of these

labor flows on the Puerto Rican wage structure.

         The simultaneous presence of the two opposing flows creates obvious problems for the

income-maximizing model of migration, since labor should presumably flow only in the

direction of the highest-paying area. It is easy to reconcile two-way flows, however, if different

regions offer differential rewards for different types of human capital, and if the opposing labor

flows are composed of different types of people.4 The Puerto Rican experience, in principle,

allows an empirical test of these theoretical implications.



         2
         Recent studies of the Puerto Rican labor market include Davis and Rivera-Batiz (2005) and Enchautegui
and Freeman (2005).

         3
         More precisely, this labor inflow is not composed of Puerto Ricans who had left the island and
subsequently decided to return.

         4
         A two-way flow of migrants and return migrants could be rationalized within the income-maximizing
framework if the initial migration was the result of misinformation about the economic opportunities available in the
                                                            5


         Similarly, the concurrent movement of large numbers of workers into and out of Puerto

Rico makes the island an inimitable setting for observing how labor flows alter labor market

conditions. In most geographic settings that have been analyzed, the countries are either the

source of immigrants (as in Mexico), or the recipients of immigrants (as in Canada and the

United States). Since labor inflows should reduce the relative wage of competing workers and

labor outflows should increase those relative wages, the Puerto Rican experience offers a rare

opportunity to determine if relative wages in a particular labor market exhibit this mirror-image

response to the two types of labor flows.

         The study uses data drawn from the microdata samples of the 1970-2000 Puerto Rican

and U.S. Censuses. The empirical analysis yields two important findings—addressing the two

distinct questions Sjaastad posed nearly half a century ago. First, the income-maximization

hypothesis can help us understand the coexistence of large labor inflows and labor outflows. The

human capital of persons who move from Puerto Rico to the United States differs strikingly from

the human capital of persons who migrate into Puerto Rico. Because the Puerto Rican wage

structure offers relatively high rewards to skills, the island attracts relatively high-skill in-

migrants and exports relatively low-skill workers. Secondly, the opposing labor flows do have

opposing effects on the wage structure. As predicted by the laws of supply and demand, in-

migration lowers the wage of competing workers in the Puerto Rican labor market, while out-

migration increases the wage. The wage impact of these labor flows is roughly comparable to

that estimated in other countries: a 10 percentage point migrant-induced shift in supply leads to

an opposite-signed change of 2 to 4 percent in the wage of competing Puerto Rican workers.




destination, or if the initial migration was used as a “stepping-stone” to acquire skills that are valuable in the source
labor market. It is also possible that migration flows respond to differences in amenities across areas, and that the
                                                            6


II. The Setting and the Data

         It is instructive to begin by briefly summarizing the history of migration flows in and out

of Puerto Rico.5 The island became a possession of the United States after the Spanish-American

war in 1898. The Jones Act of 1917 granted U.S. citizenship to all Puerto Ricans, implying that

Puerto Ricans could move freely to the United States without the legal restrictions facing

immigrants from foreign countries.

         Despite the absence of legal restrictions, there was relatively little out-migration until

after World War II. High unemployment in postwar Puerto Rico and the introduction of low-cost

air travel (the six-hour flight from San Juan to New York City cost less than $50) sparked the

initial out-migration. In 1940 only 59.0 thousand Puerto Ricans lived in the United States; by

1950 there were 225.9 thousand, and by 1960 there were 626.9 thousand. Most Puerto Rican out-

migrants chose to settle in New York City. In 1970, for instance, 68.9 percent of the Puerto

Rican-born population in the United States lived in the New York metropolitan area.

         Using Census data that will be described in more detail below, Figure 1 illustrates the

trend in the out-migrant share between 1940 and 2000. The out-migrant share is defined as the

ratio of the number of Puerto Rican persons living in the United States to the potential Puerto

Rican population (in other words, the denominator is the sum of the out-migrants and the total

population of Puerto Rico). In 1940, the out-migrant share was 3.1 percent. By 1950, the out-

migrant share stood at almost 10 percent, and then rose even more rapidly to 21.1 percent by

1960. In view of the very short time frame in which this remarkable exodus occurred, it is not

surprising that Stephen Sondheim had one of the key characters in the 1961 movie version of



optimal sorting of persons across areas reflects heterogeneity in preferences.

         5   See Fitzpatrick (1980) for a more detailed history of Puerto Rican migration to the United States.
                                                           7


West Side Story predict that the island would soon empty out. Anita was wrong, however. The

outflow of Puerto Ricans to the United States slowed down greatly in the 1960s. As a result, the

out-migrant share rose only slightly until about 1990, when the outflow seemingly began to

accelerate again.

         Return migration is relatively common among the Puerto Rican out-migrants (Hernandez,

1967; Ramos, 1992; Enchautegui, 1993; Muschkin, 1993). In 1990, 11.9 percent of the Puerto

Rican-born adults enumerated by the Puerto Rican census reported they had resided in the United

States at some point during the past decade.6 The out-migrant share illustrated in Figure 1 is the

net outcome of the two-way flows between Puerto Rico and the United States for the Puerto

Rican-born population.

         In addition to the outflow and return migration of native-born Puerto Ricans, there is an

additional labor flow that has received much less attention and that could have a substantial

economic impact. In particular, concurrently with the sizable (net) out-migration of Puerto

Rican-born persons, there has also been a sizable in-migration of persons not born in Puerto

Rico. In other words, Puerto Rico is an important recipient of immigrants.

         Since 1970, the Puerto Rican census microdata reports if a person residing in the island

was born outside Puerto Rico. Figure 1 also illustrates the out-migrant and in-migrant shares

defined in terms of the native-born Puerto Rican population.7 It is evident that this measure of


         6 Unfortunately, it is not possible to construct a consistent time series of the rate of return migration. The
1970 Puerto Rican census reports whether a person lived in the United States for at least six months during the past
five years; the 1990 census reports whether a person lived in the United States at some point between 1980 and
1990; and the 1980 and 2000 censuses report where a person lived five years prior to the census. In 1970, 13.5
percent of adult (aged 18-64) native-born Puerto Ricans are return migrants; in 1980, 4.0 percent are return
migrants; and in 2000, 2.7 percent.

         7 More precisely, the out-migrant share is now defined as the ratio of the number of out-migrants to the
sum of the number of out-migrants and the native-born Puerto Rican population, while the in-migrant share is
defined as the ratio of in-migrants to the sum of the number of in-migrants and the native-born Puerto Rican
population.
                                                         8


the out-migrant share is a little larger than the population-based share; by 2000, nearly 30 percent

of the population of persons born in Puerto Rico resided in the United States. At the same time,

the in-migrant share hovers around 10 percent, so that Puerto Rico had an immigrant influx that

was proportionately similar to that entering the United States.

        Table 1 shows that three national origin groups dominate the in-migrant population in

Puerto Rico: persons born in the United States, persons born in Cuba, and persons born in the

Dominican Republic. In 1970, almost 10 percent of the immigrants were born in Cuba, and less

than 5 percent were born in the Dominican Republic. The pre-1970 Cuban influx can be directly

linked to the communist takeover of Cuba, which led to a sizable refugee flow into both the

United States and Puerto Rico. Over time, the demographic importance of Cuban immigrants in

Puerto Rico diminished. By 2000, only 5.5 percent of the in-migrants were born in Cuba, but

17.1 percent were born in the Dominican Republic. The bulk of the remaining immigrants were

born in the United States. Together, these three countries account for 90 percent or more of the

foreign-born population in Puerto Rico.

        The ancestry of the population of U.S. born persons migrating to Puerto Rico is

composed mainly of Americans who have some type of Puerto Rican ancestry (although the

information indicating Puerto Rican ancestry is not defined consistently across Censuses). In

1970, about half of the U.S.-born immigrants in Puerto Rico had Puerto Rican ancestry. By the

1990s, the statistic was between 80 and 90 percent.8

        Despite the numerical importance of the in-migrant influx into Puerto Rico, it is worth

emphasizing that out-migration was far larger. In 2000, the in-migrant share stood at 9.4 percent,


        8  The Hispanic origin variable in the U.S. Census provides information on whether a person has Hispanic
ancestry as well as their national origin background. The Hispanic origin information is roughly comparable in the
1980, 1990, and 2000 censuses. The anomalous lower rate of Puerto Rican ancestry for the 1970 sample of U.S.-
born in-migrants is probably due to the different definition of Hispanic origin in that Census.
                                                 9


while 29.4 percent of the Puerto Rican-born population lived in the United States. As a result,

there has been a substantial net population outflow from the island. The net migrant share (i.e.,

the difference between in-migration and out-migration) has been on the order of a negative 15 to

20 percent over much of the last few decades. In other words, the various labor flows have

reduced the size of the Puerto Rican population by around 20 percent.

          Not surprisingly, this sizable net labor outflow has been accompanied by convergence in

per-capita incomes between the Puerto Rico and the United States. Figure 2 shows the trend in

the ratio of (international prices adjusted) per-capita GDP in the two countries. Relative Puerto

Rican per-capita GDP almost doubled, from 21 percent to 37 percent, between 1950 and 1965,

during the time that the out-migration flow to the United States was at its peak. Since the 1960s,

relative incomes in Puerto Rico have continued to rise. By 2003, relatively per capita GDP in

Puerto Rico stood at 66 percent.

          This paper uses data drawn from microdata Census files available for both Puerto Rico

and the United States. I use all of the available data files from the 1970-2000 Puerto Rican

Censuses. The 1970 file represents a 3 percent sample of the Puerto Rican population, while all

the other files represent a 5 percent sample. The parallel analysis of the U.S. data uses the 1970-

2000 Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS) of the decennial Census. As in Puerto

Rico, the 1970 file represents a 3 percent sample, and the 1980 through 2000 files represent a 5

percent sample. The empirical analysis is restricted to men who participate in the labor force.

The Data Appendix describes the construction of the various sample extracts and variables in

detail.

          When analyzing the Puerto Rican census data, I classify workers into two main

categories: those born in Puerto Rico and those born outside Puerto Rico. The persons born
                                                  10


outside Puerto Rico are the “in-migrants.” The persons born in Puerto Rico and enumerated by

the Puerto Rican census are the “stayers”—the group of Puerto Ricans who chose not to move to

the United States.

       The Puerto Rican census does not enumerate the Puerto Rican-born persons who moved

to the United States and chose to stay there. These out-migrants, however, are enumerated by the

U.S. census. Hence a joint analysis of the Puerto Rican and U.S. census data provides

information about the size and composition of the (net) out-migrant population. Using the place-

of-birth information in the U.S. census, I define anyone born in Puerto Rico and enumerated by

the U.S. census as a Puerto Rican out-migrant. It is worth emphasizing that the out-migrants

captured by the U.S. census tend to be persons for whom the move was relatively permanent.

Out-migrants who have already returned to Puerto Rico are not part of this population and are

included in the sample of Puerto Rican stayers.

       Since the economic impact of labor flows will depend on the skill composition of the

various populations, I classify workers in each of these three groups (i.e., the stayers, the out-

migrants, and the in-migrants) into various skill categories. As in Borjas (2003), skill groups are

defined in terms of both educational attainment and years of labor market experience.

       The distribution of educational attainment in Puerto Rico differs significantly from that of

the United States in two important ways. First, high school dropouts make up a much larger

fraction of the Puerto Rican workforce. In 1970, the proportion of high school dropouts among

working men was 62.7 for Puerto Rico-born persons enumerated in the Puerto Rican Census and

37.6 percent for U.S.-born persons enumerated in the U.S. Census. Even by 2000, the respective

statistics were 19.3 and 8.2 percent.
                                                         11


         Second, the typical high school dropout in Puerto Rico has much less schooling than the

typical high school dropout in the United States. Consider, for instance, the number of high

school dropouts who have 8 or fewer years of schooling. In 1970, 71.9 percent of the high-school

dropouts enumerated in the Puerto Rican census had this very low level of schooling. Even by

2000, 50.7 percent of high school dropouts had fewer than 8 years of schooling. It is rarer to find

persons with fewer than 8 years of schooling in the population of (U.S.-born) high school

dropouts in the United States: the respective statistics are 46.3 percent for 1970 and 20.8 percent

for 2000.

         To account for the notable skewing at the bottom end of the Puerto Rican education

distribution, I use five categories to define the education groups: (1) high school dropouts with 8

or fewer years of schooling; (2) high school dropouts with 9 to 11 years of schooling; (3) high

school graduates (workers who have exactly 12 years of schooling); (4) workers who have some

college (13 to 15 years of schooling); and (5) college graduates (workers who have at least 16

years of schooling).

         I also classify workers into a particular years-of-experience cohort by using potential

years of experience, roughly defined by Age – Years of Education – 6. I assume that age of entry

into the labor market is 14 for high school dropouts with less than 8 years of schooling, 16 for

high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling, 18 for high school graduates, 21 for persons

with some college, 23 for college graduates, and then calculate years of experience accordingly.9

The analysis is restricted to men who have between 1 and 40 years of experience. Workers are

aggregated into ten-year experience groupings (i.e., 1 to 10 years of experience, 11 to 20 years,



         9Because of the assumed age-of-entry for the various education groups, I restrict the analysis to workers
aged 14-64. I experimented with alternative assumptions (e.g., all high school dropouts enter the labor market at age
16) and the results are similar to those reported below.
                                                            12


and so on) to capture the notion that workers who have roughly similar years of experience are

more likely to affect each other’s labor market opportunities than workers who differ

significantly in their work experience. It may be preferable to define narrower experience bands

(e.g., five-year intervals), but even the 5 percent Puerto Rican censuses have relatively few

observations.10 The creation of very narrow skill categories would generate much greater

measurement error when calculating mean outcomes within cells.

        The cells corresponding to educational attainment (i), years of work experience (j), and

calendar year (t) define a skill group at a point in time. Let Nij(t) give the number of Puerto Rican

stayers (i.e., the number of Puerto Rican-born persons enumerated by the Puerto Rican census) in

the (i, j, t) cell; Mij(t) be the corresponding number of in-migrants in Puerto Rico; and Xij(t) be

the corresponding number of Puerto Ricans who out-migrated to the United States. Define:



                                    M ij (t)
(1)               pij (t) =                             ,
                              M ij (t) + N ij (t)

                                   X ij (t)
(2)               qij (t) =                         .
                              X ij (t) + N ij (t)




The variable pij(t) gives the in-migrant share in the Puerto Rican workforce (i.e., the fraction of

the Puerto Rican workforce that was born outside Puerto Rico), while qij(t) gives the out-migrant

share (i.e., the fraction of the Puerto Rican-born workforce that lives in the United States). For




        10 The total number of working men (with positive earnings) enumerated in each of the Puerto Rican
Censuses is as follows: 10,438 in 1970; 16,763 in 1980; 23,029 in 1990; and 24,313 in 2000. The average cell size
in each education-experience group is 522 in 1970, 838 in 1980, 1,151 in 1990, and 1,216 in 2000.
                                                 13


expositional convenience, I initially use the convention of defining both the in-migrant and the

out-migrant shares as positive numbers.

       Figure 3 shows the trends in the estimated in-migration and out-migration shares defined

by equations (1) and (2) and estimated in the sample of working men. Note that the in-migrant

and out-migrant shares estimated in this sample are far larger than the corresponding population

shares illustrated in Figure 1. For example, the out-migrant share in 2000 for the Puerto Rican

population was 29.4 percent, as compared to an out-migrant share of 38.6 percent for working

men. Similarly, the in-migrant share in the sample of working men (13.6 percent in 2000) is

much higher than the corresponding share in the Puerto Rican population (9.4 percent). In fact,

the in-migrant share in the Puerto Rican workforce is very similar to the immigrant share in the

U.S. workforce. In 2000, 14.7 percent of working men in the United States were foreign-born.

Put differently, the stylized perception of Puerto Rico as a region that has lost a large fraction of

its potential workforce to the United States is correct, but incomplete. Immigrants play as large a

role in Puerto Rico as they do in the United States.




III. Labor Flows by Skill

       This section documents how the structure of out-migration and in-migration differs

across skill groups. Figure 4 reports the education-specific trends in the out-migrant share of

native-born Puerto Rican working men. The out-migrant share is lowest for college graduates,

and is highest for workers with 9-11 years of schooling. In 1980, for example, only about 23

percent of the college-educated workforce had left Puerto Rico. In contrast, the out-migrant share
                                                        14


for high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling was over 50 percent during the period

(peaking at an astounding 73 percent in 1980).11

        A straightforward application of the Roy model would suggest that the least educated

workers have the most incentive to leave Puerto Rico (Borjas, 1987; Ramos, 1992). After all,

regardless of how it is measured, the rate of return to skills is much higher in Puerto Rico than in

the United States. Table 2 reports various summary measures of the spread of the wage

distribution in Puerto Rico and in the United States, including the variance of log weekly

earnings, the residual variance of log weekly earnings, and the experience-adjusted wage gap

between college graduates and high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling as well as the

experience-adjusted wage gap between college graduates and high school graduates.12

        The summary characteristics reported in Table 2 document two key facts. First, the

returns to skills are greater in Puerto Rico than in the United States.13 In 1990, for instance, the

experience-adjusted wage gap between college graduates and high school graduates was 0.811 in

Puerto Rico and 0.623 in the United States. Similarly, the residual variance of log weekly

earnings was 0.710 in Puerto Rico and 0.480 in the United States. The Roy model would then

predict that a relatively higher fraction of the least-educated Puerto Ricans should be out-

migrants.




        11 Note that the out-migrant share for this particular group declined substantially between 1980 and 2000,
suggesting that there was a sizable return migration of these high school dropouts back to Puerto Rico during those
two decades.

        12  The residual variance of log weekly earnings and the experience-adjusted wage gaps across schooling
groups are estimated from a regression of log weekly earnings on fixed effects indicating the five education
categories defined in the previous section, and on a quadratic in years of work experience.

         13 The estimated variances for the 1990 Puerto Rican wage distribution do not seem consistent with the
variances estimated in other censuses. I have been unable to identify the source of this data anomaly.
                                                15


       Second, the returns to skills have increased at a much faster rate in the United States than

in Puerto Rico. For example, the (experience-adjusted) wage gap between college and high

school graduates in Puerto Rico rose slightly from 0.81 to 0.85 between 1970 and 2000. In the

United States, however, the corresponding log wage gap rose from 0.53 to 0.68. Similarly, the

residual variance in log weekly earnings was 37 percent higher in Puerto Rico than in the United

States in 1970 (0.56 as compared to 0.41). By 2000, however, the variances were almost the

same: 0.57 in Puerto Rico and 0.53 in the United States. The relatively faster increase in the

return to skills in the United States would suggest that the out-migrant share of highly educated

workers should have risen the most during the period under study.

       The differences in out-migrant shares across education groups illustrated in Figure 4 are

partly consistent with these predictions of the Roy model: while the fraction of low-educated

Puerto Ricans who moved to the United States was about the same in 1970 as in 2000 (with

some noticeable ups-and-downs in between), the out-migrant share for college graduates was

rising rapidly. In 1970, the out-migrant share of college graduates was 13.4 percent; by 2000, it

had more than doubled to 30.4 percent. These trends are consistent with the fact that the returns

to skills were increasing much faster in the United States, encouraging highly educated workers

to leave the island.

       Note, however, that the data are not entirely consistent with the prediction that, on net,

the Puerto Rican out-migrants should be negatively selected. After all, the highest out-migration

rate is not observed in the sample of high school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling, but in the

sample of high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling. This non-monotonicity in out-

migration rates, however, can be explained by a slightly modified version of the traditional Roy

model. In particular, suppose that liquidity constraints prevent the least-educated Puerto Rican
                                                      16


workers from financing the requisite investments required to move to the United States. This

would imply that the least skilled among the least-educated workers would find it difficult to

move, depressing their out-migration rate.14 Once the liquidity constraints are relaxed, those low-

educated workers who can afford to leave the island will do so. This pattern seems to be what the

data reveal. Out-migrant shares are generally higher for low-educated workers, though they are

highest for the “better off” workers within this disadvantaged population.

        These Roy model-related insights are corroborated by the selection that characterizes the

reverse migration of U.S.-born workers who move to Puerto Rico. As reported in Table 1,

roughly 7 to 8 percent of the workforce in Puerto Rico was born in the United States, with close

to 80 percent of these U.S.-born immigrants having some type of Puerto Rican ancestry.

        By judiciously using the available data, it is possible to roughly estimate the out-migrant

share in the population of U.S.-born persons of Puerto Rican ancestry. Since 1970, the U.S.

Census reports a measure of Hispanic ancestry for the native-born population. Persons who

report being Hispanic are then asked to specify the type of Hispanic background. These data

allow the enumeration of the number of U.S.-born persons of Puerto Rican ancestry who reside

in the United States. By combining this size-of-population statistic with the number of U.S.-born

persons of Puerto Rican ancestry enumerated by the Puerto Rican Census, one can estimate the

out-migrant share of this population (i.e., the fraction of the U.S.-born population of Puerto




        14  The hypothesis of liquidity constraints among the least-educated workers also seems to explain the
selection of out-migrants from Mexico (Chiquiar and Hanson, 2005). There is, however, some disagreement on the
type of selection that characterizes Mexican emigration; Fernández-Huertas Moraga (2006) and Ibarrarán and
Lubotsky (2007) argue that there is unambiguous evidence of negative selection in the subsample of Mexican
emigrants.
                                                          17


Rican ancestry that lives in Puerto Rico). In 2000, 10.8 percent of male workers in this group

lived in Puerto Rico.15

         As Figure 5 shows, the skill composition of this population seems to be a mirror image of

that of Puerto Ricans choosing to move to the United States. Because Puerto Rico generally

offers relatively higher returns to skills than the United States, it is not surprising that the out-

migrant shares of U.S.-born Puerto Ricans are highest for college educated workers. In 2000, for

example, the out-migrant share of college graduates was 18.9 percent, as compared to 5.5 percent

for high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling.16

         The inflow of relatively large numbers of both U.S.-born and foreign-born workers into

Puerto Rico substantially altered the skill endowment of the Puerto Rican workforce. Consider,

in particular, the supply shifts caused by migration into the Puerto Rican labor market. Figure 6

illustrates the trend in the in-migrant shares for the five education groups. Evidently, in-

migration led to a sizable increase in the number of college graduates in the Puerto Rican

workforce. In 1970, for example, 26.9 percent of college-educated workers in Puerto Rico were

foreign-born, as compared to only about 5 percent of high school dropouts.

         In addition to these differences in the in-migrant and out-migrant shares across education

groups, there is substantial variation across experience groups (holding education constant).

Figures 7 and 8 summarize some of these differences in the estimated supply shifts for outflows

and inflows, respectively. The data illustrated in Figure 7, for instance, indicate that for some


         15  It is important to emphasize that this out-migration rate probably contains a lot of measurement error.
First, the definition of Hispanic (and Puerto Rican ancestry) in the 1970 Census is not strictly comparable with the
definition in subsequent censuses. Second, the definition of Puerto Rican ancestry differs significantly between the
Puerto Rican and U.S. Censuses.

         16 It would also be interesting to determine if the skills of immigrants born outside the United States are
consistent with the differences in the wage structures between Puerto Rico and the sending countries. It is
                                                          18


education groups out-migrant shares in 1990 tend to be larger for younger workers (e.g., college

graduates), while for other groups out-migrant shares tend to be larger for older workers (e.g.,

high school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling). Figure 8 shows equally striking variation in

the observed in-migrant shares. Among less-educated workers, there is a tendency for in-

migration to most increase the supply of younger workers. Among more educated workers,

however, in-migrant shares are much more stable across experience groups.

         The evidence presented in this section suggests that the type of worker leaving Puerto

Rico differs from the type of worker that is moving in. It is easy to provide a striking illustration

of just how different the two opposing flows are. In particular, Figure 9 presents a scatter

diagram of the in-migrant and out-migrant shares—as defined by equations (1) and (2)—

calculated for each of the (i, j, t) cells. There is a strong negative correlation between the two

variables. The skill groups that experienced the greatest outflows at a particular point in time are

also the skill groups that experienced the smallest inflows. The differential skill composition of

the opposing flows provides a simple and intuitive explanation for why there can be sizable

inflows and outflows in a particular labor market at the same time: The relatively high returns to

skills in the Puerto Rican labor market attract high-skill workers and encourage the outflow of

low-skill workers.




IV. Determinants of Labor Flows

         Before proceeding to discuss the equilibrating effects of labor flows, it is instructive to

investigate if the Puerto Rican experience confirms a key prediction of economic theory—that

the workers who incur the cost of moving are the ones who have the most to gain. Although the


impossible to conduct this exercise, however, because it requires detailed information on the skill distributions of the
                                                         19


presence of selection biases in calculating potential wages in alternative regions prevents a

complete analysis (unless much more statistical structure is imposed on the data), the results

clearly suggest that the flows of workers in and out of Puerto Rico move in precisely the right

direction.

         Let wijPR (t) denote the mean value of the log weekly wage that Puerto Rican-born men

who have education i and experience j would earn if employed in Puerto Rico at time t. Let

wijUS (t) be the alternative log wage that this group of workers would earn in the U.S. labor

market. For given migration costs, Puerto Rican natives should be more likely to migrate to the

United States the greater the wage gain wijUS (t) ! wijPR (t) . Both the U.S. and the Puerto Rican wage

structures changed significantly between 1970 and 2000. As a result, there is a great deal of

variation in the potential wage gain associated with moving to the United States across skill

groups and over time.

         Equation (2) defines qij(t), the out-migrant share from Puerto Rico as of time t. Define the

decadal change in the out-migrant share and in the wage gain as Δqij(t) = qij(t) – qij(t - 1) and

![wijUS (t) " wijPR (t)] = [(wijUS (t) " wijPR (t)) " (wijUS (t " 1) " wijPR (t " 1))]. Consider the regression model:




(3)               !qij (t) = " ![wijUS (t) # wijPR (t)] + other variables + $ ij (t),




Equation (3) relates the decadal change in the out-migrant share to the decadal change in the

relative Puerto Rican wage. The coefficient β should be positive as long as the probability of

migrating from Puerto Rico to the United States responds to economic incentives. Note that the


populations of the sending countries.
                                                        20


differencing of the data within education-experience cells implies that β is being identified from

changes in the relative wage of a particular skill group. The regressions weigh the observations

by the sum of sampling weights used to calculate the out-migrant share at time t, and the

standard errors are clustered by education-experience cells to adjust for possible serial

correlation.17

        One problem with estimating the regression model in (3) is that we do not observe what

the typical worker in cell (i, j, t) would earn if he were to migrate to the United States. Instead,

we observe the mean wage of the self-selected group of workers who chose to migrate. If the

selection of Puerto Ricans into the out-migrant flow were determined solely by observed

characteristics (in particular, education and experience), we could define the alternative wage

wijUS (t) as the wage that Puerto Rican out-migrants in that particular cell actually earn in the

United States. This wage can be calculated from the respective U.S. Census. Similarly, I define

wijPR (t) as the average log weekly wage that native-born Puerto Ricans in cell (i, j, t) actually

earn in Puerto Rico. All earnings are deflated to 1990 constant dollars using either the U.S. or

Puerto Rican CPI.

        Using these definitions, the top panel of Table 3 reports the estimated coefficients from

two alternative specifications of the model in equation (3). In column 1, the regression model

does not include any other regressors. There is a positive and significant correlation between the

out-migrant share in a skill group and the net wage gain associated with moving to the United

States. A 10-percentage point increase in the wage gain increases the out-migrant share by one

percentage point. Column 2 adds a vector of period fixed effects to allow for differences in other


        17 I normalized the sum of weights to equal 1 in each cross-section to prevent the more recent censuses
from contributing more to the estimation simply because Puerto Rico’s population increased over time.
                                                         21


factors that are time-specific (such as migration costs). The inclusion of these fixed effects

strengthens the basic result: a 10-percentage point increase in the wage gap raises the out-

migration rate by 1.5 percentage points.

         Columns 3-4 of the top panel of Table 3 report the coefficients from a slightly more

general specification of the regression model in equation (3). In particular, suppose that:



(4)               !qij (t) = "1 !wijUS (t) + " 2 !wijPR (t) + other variables + # ij (t),




where !wijUS (t) = [wijUS (t) " wijUS (t " 1)] and !wijPR (t) = [wijPR (t) " wijPR (t " 1)]. This specification

allows for the separate identification of the push and pull factors in the determination of out-

migration. The coefficients reported in the top panel of Table 3 indicate that the out-migrant

share is higher the greater the wage in the U.S. labor market, and is lower the greater the wage in

the Puerto Rican labor market—although some of the coefficients are not precisely estimated.

         An obvious problem with the regression results is that the actual earnings of the Puerto

Rican out-migrants in the U.S. labor market may not be the correct measure of the alternative

wage facing the typical Puerto Rican worker in Puerto Rico. In principle, one could adjust for

this selection problem by adding more structure to the statistical model. Such an analysis would

likely be unconvincing since there are relatively few variables in the data that would allow

identification of alternative wages on the basis of exogenous variation in opportunities, rather

than on the basis of statistical assumptions.

         A simpler approach is to evaluate the sensitivity of the results to using alternative

definitions of the potential U.S. wage. The middle panel of Table 3 replicates the analysis by

defining wijUS (t) as the average wage earned by the typical native-born worker in the United
                                                         22


States in cell (i, j, t). The key difference between the two measures of wijtUS is that the one used in

the top panel of the table uses only the sample of Puerto Rican-born workers in the United States,

while the one used in the middle panel aggregates over all U.S.-born workers. Despite the

substantive difference in the two definitions of the alternative wage, the estimated regression

coefficients are roughly similar. A 10 percent increase in the wage gap between the United States

and Puerto Rico still leads to a one- to two-percentage point increase in the out-migration rate.

         Finally, as noted earlier, most of the Puerto Rican immigrants in the United States settle

in the New York metropolitan area. This suggests that another possible definition for wijUS (t) is

the average wage earned by the typical Puerto Rican immigrant in that region.18 The bottom

panel of Table 3 re-estimates the regression using this measure of the alternative wage. It is

evident that the coefficient β is still positive. In the specification that contains the period fixed

effects, a 10 percent increase in the net wage gain from moving increases the out-migration rate

by 3.0 percentage points.

         An endogeneity problem may bias the estimate of β in equation (3), and of β1 and β2 in

equation (4). A positive estimate of β in equation (3), for example, implies that the net size of

migration flows responds positively to the wage differential between receiving and sending

regions. It is also the case, however, that the resulting outflow from Puerto Rico to the United

States must have affected the wage structure in both areas. In particular, the outflow would

presumably lower wages in the U.S. labor market and raise wages in the Puerto Rican labor

market. In other words, the endogeneity of the inter-regional wage gap creates a negative



         18 Although the 1980-2000 U.S. Censuses report the metropolitan area of residence for all observations,
only a third of the sample in the 1970 U.S. Census reports that information. To maintain a relatively large sample
size, the 1970 New York wage is defined to be the average wage of native-born workers in New York State.
                                                        23


correlation between the measured out-migrant share and the net wage gain resulting from

migration. As a result, the coefficients reported in Table 3 underestimate the responsiveness of

migration flows to regional wage differentials. In the next section, I present one approach for

correcting the coefficients for this potential endogeneity.

       It is of interest to develop a parallel analysis of the determinants of in-migration flows

into Puerto Rico. As noted earlier, there are two main types of in-migrants: workers who were

born in the United States and move to Puerto Rico (and at least 80 percent of these workers have

Puerto Rican ancestry after 1980), and workers who were born in other countries (particularly

Cuba and the Dominican Republic) and migrate to Puerto Rico. Although it is impossible to

analyze the determinants of out-migration rates for workers from Cuba or the Dominican

Republic, it is possible to estimate an analogous model for the first group of workers—the U.S.-

born migrants from the United States to Puerto Rico. To determine the determinants of this

influx, consider the regression model:



(5)             !pij* (t) = " ![wijUS (t) # wijPR (t)] + other variables + $ ij (t),




where !pij* (t) is the decadal change in the out-migrant share of U.S.-born workers as a fraction

of the number of U.S.-born persons who have Puerto Rican ancestry. The income-maximization

hypothesis implies that the coefficient γ should be negative.

       The nature of the available data makes it difficult to find operational definitions for

wijUS (t) and wijPR (t) . I use the Puerto Rican census to calculate the average wage earned by U.S.-

born immigrants in Puerto Rico, and define wijPR (t) accordingly. Second, there is no direct
                                                         24


information about how much the U.S.-born immigrants in Puerto Rico earned in the United

States prior to their migration. I approximate the average wage wijUS (t) by either the average

wage of workers in a particular skill group who have Puerto Rican ancestry, the average wage of

native-born workers in the United States, or the average wage of native-born workers in the New

York metropolitan area.

         Table 4 reports the regression results. The estimated coefficient γ is negative and

significant in the specifications reported in columns 1 and 2. The results, however, are more

mixed in the specification that allows for separate identification of push and pull factors—with

the results depending on the definition of the alternative potential U.S. wage. Overall, the

evidence suggests that a 10-percentage point increase in the wage gap between the United States

and Puerto Rico reduces the probability that a U.S.-born person of Puerto Rican ancestry moves

to Puerto Rico by 1 to 2 percentage points.19




V. Consequences of Labor Flows: Migration as an Equilibrating Mechanism

         As noted earlier, because immigrants tend to cluster in a small number of cities in most

receiving countries, many studies estimate the labor market impact of immigration by comparing

economic conditions across localities in the receiving country. These studies calculate the

correlation between measures of immigrant penetration in local labor markets and measures of

economic outcomes, such as wages (Altonji and Card, 1991; Card, 2001; and LaLonde and


         19  Note that even though high-skill workers do relatively better in Puerto Rico, many of the high-skill
migrants from the United States to Puerto Rico may actually be taking a nominal wage cut because of the sizable
difference in wage levels between the two regions. This implies, of course, that there are important differences in
relative prices (e.g., housing) or amenities that are being ignored in the analysis. It seems plausible to argue that
these factors may become more important as workers near retirement age. However, the descriptive data in Figure 5
suggests that there has actually been a reduction in the relative propensity of older U.S.-born workers to migrate to
Puerto Rico.
                                                        25


Topel, 1991). The sign of this spatial correlation is interpreted as indicating the direction in

which supply shifts affect wages; a negative correlation would suggest that immigration-induced

increases in labor supply lower wages. Although there is a lot of dispersion across studies, the

estimated spatial correlations cluster around zero. This weak correlation has been interpreted as

indicating that immigration has little impact on the receiving country’s wage structure.

        The potential problems associated with using regional wage differences to measure the

labor market impact of immigration are now well understood (Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997).

For instance, natives (and pre-existing immigrants) may respond to the adverse wage impact of

immigration by moving their labor or capital to other cities. These regional flows diffuse the

impact of immigration across all regions, suggesting that the labor market impact of immigration

may be measurable only at the national level.20 Borjas (2003) used this insight to examine how

the aggregate wage trends of U.S. workers were related to the immigrant supply shocks affecting

those groups. The national-level evidence indicated that the wage growth experienced by

narrowly defined skill groups was strongly and inversely related to immigration-induced supply

increases. This approach has now been applied to such diverse contexts as Canada (Aydemir and

Borjas, 2007) and Mexico (Mishra, 2007) with similar conclusions: supply shifts induced by

international migration lead to an opposite-signed change in the wage of competing workers.21




        20   There is little consensus on whether the internal migration decisions of native workers are, in fact,
influenced by immigration (Card, 2001; Borjas, 2006). The observed spatial correlation is also contaminated by the
possibility that immigrants choose to settle in high-wage areas of the host country and by measurement error in the
observed immigrant supply shock in the local labor market.

        21  Bonin (2005) reports some contradictory evidence using the national level approach. Bonin finds that
supply shocks in Germany lower wages in the German labor market, but by much less than in the Borjas (2003)
study. The German census, however, does not provide direct information on immigration status, so that the data
cannot distinguish between foreign citizens born abroad and foreign citizens born in Germany. As a result, it is
unclear exactly what type of supply shock is being measured.
                                                           26


         In this section, I employ this methodological approach to investigate if the Puerto Rican

wage structure responded to the labor inflows and outflows documented in the previous sections.

It is worth noting that the application of the Borjas (2003) framework to the Puerto Rican data

may be illuminating because, given Puerto Rico’s size, the local labor market is the national

labor market.

         As in my earlier work, I analyze the relation between the evolution of the wage structure

and labor flows by using the education-experience skill groups defined above. The construction

of the various groups, of course, implicitly assumes that workers with the same level of

schooling but with different levels of experience are imperfect substitutes in production (Welch,

1979; Card and Lemieux, 2001).22

         The analysis focuses on the impact of labor flows on the earnings of Puerto Rican-born

workers enumerated by the Puerto Rican census—in other words, I examine the impact of labor

flows on the earnings of stayers. In addition to the sample restrictions noted in Section II, the

construction of mean earnings for each education-experience-time cell uses only those workers

who reported positive earnings in the calendar year prior to the Census. The sample includes

both salaried and self-employed workers.

         Let yij(t) denote the mean value of a particular labor market outcome for men who have

education i, experience j, and are observed at time t. The empirical analysis differences these

data within each decade, so that Δyij(t) = yij(t) – yij(t - 1), and estimates the regression model:




         22 The analysis also ignores the possibility that labor flows in and out of a particular skill group affect the
wages of other skill groups. The estimation of these cross-effects would require a much more detailed specification
of the production technology (such as the three-level CES framework in Borjas, 2003). Given the relatively small
number of observations available in the Puerto Rican data, the specification of a full-blown structural model would
probably lead to imprecise (and unconvincing) estimates of the underlying technological parameters.
                                                       27


(6)             !yij (t)= "1 !pij (t)+ " 2 !qij (t)+ I + J + T + (I # T )+ (J # T )+ $ ij (t),




where I is a vector of fixed effects indicating the group’s educational attainment; J is a vector of

fixed effects indicating the group’s work experience; and T is a vector of fixed effects indicating

the time period. The interactions (I × T) and (J × T) account for the returns to education and

experience changed over time. Finally, the regressions weigh the observations by the sum of

sampling weights used to calculate the variable yij(t) and the standard errors are clustered by

education-experience cells.

       The dependent variables used to estimate equation (6) are the mean of log annual

earnings and log weekly earnings for each skill group, as well as the fraction of weeks worked

during the calendar year prior to the Census (defined as weeks worked divided by 52 in the

sample of all persons, including non-workers). Model 1 of Table 5 reports the estimates of the

coefficients θ1 and θ2 from OLS regressions.

       Consider initially the results for the specification that uses the log weekly earnings of the

skill group as the dependent variable. The key implication of economic theory—that the in- and

out-migration rates should have opposing effects on the earnings of Puerto Rican stayers—is

strongly confirmed by the data. A larger out-migration flow increases the wage of those who

remain in the island, while a larger in-migration flow decreases their wage.

       The coefficient of the out-migrant share is +0.537, with a standard error of 0.185. It is

easier to interpret this coefficient by converting it to an elasticity that gives the percent change in

wages associated with a percent change in labor supply. Throughout the paper, I have used the

expositional device of defining both in-migrant and out-migrant shares as positive numbers
                                                         28


(hence leading to the opposing signs of the two coefficients in Table 5). To avoid confusion in

the interpretation of a “wage elasticity,” however, it is best to explicitly define out-migration as a

negative number. Let xij(t) = −Xij(t)/Nij(t), or the percentage decrease in the size of group (i, j, t)

attributable to out-migration. It is easy to show that the wage elasticity is:



                ! log wij (t)
(7)                             = " #2 [1" qij (t)]2 .
                   !xij (t)




In 2000, the out-migrant share from Puerto Rico was 38.6 percent. Equation (7) implies that the

wage elasticity associated with out-migration (evaluated at the mean value of the out-migrant

share) can be obtained by multiplying −θ2 by approximately 0.4. The wage elasticity for weekly

earnings is then −0.21 (or −0.537 × 0.4), with a standard error of 0.07. Put differently, a 10

percent migration-induced reduction in the number of workers in a particular skill group

increases the wage of the Puerto Rican workers left behind by 2.1 percent.

        The coefficient of the in-migrant share is −0.543, with a standard error of 0.269. By using

an analogous derivative to that defined in equation (7), one can calculate the wage elasticity

associated with in-migration. In 2000, the in-migrant share in Puerto Rico was 13.6 percent. The

wage elasticity associated with in-migration can then be obtained by multiplying the estimated θ1

by approximately 0.7. The wage elasticity of in-migration is then equal to −0.40 (or −0.573 ×

0.7), with a standard error of 0.19. A 10 percent immigration-induced increase in supply,

therefore, reduces wages by about 4 percent. Although the estimated wage elasticity of in-
                                                            29


migration is twice the size as the estimated wage elasticity of out-migration, the hypothesis that

the two elasticities are the same cannot be rejected.23

         The estimated wage elasticity of −0.2 to −0.4 is roughly similar to those estimated in

other geographic settings using the same conceptual framework. Borjas (2003) estimated the

wage elasticity associated with immigrant flows in the U.S. labor market to be −0.40; Aydemir

and Borjas (2007) estimated the corresponding elasticity for the Canadian labor market to be

−0.32; and Mishra (2007) estimated the wage elasticity associated with out-migration flows in

the Mexican labor market to be −0.44. The Puerto Rican context is unique in that it allows the

estimation of equilibrating responses to both inflows and outflows in the same market at the

same time—and these wage responses seem to be relatively similar to those found in other labor

markets despite the very different institutional, social, and economic settings.

         Given the similarity of the effects of in-migration and out-migration coefficients in the

log weekly earnings regression, it is not surprising that a regression of the log weekly wage on

the net migration rate (defined as the difference between the in-migration and out-migration

rates) leads to a similar wage effect. Model 2 of Table 5 reports that the coefficient of the net

migration rate in the log weekly earnings regression is −0.539 (0.165). The net out-migrant share

in 2000 was 25 percent, suggesting that the wage elasticity associated with a 10 percent migrant-

induced (net) shift in supply is approximately −0.30.24



         23   The difference between the two elasticities is 0.19, and this difference has a standard error of 0.20.

         24  Although the first-difference regression model used to estimate the coefficients reported in Table 5 has
60 skill-group-time cells and includes education-time and experience-time interactions, the regression still has 34
degrees of freedom. The evidence suggests that the regression specification in equation (6) does not seem “over-
saturated” with fixed effects. However, the estimated wage impact of migration flows is sensitive to the exclusion of
some of the interactions, particularly the education-time fixed effects. To illustrate, suppose that the education-time
and experience-time interactions are both excluded from the model. The coefficient of the net migrant share then
falls to -0.193 (0.124). Given the sizable education-related changes in the wage structure during the period, the
                                                         30


         One potential problem with the least squares estimates of the wage elasticities is that the

in-migrant and out-migrant shares included as regressors may be endogenous: income-

maximizing behavior on the part of migrants generates a negative correlation between the wage

level in the Puerto Rican labor market and the out-migrant share, and a positive correlation

between wages in Puerto Rico and the in-migrant share. In other words, the estimated wage

elasticities (in absolute value) underestimate the true impact of labor flows on Puerto Rican

wages. I will discuss this issue in more detail shortly.

         Table 5 also documents that the labor supply of the Puerto Ricans who remained in the

island is positively affected by the out-migration of their compatriots and negatively affected by

the in-migration of foreign-born persons. For instance, there is a negative correlation between the

fraction of weeks worked by the typical Puerto Rican stayer and the in-migrant share, and a

positive correlation between the fraction of weeks worked and the out-migrant share. The

coefficient of the net migrant share is −0.248, with a standard error of 0.090. This coefficient

implies that a 10-percentage point migrant-induced net reduction in the supply of workers

increases the fraction of weeks worked by 1.4 percentage points.

         In sum, a simple application of the laws of supply and demand helps to explain how the

Puerto Rican wage structure responds to migration-induced supply shifts. Labor inflows reduce

wages and labor supply; labor outflows increase wages and labor supply.




preferred specification should include these interactions. The estimated coefficient is robust once the education-time
interactions are included in the regression model. For example, the coefficient of the net migrant share in the
regression that only excludes the experience-time interactions is -0.600 (0.112).
                                                        31


      Joint Determination of Migration and Wages

         The regressions reported in Tables 3 and 5 define the system that simultaneously

determines out-migration out of Puerto Rico as well as the wage in Puerto Rico for workers left

behind. For expositional convenience, I summarize the two-equation regression model here:



(4)              !qij (t) = "1 !wijUS (t) + " 2 !wijPR (t) + other variables + # ij (t),

(6)              !wijPR (t) = "1 !pij (t) + "2 !qij (t) + other variables + # ij (t).




As noted above, income maximization on the part of migrants suggests that the estimated

parameters understate the response of migration flows to wage changes, as well as understate the

impact of labor flows on the wage.

         The model’s specification suggests a simple (though imperfect) solution to the

endogeneity problem faced in estimating the vector (β, θ). In particular, let the decadal change in

the potential wage in the United States be an exogenous shifter in the out-migrant share equation,

and let the decadal change in the in-migrant share into Puerto Rico be an exogenous shifter in the

Puerto Rican wage equation. Because the assumption that !wijUS (t) and Δpij(t) are valid

instruments may not be strictly correct, I will discuss below how any resulting biases might

change the nature of the conclusions.

         Table 6 reports the IV coefficients estimated from two alternative specifications of the

two-equation system.25 Columns 1a and 1b estimate the model as summarized in equations (4)

and (6), while columns 2a and 2b estimate the model in terms of the impact of net differences
                                                        32


(i.e., by using the net wage gain and the net migrant share). The “other variables” in the

regression models include the vector of education-time and experience-time interactions in

equation (6).

       By comparing the results reported in Table 6 with the corresponding results reported in

Tables 3 and 5, it is evident that the endogeneity-corrected effects are often numerically larger

than those obtained from the earlier specifications. Consider the impact of the U.S. and Puerto

Rican wage on the out-migrant share qij(t). The coefficients reported in Table 6 imply that a 10

percent increase in the potential U.S. wage raises the net migrant share by 2.9 percentage points.

The labor flows in and out of Puerto Rico also tend to have larger effects on Puerto Rican wages.

A 10 percent increase in the net migrant share reduces the average Puerto Rican wage by 4.3

percent.

       These results should be interpreted with caution as there are reasons to suspect that the

instruments are not strictly valid. The key instrument in equation (6) is the mean alternative wage

in the U.S. labor market (which affects the out-migration rate, but is assumed not to directly

influence Puerto Rican wages). If Puerto Rican and U.S. wages move in tandem (perhaps

because of the interconnectedness between the two economies), the IV coefficient of θ1 would

likely be positively biased. Given the disparity in economic outcomes between the two regions

over many decades, however, it may well be that this correlation is not very strong.

       Similarly, the key instrument used to estimate equation (4) is the in-migrant share in the

Puerto Rican workforce (which affects Puerto Rican wages, but does not directly influence the

out-migration decision of Puerto Ricans). In this case, the IV estimate may be underestimating

the true impact of a change in the Puerto Rican wage on out-migration rates. There is a very


       25   All of the regression models estimated in Table 6 define the potential U.S. wage as the average wage
                                                    33


strong negative correlation between in-migrant and out-migrant shares in the data. If the

unobserved factors that lead to more Puerto Ricans leaving Puerto Rico also discourage

foreigners from migrating to Puerto Rico, it is easy to show that the IV estimates of the

parameter β2 would be positively biased. Hence the negative coefficients reported in Table 6

may underestimate the response elasticity.




VI. Simulating the Wage Effects of Labor Flows

         I now use the regression coefficients estimated above to simulate how the labor inflows

and outflows altered the Puerto Rican wage structure. Suppose the estimated coefficient in a

regression of the log weekly age on the in-migrant share is !ˆ 1 and that the corresponding

coefficient on the out-migrant share is !ˆ 2 . Equation (7) then implies that the reduced-form

impacts of an in-migration flow that shifts the supply of education group i by mi percent and of

an out-migration flow that shifts the supply by xi percent can be approximated by:



(8)               ! log wiM = "ˆ 1 (1# p)2 mi ,

(9)               ! log wiX = " #̂2 (1" q )2 xi ,



where p and q are the mean values of the in-migrant and out-migrant shares observed in 2000.

To simulate the impact of the inflows and outflow observed in Puerto Rico between 1980 and

2000, I define the supply shocks as:




earned by native workers in the skill group.
                                                             34


                              M i,2000 ! M i,1980
(10)           mi =                                          ,
                      0.5(N i,1980 + N i,2000 ) + M i,1980




                      "          X i,2000 ! X i,1980         %
(11)           xi = ! $                                      ',
                      # 0.5(N i,1980 + N i,2000 ) + M i,1980 &



where Mit gives the number of in-migrants residing in Puerto Rico with education i at time t; Nit

gives the number of Puerto Rican stayers; and Xit gives the number of Puerto Rican out-migrants

residing in the United States. Note that the baseline population used to calculate the percent

supply shifts in equations (10) and (11) averages the number of Puerto Rican stayers over the

1980-2000 period and treats the pre-existing immigrant population as part of the “native” stock.

By definition, the variable mi is a positive number if in-migration increases the supply of workers

in Puerto Rico, and xi is a negative number if out-migration results in a net outflow of Puerto

Rican-born workers from Puerto Rico.

       Table 7 summarizes the results of the simulation. Consider the evidence summarized in

the top panel of the table, which use the OLS wage elasticities estimated separately for in-

migration and out-migration and are reported in Model 1 of Table 5. The wage elasticity

associated with in-migration is approximately −0.4, while the wage elasticity associated with

out-migration is −0.2.

       As columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 show, in-migration increased the number of workers in

the Puerto Rican labor market by 10.6 percent, and out-migration reduced the number by 19.2

percent. This flow of in-migrants lowered wages by 4.2 percent, while the out-migrant flow
                                                35


increased wages by 3.8 percent (see columns 3 and 4). On aggregate, therefore, labor flows had

only a negligible impact on the average Puerto Rican wage.

       This result, however, masks a lot of variation across education groups. In particular, the

supply shifts differ substantially by skill. Although the supply of the least-educated workers

(high school graduates with 0-8 years of schooling) was barely affected by in-migration, the

number of workers with more than a high school diploma rose by around 15 percent. Similarly,

the out-migration of highly educated workers reduced the number of workers in those skill

groups by 40 to 50 percent. However, net flows of Puerto Rican-born workers between the

United States and Puerto Rico actually increased the supply of the least-educated workers in

Puerto Rico! The direction of the net flow of low-educated Puerto Rican-born workers flowed

from the United States to Puerto Rico between 1980 and 2000. As a result, the process of “out-

migration” increased the size of the low-skill workforce in Puerto Rico by 25 to 50 percent.

       Inevitably, these very different supply shifts had very different wage effects. Consider,

for example, the wage impact of in-migration. The wage of the least-educated workers (i.e., high

school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling) is barely affected by in-migration, while the 1980-

2000 in-migrant influx is predicted to have reduced the wage of college-educated workers by

almost 6 percent.

       The differences are much larger in the predicted impact of out-migration. The flow of

Puerto Rican-born workers between Puerto Rico and the United States lowered the wage of the

least-educated workers by 5 to 10 percent, but raised the wage of the most educated workers by 8

to 10 percent. In other words, the two-way flow of Puerto Rican-born workers had a substantial
                                                         36


impact on the wage gap across skill groups, increasing the relative wage of college graduates by

at least 15 percent.26

         The bottom panel of the table replicates the simulation exercise using the wage elasticity

estimated in the regression reported in Model 2 of Table 4, which uses the net migrant share as

the independent variable. This specification constrains the wage elasticity to be the same for both

in-migration and out-migration. It is evident that the qualitative nature of the empirical evidence

is unaffected.

         Finally, Column 5 of Table 7 adds the predicted wage effects of in-migration and out-

migration to calculate the net impact of all labor flows on the Puerto Rican wage structure (while

column 6 reports what actually happened to the real wage of the various skill groups). In rough

terms, the wage impact of the opposing flows of highly educated workers (foreign-born college

graduates migrating in at the same time that Puerto Rican-born college graduates migrate out to

the United States) either wash out or result in a slight positive gain. In contrast, the wage impact

of the various labor flows on the wage of low-skill Puerto Ricans works in the same direction,

resulting in a sizable decline in the relative wage of this group. In the end, the sizable labor flows

that were a key feature of the Puerto Rican labor market during the 1980s and 1990s reduced the

relative wage of low-skill workers, perhaps by as much as 15 to 20 percent.




         26  The ultimate effect of migration on absolute wage levels depends on how capital flows respond to the
labor supply shifts. Under some separability assumptions, the relative wage impact on different education groups is
the same regardless of the extent of capital adjustment. For example, in the three-level CES framework introduced
by Borjas (2003), the predicted wage effect for each skill group in the short and long runs differ only by a constant,
so the relative wage effect of the labor flows can be easily calculated by simply differencing the group-specific wage
effects.
                                                  37


VII. Summary

        One of the central questions in the economics of migration concerns the impact of

migrants on the labor markets of sending and receiving areas. Economic theory suggests that, at

least in the short run, migrant-induced shifts in labor supply should lead to opposite-signed

changes in the wage of competing workers. This wage response is a crucial parameter not only in

the study of the efficiency and distributional impact of migration, but also in the policy debate

over how to best regulate the population flows.

        Puerto Rico presents a unique laboratory for testing these implications of economic

theory—for it has both large inflows and outflows of workers. The immigrant population in

Puerto Rico now makes up around 14 percent of its male workforce. Put differently, immigration

into Puerto Rico is as important a demographic phenomenon as it is in the United States.

However, in contrast to the United States (and other immigrant-receiving countries), nearly 40

percent of the potential male workforce has left the island and lives in the United States.

        Using data drawn from the microdata censuses of Puerto Rico and the United States, this

paper examines the determinants and consequences of these labor flows. The empirical analysis

documented a number of findings. First, the in-migrants and the out-migrants differ significantly

in their skill composition. In particular, at least until recently, in-migrants tend to be relatively

skilled and out-migrants tend to be relatively unskilled. This difference helps to resolve the

question of how sizable inflows and outflows can coexist if all migrants are income maximizers.

The answer is clear: the types of workers flowing in one direction are almost the opposite (in

terms of their skills) as the types flowing in the other direction. In the end, all migrants make a

sensible human capital investment, but they collect the returns in different places.
                                                38


       The study also documented that inflows and outflows have opposing effects on the Puerto

Rican wage structure. Immigrants tend to reduce wages, and out-migrants tend to increase

wages. The numerical response to these opposing flows was roughly the same: a 10 percent labor

supply shift is associated with about a 2 to 4 percent opposite-signed change in wages. These

wage shifts are sufficiently large for migration flows to have a numerically important impact on

the Puerto Rican wage structure. If the wage elasticity were on the order of −0.3, a net out-

migration of 30 percent would, by itself, increase the average Puerto Rican wage by nearly 10

percent—implying that labor flows played an important role in the narrowing of the income gap

between Puerto Rico and the United States.
                                                39


                                         DATA APPENDIX



Puerto Rico

       The data are drawn from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Public Use Samples of the

Puerto Rican Census. The 1970 Census extract forms a 3 percent sample (obtained by pooling

the state, municipal, and neighborhood files). The 1980-2000 Census extracts form a 5 percent

sample. The analysis is restricted to men aged 14-64. A person is classified as a native-born

Puerto Rican if he was born in Puerto Rico. He is classified as an in-migrant from the United

States if he was born in the United States; and he is classified as an in-migrant from other

countries he if he was born in other countries. Sampling weights are used in all calculations.

       Definition of education and experience: I convert the Census-provided education

variables into the IPUMS recoded variable educrec using the code provided by the Minnesota

Population Center. The workers are classified into five education groups as follows: high school

dropouts with 0 to 8 years of schooling (educrec ≤ 3), high school dropouts with 9 to 11 years of

schooling (4 ≤ educrec ≤ 6), high school graduates (educrec = 7), persons with some college

(educrec = 8), and college graduates (educrec = 9). I assume that high school dropouts with 0-8

years of schooling enter the labor market at age 14; high school dropouts with 9-11 years of

schooling at age 16, high school graduates at age 19, persons with some college at age 21, and

college graduates at age 23 and define work experience as the worker’s age at the time of the

survey minus the assumed age of entry into the labor market. I restrict the analysis to persons

who have between 1 and 40 years of experience. Workers are classified into one of 4 experience

groups, defined in ten-year intervals.
                                                40


       Counts of persons in education-experience groups: The counts are calculated in the

sample of men who worked at some point in the past year (i.e., have a positive value for weeks

worked in the calendar year).

       Annual and weekly earnings: I use the sample of men who reported positive annual

earnings and weeks worked, are not in the military in the reference week, are not enrolled in

school, and are aged 18-64. The measure of earnings is the sum of the IPUMS variables incearn,

incbus, and incfarm in 1970 and 1980, and is given by incearn in 1990-2000. In the 1970 and

1980 Censuses, the top coded annual salary is multiplied by 1.5. In the 1970 Census, weeks

worked in the calendar year prior to the survey are reported as a categorical variable. I imputed

weeks worked for each worker as follows: 6.5 weeks for 13 weeks or less, 20 for 14-26 weeks,

33 for 27-39 weeks, 43.5 for 40-47 weeks, 48.5 for 48-49 weeks, and 51 for 50-52 weeks. The

average log annual earnings or average log weekly earnings for a particular education-experience

cell is defined as the mean of log annual earnings or log weekly earnings over all workers in the

relevant population.

       Fraction of time worked: This variable is calculated in the sample of men. The fraction of

time worked for each person is defined as the ratio of weeks worked (including zeros) to 52.



United States

       The data are drawn from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Integrated Public Use

Microdata Samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. Census. The 1970 Census extract forms a 3 percent

sample (obtained by pooling the state, metropolitan area, and neighborhood files). The 1980-

2000 Census extracts form a 5 percent sample. The analysis is restricted to men aged 14-64. A

person is classified as a Puerto Rican out-migrant if he was born in Puerto Rico. A person is
                                                41


classified as U.S.-born of Puerto Rican ancestry if he was born in the United States and is

Hispanic of Puerto Rican background (hispand = 200). Sampling weights are used in all

calculations.

       Definition of education and experience: I use the IPUMS variable educrec to first

classify workers into five education groups: high school dropouts with 0-8 years of schooling

(educrec <= 3), high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling (4 ≤ educrec ≤ 6) high school

graduates (educrec = 7), persons with some college (educrec = 8), and college graduates

(educrec = 9). I assume that age of entry into the labor market is 14 for high school dropouts

with less than 8 years of schooling, 16 for high school dropouts with 9-11 years of schooling, 18

for high school graduates, 21 for persons with some college, and 23 for college graduates, and

define work experience as the worker’s age at the time of the survey minus the assumed age of

entry into the labor market. I restrict the analysis to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of

experience. Workers are classified into one of 4 experience groups, defined in ten-year intervals.

       Counts in education-experience groups: The counts of out-migrants are calculated in the

sample of Puerto Rican-born men who do not reside in group quarters and worked at some point

in the past year (i.e., have a positive value for weeks worked in the period calendar year).
                                              42


                                         References

      Altonji, Joseph G. and Card, David. 1991. The Effects of Immigration on the Labor
Market Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives. In Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, ed.
John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Aydemir, Abdurrahman, and George J. Borjas. 2007. Cross-Country Variation in the
Impact of International Migration: Canada, Mexico, and the United States. Journal of the
European Economic Association 5, no. 4: 663-708.

       Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. Regional Evolutions. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1: 1-75.

       Bonin, Holger. 2005. Is the Demand Curve Really Downward Sloping? Working Paper
No. 1875, IZA, Bonn, Germany.

      Borjas, George J. 1987. Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants. American
Economic Review 77, no. 4: 531-553.

       Borjas, George J. 2003. The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining
the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4:
1335-1374.

      Borjas, George J. 2006. Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration. Journal of Human Resources 41, no. 2: 221-258.

        Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes? Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, no. 1: 1-67.

       Card, David. 1991. The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43, no. 2: 245-257.

       Card, David. 2001. Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
Impacts of Higher Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19, no. 1: 22-64.

       Card, David. 2005. Is the New Immigration Really So Bad? Economic Journal 115, no.
507: F300-F323.

        Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux, 2001. Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return
to College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116,
no. 2: 705-746.

       Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon H. Hanson. International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States. Journal of Political
Economy 113, no. 2: 239-281.
                                             43



      Davis, Steven J., and Luis Rivera-Batiz. 2005. The Climate for Business Development
and Employment Growth in Puerto Rico. Working Paper No. 11679, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

      Enchautegui, Maria. 1993. The Value of U.S. Labor Market Experience in the Home
Country: The Case of Puerto Rican Return Migrants. Economic Development and Cultural
Change 42, no. 1: 169-191.

      Enchautegui, Maria, and Richard B. Freeman. 2005. Why Don’t Puerto Rican Men
Work? The Rich Uncle (Sam) Hypothesis. Working Paper No.11751, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

       Fernández-Huertas Moraga, Jesus. 2006. New Evidence on Emigrant Selection. Working
Paper, Columbia University, New York.

      Fitzpatrick, Joseph P. 1980. Puerto Ricans. In Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic
Groups, ed. Stephan Thernstrom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

      Friedberg, Rachel M., and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. The Impact of Immigration on Host
Country Wages, Employment and Growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, no. 2: 23-44.

      Greenwood, Michael J. 1997. Internal Migration in Developed Countries. In Handbook of
Population and Family Economics, Volume 1B, ed. Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

       Hernandez Alvarez, Jose. 1967. Return Migration to Puerto Rico. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Institute of International Studies.

       Hicks, John R. 1932. The Theory of Wages. London: Macmillan.

       Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten. 2006. Penn World Table Version 6.2.
Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices, Philadelphia, PA.

        Ibarrarán, Pablo, and Darren Lubotsky. 2007. Mexican Immigration and Self-
Selection: New Evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census. In Mexican Immigration to the United
States, ed. George J. Borjas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 159-192.

      LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel. 1991. Labor Market Adjustments to Increased
Immigration. In Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, ed. John M. Abowd and Richard B.
Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

      Mishra, Prachi. 2007. Emigration and Wages in Source Countries: Evidence from
Mexico. Journal of Development Economics 82, no. 1: 180-199.
                                             44


       Muschkin, Clara G. 1993. Consequences of Return Migrant Status for Employment in
Puerto Rico. International Migration Review 27, no. 1: 79-102.

       Ramos, Fernando. 1992. Out-Migration and Return Migration of Puerto Ricans. In
Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source
Areas, ed. George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

      Sjaastad, Larry. 1962. The Costs and Returns of Human Migration, Journal of Political
Economy 70, no. 5, part 2: 80-93.

       Welch, Finis. 1979. Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies’
Financial Bust. Journal of Political Economy 87, no. 5, part 2: S65-S97.
                                                         45


       Figure 1. Trends in in-migrant and out-migrant shares in the population




Notes: An out-migrant is a person born in Puerto Rico, but residing in the United States; an in-migrant is a person
born outside Puerto Rico, but residing in Puerto Rico. The 1940-2000 out-migration series is defined by the ratio of
the number of out-migrants to the Puerto Rican population at a point in time. The denominator in the 1970-2000 in-
migrant and out-migrant series is the total number of Puerto Rican born persons (i.e., the sum of Puerto Rican born
persons enumerated in both Puerto Rico and the United States). All statistics are based on calculations that use the
entire population counts.
                                                        46


                  Figure 2. Per-capita GDP of Puerto Rico (relative to U.S.)




Source: Heston, Summers, and Aten (2006), The ratio of per capita GDP is based on GDP estimates that are
adjusted for international prices. The 1950-2003 series is obtained by splicing the 1950-1969 estimates from version
6.1 of the Penn World Tables with the post-1970 estimates from version 6.2.
                                                      47


              Figure 3. Out-migrant and in-migrant shares for working men




Notes: The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrant working men to the potential number of
Puerto Rican-born working men (defined as the sum of the number of out-migrants plus the number of Puerto Rican
stayers); the in-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of in-migrants working men to the number of working
men in the Puerto Rican workforce (defined as the sum of the number of in-migrants plus the number of Puerto
Rican stayers).
                                                      48


    Figure 4. Out-migrant shares of Puerto Rican-born population, by education




Notes: The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrant working men to the potential number of
Puerto Rican-born working men (defined as the sum of the number of out-migrants plus the number of Puerto Rican
stayers).
                                                        49


            Figure 5. Out-migrant share of U.S.-born persons to Puerto Rico
        (relative to the number of U.S.-born persons of Puerto Rican ancestry)




Notes: The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of U.S.-born out-migrants to Puerto Rico to the potential
number of U.S.-born persons of Puerto Rican ancestry (defined as the sum of the number of out-migrants plus the
number of U.S.-born persons of Puerto Rican ancestry who stayed in the United States).
                                                       50


     Figure 6. In-migrants in Puerto Rico, as a fraction of the Puerto Rican-born
                               population, by education




Notes: The in-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of in-migrants working men to the number of working
men in the Puerto Rican workforce (defined as the sum of the number of in-migrants plus the number of Puerto
Rican stayers).
                                                       51


                Figure 7 – The out-migrant share in Puerto Rico, 1970-2000




Note: The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrant working men to the potential number of
Puerto Rican-born working men.
                                                       52


                 Figure 8 – The in-migrant share in Puerto Rico, 1970-2000




Note: The in-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrant working men to the potential number of
Puerto Rican-born working men.
                                                      53


              Figure 9. Relation between in-migrant and out-migrant shares




Notes: The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrant working men to the potential number of
Puerto Rican-born working men (defined as the sum of the number of out-migrants plus the number of Puerto Rican
stayers); the in-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of in-migrants working men to the number of working
men in the Puerto Rican workforce (defined as the sum of the number of in-migrants plus the number of Puerto
Rican stayers).
                                                        54


                      Table 1. National origin of inflows into Puerto Rico

                                                                     1970        1980         1990            2000
Percent of population born outside Puerto Rico                      10.3%        9.8%         9.1%            9.4%

Percent of foreign-born population in Puerto Rico
born in:
   United States                                                    73.0        80.1         75.2         69.3
   Colombia                                                          0.6         0.6          0.7          1.0
   Cuba                                                              9.4         7.2          6.0          5.5
   Dominican Republic                                                4.5         6.5         11.1         17.1
   Spain                                                             1.7         1.7          1.1          1.1

Percent of U.S.-born population living in Puerto Rico               47.3        80.7         88.8         80.0
that has Puerto Rican ancestry

Source: Calculations from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Puerto Rican censuses. All statistics are based on
enumerations from the entire population counts.
                                                      55


        Table 2. Summary characteristics of spread of male wage distributions
                       In Puerto Rico and the United States

                                                           1970          1980           1990           2000
Puerto Rico
  Variance of log weekly earnings                          0.713         0.701          0.883          0.727

   Residual variance of log weekly earnings                0.559         0.541          0.710          0.569

   Experience-adjusted log weekly earnings                 1.066         1.066          1.055          1.055
   differential between college graduates and
   workers with 8-11 years of schooling

   Experience-adjusted log weekly earnings                 0.807         0.760          0.811          0.847
   differential between college and high
   school graduates

United States
  Variance of log weekly earnings                          0.542         0.615          0.655          0.710

   Residual variance of log weekly earnings                0.414         0.477          0.480          0.533

   Experience-adjusted log weekly earnings                 0.747         0.726          0.957          1.018
   differential between college graduates and
   workers with 8-11 years of schooling

   Experience-adjusted log weekly earnings                 0.527         0.444          0.623          0.683
   differential between college and high
   school graduates

Notes: The calculations in the Puerto Rican Census use the sample of Puerto Rican-born working men aged 18-64,
and the calculations in the U.S. Census use the sample of U.S.-born working men aged 18-64.
                                                         56


            Table 3. Determinants of out-migrant share in Puerto Rico
    (Dependent variable = Decadal change in out-migrant share of Puerto Rican-born
                              workers from Puerto Rico)

                                                                                     Specification
Variables:                                       1                               2                   3                  4
Panel A: wUS = wage of Puerto Rican immigrants in U.S.
Δ(wUS – wPR)                                 0.098                           0.147                   ---                ---
                                            (0.041)                         (0.111)
ΔwUS                                            ---                             ---             0.026             0.151
                                                                                               (0.067)           (0.105)
ΔwPR                                                          ---                ---           -0.109            -0.133
                                                                                               (0.048)           (0.233)

Panel B: wUS = wage of native workers in U.S.
Δ(wUS – wPR)                                   0.120                         0.188                   ---                ---
                                              (0.039)                       (0.069)
ΔwUS                                              ---                           ---             0.661             0.563
                                                                                               (0.206)           (0.202)
ΔwPR                                                          ---                ---           -0.173            -0.279
                                                                                               (0.068)           (0.257)

Panel C: wUS = wage of Puerto Rican immigrants in N.Y.
Δ(wUS – wPR)                                 0.078                           0.297                   ---                ---
                                            (0.041)                         (0.134)
ΔwUS                                            ---                             ---            -0.061             0.313
                                                                                               (0.093)           (0.115)
ΔwPR                                                          ---                ---           -0.095            -0.256
                                                                                               (0.046)           (0.246)

Controls for period fixed effects                             No                Yes                  No                 Yes

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All regressions are weighted by the sum of sampling weights in the cell. The regressions have 60 education-
experience-year cells. The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of working men who left Puerto Rico to
the potential number of Puerto Rican-born working men. The potential wage in Puerto Rico is given by the average
wage of Puerto Rican stayers. The “Δ” operator for the regressors indicates that these variables are defined as
decadal changes.
                                                         57


        Table 4. Determinants of out-migrant share of U.S.-born workers
(Dependent variable = Decadal change in out-migrant share of U.S.-born Puerto Ricans
                                  from the U.S.)

                                                                                     Specification
Variables:                                      1                                2                   3                  4
           US
Panel A: w = wage of Puerto Ricans in U.S.
Δ(wUS – wPR)                               -0.148                           -0.080                   ---                ---
                                           (0.050)                          (0.042)
Δw US                                          ---                              ---             0.071            -0.296
                                                                                               (0.262)           (0.140)
ΔwPR                                                          ---                ---            0.146             0.043
                                                                                               (0.056)           (0.041)

Panel B: wUS = wage of native workers in U.S.
Δ(wUS – wPR)                                  -0.176                        -0.036                   ---                ---
                                              (0.047)                       (0.048)
Δw US                                             ---                           ---            -0.483             0.026
                                                                                               (0.294)           (0.245)
ΔwPR                                                          ---                ---            0.177             0.042
                                                                                               (0.050)           (0.046)

Panel C: wUS = wage of Puerto Ricans in N.Y.
Δ(wUS – wPR)                                 -0.096                         -0.078                   ---                ---
                                             (0.044)                        (0.037)
Δw US                                            ---                            ---             0.339            -0.291
                                                                                               (0.125)           (0.116)
ΔwPR                                                          ---                ---            0.087             0.048
                                                                                               (0.049)           (0.045)

Controls for period fixed effects                             No                Yes                  No                 Yes
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All regressions are weighted by the sum of sampling weights in the cell. The regressions have 60 education-
experience-year cells. The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of U.S.-born workers in Puerto Rico to
the potential number of U.S.-born persons of Puerto Rican ancestry. The potential wage in Puerto Rico is given by
the average wage of U.S.-born immigrants in Puerto Rico. The “Δ” operator for the regressors indicates that these
variables are defined as decadal changes.
                                                         58


           Table 5. Relation between labor flows and labor market outcomes

                                                                   Dependent variable
                                     Decadal change in           Decadal change in      Decadal change in
Specification                       log annual earnings         log weekly earnings fraction of weeks worked
Model 1
  Δ(In-migrant share)                  -0.631                        -0.543                     -0.243
                                       (0.246)                       (0.269)                    (0.187)
   Δ(Out-migrant share)                 0.678                         0.537                      0.250
                                       (0.246)                       (0.185)                    (0.153)

Model 2
  Δ(Net migrant share)                 -0.665                        -0.539                     -0.248
                                       (0.175)                       (0.165)                    (0.090)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All regressions are weighted by the sum of sampling weights in the skill cell and have 60 education-experience-year
cells. The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrants to the potential number of Puerto Rican-
born working men, and the in-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of in-migrants to the number of working
men in the Puerto Rican workforce. The net migrant share gives the difference between the decadal change in the in-
migrant and out-migrant shares. The “Δ” operator for the regressors indicates that these variables are defined as
decadal changes.
                                                         59


Table 6. Joint determination of out-migration and weekly wages in Puerto Rico
                                   (IV estimates)

                                                           Dependent variable / Specification
                                               Decadal change in out-            Decadal change in log
                                                    migrant share                    weekly earnings
Regressor                                          of Puerto Ricans                   in Puerto Rico
                                                  (1a)             (2a)             (1b)              (2b)
Δ(Mean log wage in U.S.)                         0.673          ---              ---                ---
                                                (0.203)
Δ(Mean log wage in Puerto Rico)                 -0.183          ---              ---                ---
                                                (0.068)
Δ(Net log wage gain: U.S. – P.R.)              ---                0.129          ---                ---
                                                                 (0.040)
Δ(In-migrant share)                            ---              ---               -0.523            ---
                                                                                  (0.263)
Δ(Out-migrant share)                           ---              ---                0.687            ---
                                                                                  (0.362)
Δ(Net migrant share: In – Out)                 ---              ---              ---                 -0.769
                                                                                                     (0.577)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells.
All regressions are weighted by the sum of sampling weights in the skill cell and have 60 education-experience-year
cells. The out-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of out-migrants to the potential number of Puerto Rican-
born working men, and the in-migrant share gives the ratio of the number of in-migrants to the number of working
men in Puerto Rico. The out-migrant share model uses the wage of native workers in the United States as the
alternative wage. The “Δ” operator for the regressors indicates that these variables are defined as decadal changes.
See the text for a detailed description of the instruments.
                                                       60


  Table 7. Predicted wage impact of in-migration and out-migration in 1980-2000

                                % Δ in supply due to:
                                _________________                      Δ log w due to:
                                                               ________________________
                                 1. In-     2. Out-            3. In-      4. Out-     5. All             6. Actual
                               migration migration            migration migration migration                Δ log w
Wage elasticity: -0.4 for
in-migration and -0.2 for
out-migration
All workers                       10.6         -19.2             -0.042         0.038        -0.004         0.283
  High school dropouts,            2.4         +51.7             -0.010        -0.102        -0.112         0.351
  0-8
  High school dropouts,           15.1         +25.0             -0.061        -0.050        -0.111         0.308
  9-11
  High school graduates            7.5         -34.9             -0.030         0.070         0.040         0.243
  Some college                    17.4         -55.0             -0.070         0.110         0.040         0.237
  College graduates               13.9         -38.7             -0.056         0.077         0.021         0.330

Wage elasticity: -0.3 for
in- and out-migration
All workers                       10.6         -19.2             -0.032         0.058         0.026         0.283
  High school dropouts,            2.4         +51.2             -0.007        -0.154        -0.161         0.351
  0-8
  High school dropouts,           15.1         +25.0             -0.045        -0.075        -0.120         0.308
  9-11
  High school graduates            7.5         -34.9             -0.023         0.105         0.082         0.243
  Some college                    17.4         -55.0             -0.052         0.165         0.113         0.237
  College graduates               13.9         -38.7             -0.042         0.116         0.074         0.330

Notes: The variable measuring the group-specific in-migrant supply shock is defined as the number of in-migrants
arriving between 1980 and 2000 divided by a baseline population equal to the average size of the Puerto Rican
stayer workforce (over 1980-2000) plus the number of in-migrants in 1980. The variable measuring the out-migrant
supply shock is defined as the number of persons who out-migrated between 1980 and 2000 divided by a baseline
native population equal to the average size of the Puerto Rican stayer workforce (over 1980-2000) plus the number
of in-migrants in 1980. The weighted averages reported for “all workers” use the number of workers in each
education group as weights.
