NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING FIRM OPTIMIZATION TO EVALUATE AND ESTIMATE RETURNS TO
SCALE
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Working Paper 13666
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13666

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

I am grateful to Susanto Basu, Robert Chirinko, Olivier Coibion, Erwin Diewert, Juan Carlos Hallak,
Lutz Kilian, Patrick Kline, Edward Knotek, Yuriy Mokrousov, Alice Nakamura, Serena Ng, Amil
Petrin, John van Reenen, Matthew Shapiro, Jan Svejnar and conference and seminar participants in
Berkeley, Michigan, NBER SI, Econometric Society, Midwest Econometrics Group, Joint Statistical
Meetings, and CAED - FRB Chicago for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Using Firm Optimization to Evaluate and Estimate Returns to Scale
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 13666
December 2007
JEL No. D24,D4,E23,L11
ABSTRACT
At the firm level, revenue and costs are well measured but prices and quantities are not. This paper
shows that because of these data limitations estimates of returns to scale at the firm level are for the
revenue function, not production function. Given this observation, the paper argues that, under weak
assumptions, micro-level estimates of returns to scale are often inconsistent with profit maximization
or imply implausibly large profits. The puzzle arises because popular estimators ignore heterogeneity
and endogeneity in factor/product prices, assume perfect elasticity of factor supply curves or neglect
the restrictions imposed by profit maximization (cost minimization) so that estimators are inconsistent
or poorly identified. The paper argues that simple structural estimators can address these problems.
Specifically, the paper proposes a full-information estimator that models the cost and the revenue functions
simultaneously and accounts for unobserved heterogeneity in productivity and factor prices symmetrically.
The strength of the proposed estimator is illustrated by Monte Carlo simulations and an empirical application.
Finally, the paper discusses a number of implications of estimating revenue functions rather than production
functions and demonstrates that the profit share in revenue is a robust non-parametric economic diagnostic
for estimates of returns to scale.

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

1

INTRODUCTION

Production functions estimated on establishment level data provide essential insights into microand macroeconomic phenomena. Estimated returns to scale and measured productivity
differences are important inputs to economic theories and policy analyses. However, micro level
datasets have significant limitations and recognizing these limitations can dramatically change
the economic interpretation of estimated parameters and various measures of relative
performance.
Specifically, at the establishment level revenue and costs are well measured but prices
and quantities are not.1 Economic theory suggests that firms with at least some degree of
monopoly power should charge different prices if there is heterogeneity in productivity across
firms. Since most firms face a downward sloping demand curve, it is not surprising that there is,
as I argue below, overwhelming evidence of firms charging different prices even for highly
homogenous products. Since the purpose of using micro-level data is often to unearth differences
in productivity across firms, it follows that one should be careful in distinguishing quantities and
revenues as the latter is a product of quantities and prices varying across firms. In most studies,
however, firm revenues are typically deflated by industry price indices to get a measure of
quantity. I argue that this measure of quantity, when used as the dependent variable in production
function regressions, is effectively the firm’s revenue rather than (physical) output precisely
because firms have different productivity levels and, consequently, charge different prices. Thus,
the estimated returns to scale are returns in revenue, not production. This has important
implications for the estimation and interpretation of returns to scale as well as productivity
measurement. Despite these data limitations, micro level estimates can still be highly informative
for positive and normative economics. There are two outstanding questions. First, does economic
theory make predictions about plausible magnitudes of returns to scale in the revenue function?
Second, how could one estimate consistently returns to scale with the data actually available?
To answer the first question, I show that under weak assumptions the profit share is
intimately related to the elasticity of the total cost with respect to inputs, returns to scale in
production, and the markup. With the standard assumption of perfectly elastic factor supply
curves, I demonstrate that returns to scale in the revenue function are equal to one minus the

1

I use firm and establishment interchangeably.

2

profit share. Given that the share of economic profits is small, there is a tight restriction on the
estimates of returns to scale in the revenue function. Importantly, since I make only a few
assumptions about the nature of production functions, costs, and market structure, the profit
share can serve as a simple litmus test for whether the estimates of returns to scale make
economic sense. As I show below, many of the available estimates fail to pass the simple test of
this diagnostic.
To answer the second question, it is important to remember that estimation of production
(revenue) function parameters is inseparable from simultaneity problem because the volumes of
inputs and output are optimizing choices of firms. This fundamental problem is particularly acute
in single-equation approaches because in these approaches the researcher does not model the
choice of inputs while, as Marschak and Andrews (1944) warn, one cannot treat inputs as
independent variables. Modeling the choice of inputs should be an integral part of the production
(revenue) function estimation. I show that that one can turn the simultaneity weakness of singleequation estimators into the strength of simple structural estimators as optimizing choices of
inputs and output help in identification and estimation of the deep parameters governing the
behavior of firms.
Specifically, I extend the full information maximum likelihood estimator of Marschak
and Andrews (1944) and Schmidt (1988) to dynamic production (revenue) function models with
serially correlated measurement errors and factor prices correlated with productivity. This
estimator, which I call the covariance estimator, deals simultaneously with the production and
cost sides and with unobserved technology and factor prices. The key idea of the estimator is to
use the covariance structures for the firms’ observed optimizing choices (inputs, output) to
identify and estimate parameters of interest using the restrictions imposed by the economic
model on the response of observed variables to unobservables such as productivity and factor
prices. In this estimator, the researcher not only focuses on the production (revenue) function
relationship but also utilizes information from firm’s optimizing choices of inputs. The
covariance estimator is easy to implement and interpret since the estimator can have an
instrumental variable interpretation.
The covariance estimator adds to a large set of alternative estimators of production
(revenue) functions and, therefore, it is important to contrast this estimator with popular rival
estimators. I use both simulations and economic arguments to highlight the differences. First, I
show that the covariance estimator outperforms popular alternatives in Monte Carlo experiments
3

in a wide range of setups including empirically important cases such as correlated productivity
and factor prices, serially correlated measurement errors, upward sloping factor supply curves,
etc. Furthermore, my simulations suggest that popular estimators often yield productivity
measures that are poorly correlated with true productivity and, thus, the researcher or
policymaker can reach strikingly different (and likely incorrect) conclusions about the relative
productivity of firms and the magnitudes of productivity differences. On the other hand, the
covariance estimator measures productivity well. The covariance estimator also yields
economically more reasonable estimates than those achieved by alternative estimators when
confronted with real data.
Second, I use the profit share to show that under the standard assumption of perfectly
elastic factor supply curves many estimates of returns to scale are inconsistent with profit
maximization or imply implausible large profits. Specifically, returns to scale (RTS) in the
revenue function cannot exceed unity otherwise the profit share in revenue is negative. Estimates
of RTS frequently exceed unity not only in simple least squares cases (e.g., Griliches and
Ringstad 1971, Tybout and Westbrook 1996, Bartelsman and Dhrymes 1998), but also after
correcting for the endogeneity of inputs—i.e., the transmission bias (e.g., Pavcnik 2002,
Levinsohn and Petrin 2003). In other words, these estimates suggest that firms systematically
violate the profit maximization principle. At the other extreme, studies often find low returns to
scale that imply a much larger profit share in revenue than is observed in the data. For example,
0.8 returns in the revenue function entails that the share of pure economic profits in revenue is
20% (or 50% in value added if the share of materials is 0.6). In most data, the profit share is 3%
or less (Rotemberg and Woodford 1995, Basu and Fernald 1997).
These results raise legitimate concerns about the validity of the applied economic model
and statistical estimator. I show that one can reconcile increasing returns to scale in the revenue
function and a small profit share by relaxing the assumption of perfectly elastic factor supply
curves. Likewise, one can explain large decreasing returns to scale and a small profit share.
Unfortunately, available estimators either do not estimate the elasticity of the cost or depend
critically on the assumption that factor supply curves are perfectly elastic. Thus, the researcher
using these alternative assumptions about factor supply can be unable to check if the estimates
make economic sense when he or she uses single-equation approaches.
Furthermore and most importantly, some of the popular estimators ignore that firms
optimize given their technology and factor/product prices. Sweeping the latter variation under
4

the “ceteris paribus” rug can greatly distort estimates of returns to scale, measures of
productivity and resource reallocation, calibration of economic models, etc. I emphasize that
consistent estimation requires modeling not only unobserved technology but also unobserved
factor prices and, possibly, other structural shocks. It is equally important to model both the
revenue and cost sides of optimizing firms. Finally, optimization imposes restrictions on how
firms react to changes in technology and prices and, thus, makes certain moment conditions
redundant. I show that this reduction in the number of informative moments can be so acute that
certain estimators become not identified. Likewise, tight theoretical restrictions on
contemporaneous and dynamic responses of observed choices of firms to structural shocks such
as productivity suggest that estimators based on inverting factor demands to construct proxy
variables for unobserved productivity can be underidentified. In fact, the problem can be so acute
that these types of estimators can be forced to make internally inconsistent assumptions to
“achieve” identification, which means that these estimators cannot yield consistent estimates
even in theory. I demonstrate that puzzling estimates of returns to scale can be an artifact of these
misspecifications while simple structural estimators such as the proposed covariance estimator
can address these problems.
In summary, this paper makes three important contributions to measuring productivity
and estimating returns to scale with the micro level data. First, I show that because of data
limitations many of the available estimates of returns to scale are for the revenue function, not
production function. I argue that this alternative concept, the returns to scale in revenue, is
economically meaningful and can be robustly estimated with the data that are actually observable
at the establishment level. Second, I show how one can fruitfully merge economic theory and
statistical methods into simple structural estimators to obtain consistent estimates of returns to
scale. Furthermore, I prove that the profit share (i.e., the share of economic profits in total
revenue) can work as a robust, non-parametric diagnostic for returns to scale in the revenue
function. Third, I demonstrate that many of the popular estimators of returns to scale are
inconsistent with simple economic arguments and tend to perform poorly in a wide range of
settings.
In the following section of the paper I elaborate on the ideas and claims I make in this
introduction. In the next section, I present theoretical results, discuss the sources of identification
in production (revenue) functions, and examine the variables used in the production (revenue)
function regressions. In Section 3, I present the covariance estimator and discuss identification
5

and estimation issues. In Section 4, I derive the theoretical predictions about the performance of
OLS, instrumental variables and inversion estimators. Monte Carlo experiments in Section 5
illustrate the performance of alternative estimators. In Section 6, I use a well-known Chilean
firm-level data set to compare RTS estimates from the covariance estimator and popular
alternatives. I present conclusions in Section 7.

2

SETUP

In this section, I derive the relationship between the markup, returns to scale in production, the
elasticity of the cost and the profit share. I demonstrate that the profit share can serve as a robust
non-parametric diagnostic for economic tests of the estimates of production (revenue) functions.
2.1 ECONOMIC MODEL OF PRODUCER BEHAVIOR
Consider a firm that minimizes cost in expectation or non-stochastically. I assume that the cost of
inputs is separable in inputs and factor prices, i.e., cross-partial derivatives of the cost with
respect to factor prices and inputs are equal to zero. Hence, the cost can be written as
C ( L, w) = ∑ j =1 C j ( L j , w j ) where L and w are vectors of inputs and factor prices, Lj is the jth
n

input, and wj is its price. The elasticity of the cost Cj with respect to input j is

φj =

∂C j ( L j , w j )
∂L j

⋅

Lj
C j (Lj , wj )

. The share of input j in total cost is ω j = C j ( L j , w j ) / C ( L, w) .

Returns to scale in production γ is defined as γ = ∑ j =1 (∂Q ∂L j ) L j / Q ( L) , where Q(L) is
n

the production function. Analogously, RTS in the revenue function η is defined as

η = ∑ j =1 (∂Y ∂L j ) L j / Y ( L) , where Y is total revenue. I define the markup μ as the ratio of the
n

output price to the marginal cost. The share of economic profits in revenue (henceforth, profit
share) is sπ ≡ (Y − C ) Y . Note that I make no assumptions about the production function or the
structure of product and factor markets.
To simplify exposition, assume that firms freely adjust factors of production to avoid
unnecessary complications arising from dynamic optimization. This assumption implies that
firms solve a static profit maximization problem in every period and inputs and output are
chosen simultaneously. One can interpret this assumption as describing a large cross-section of

6

firms or the long run when firms can adjust all inputs. In this general setup, the following result
can be proven:

Proposition 1.
Suppose a firm minimizes cost, all inputs are variable, and its cost is separable in inputs. Then

γ μ = (1 − sπ )φ , where μ is the markup, φ = ∑ j =1φ jω j is the elasticity of the cost with respect to
n

inputs, φ j is the elasticity of the jth factor cost, ωj is the share of input j in total cost, γ is returns
to scale in production, and sπ is the profit share in revenue. Furthermore, if the firm maximizes
profit, then η = γ μ , where η is returns to scale in the revenue function.
Proof: see Appendix B.
One can draw several conclusions from Proposition 1. First, consider the case where factor
supplies are perfectly elastic (i.e., φ j = 1 for all j). Since the profit share sπ is close to zero
(Rotemberg and Woodford 1995, Basu and Fernald 1997), by Proposition 1 the returns in the
revenue function η, which is equal to γ μ , should be approximately unity. Furthermore,
industries with large RTS in production γ should have a large markup μ such that μ ≈ γ . Hence,
finding constant RTS in revenue is likely to indicate that there are increasing RTS in production
since the markup is often greater than 1.05-1.1 (e.g., Bresnahan 1988). Proposition 1 also shows
that low RTS in the revenue function imply a large profit share. For instance, η=0.8 implies
sπ=20%.2 Similarly, finding η>1 is not consistent with profit maximization since η>1 implies a
negative profit share. More generally, if the profit share implied by an estimate of η is far from
the profit share observed in the data, then one has a signal that either the statistical or economic
model is incorrect. This point is first raised by Basu and Fernald (1997) in the context of
estimating aggregate production functions. Because Proposition 1 makes weak assumptions
about producer behavior, the profit share serves as a robust non-parametric economic diagnostic
for statistical estimates of η.

2

Griliches and Hausman (1986) attribute low returns to large, (possibly) serially correlated measurement errors,
which are hard to handle in the instrumental variables (IV) framework as there are few good instruments to cope
with measurement errors. It is not clear, however, why measurement errors are so pervasive in some industries and
not others.

7

Second, consider the case where factor supplies are not perfectly elastic (i.e., φ j ≠ 1 for
some j). In this case, there is no tight link between the profit share sπ and RTS in the revenue
function η. Increasing RTS in the revenue function η and a small positive profit share sπ can be
reconciled by a steep cost (i.e., large φ ). For example, monopsony power or a shift premium can
result in an upward-sloping labor supply schedule. Likewise, decreasing RTS in revenue or
production functions can be consistent with a small profit share if φ is less than unity, i.e., the
marginal unit cost of inputs is (locally) declining. Table 1 summarizes the relationship between
sπ, η and φ .
Note that in the case with φ ≠ 1 the cost-based Solow residual does not measure
technology (or revenue-generating ability) correctly because cost shares are not equal to the
elasticities of output with respect to corresponding inputs. Specifically, the cost-based Solow
residual depends on factor ratios and thus can be procyclical and serially correlated.
For the case with some inputs being fixed, Proposition 1 needs a slight modification:
Corollary 1
Suppose that the assumptions of Proposition 1 hold. Also suppose that the first k inputs are

variable and the other n–k inputs are fixed. Then, γ * μ = (1 − sπ* )φ *ω * , where φ * = ∑ j =1φ jω j is
k

the elasticity of the cost with respect to variable inputs, ω * is the cost share of variable inputs in
total cost, γ * is returns to scale in production with respect to variable inputs, and sπ* is the
profit share in revenue. Furthermore, if the firm maximizes profit, then returns to scale in
revenue with respect to variable inputs is η * = γ * μ .

Proof: see Appendix B.
Corollary 1 suggests that the argument about the profit share should be applied to
variable inputs only. The corollary explains that the profit share can be temporarily large since

γ * can be significantly less than unity or temporarily small since the short term elasticity of the
variable factor supplies can be low (i.e., φ * large). Since there is no optimization with respect to
fixed inputs, cross-sectional variation in the fixed inputs is sufficient to identify the RTS with
respect to fixed inputs and, hence, RTS with respect to all inputs.

8

In summary, Proposition 1 justifies using the profit share as an economic check to verify
that statistical estimates of returns to scale make economic sense.3 Put differently, since the
parameter φ can be interpreted as RTS in the cost, RTS in the revenue function η is always less
than RTS in the cost but the difference is small. Furthermore, since the profit share is typically
small, a consistent estimate of RTS in the revenue function can inform the researcher about the
properties of the cost, specifically φ . Likewise, one can infer η from φ .
2.2 FIRST ORDER APPROXIMATION
To make further progress in the analysis of estimated RTS, I make a few assumptions about

production,

demand,

and

cost.4

Specifically,

the

inverse

demand

function

is

Pit = D(Git , Qit ) = Git ⋅ D2 (Qit ) , where i and t index firms and time, Pit is the price of the good, Qit
is the quantity of the good, Git is a separable demand shifter (e.g., quality of a good,
macroeconomic conditions). If σ is the elasticity of demand, then the markup is μ = σ /(σ − 1) .
The production function is Qit = F ( Aitμ , Z it ) = Aitμ ⋅ F2 ( Z it ) where Ait is Hicks-neutral firm-specific
productivity (the power of Ait is a normalization to simplify notation), and Zit is a composite
input.

Inputs

are

measured

in

physical

units.

The

cost

of

employing

Zit

is

C (Wit , Z it ) = Wit ⋅ C2 ( Z it ) where Wit is the separable base price of the input. To be consistent with
previous notation, γ is local returns to scale in production and φ is the elasticity of the cost with
respect to the input Zit. The case of φ = 1 corresponds to supply of Zit being perfectly elastic.
Hence, profits are π it ≡ Yit − C (Wit , Z it ) , where Yit = PitQit is the revenue function. The profit
function is (locally) concave in the input if and only if γ μ − φ = − sπ φ < 0 .
After log-linearizing the first order conditions, suppressing uninteresting constants, and
partialing out industry-wide shocks, one obtains the following expressions for profit-maximizing
input and revenue:

zit =
yit =

1
1
( a + git ) ,
wit −
η −φ
η − φ it

η
η −φ

wit −

φ
η −φ

(1)

( ait + git ) ,

(2)

3

Of course, some caution is warranted since measured profits can be deviate from economic profits.
This model of producer behavior is similar to the model analyzed by Marschak and Andrews (1944) and Klette and
Griliches (1996).
4

9

where small letters denote log deviation of the respective variables from steady state (or industry
averages), and η=γ/μ is the RTS in the revenue function. Note that demand shocks Git and
technology shocks Ait are isomorphic and, thus, are not identified separately.5 Henceforth, I treat

Git as if it were a shock to technology and consider only Ait. It will be convenient in further
analysis to write (1)-(2) in matrix form:
⎡ z ⎤ ⎡ η −1φ
X it ≡ ⎢ it ⎥ = ⎢ η
⎣ yit ⎦ ⎣ η −φ

−1

η −φ
−φ
η −φ

⎤ ⎡ wit ⎤
⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ≡ ΛFit .
⎦ ⎣ ait ⎦

(3)

Equations (1) and (2) indicate that output and input demand are increasing in productivity ait and
decreasing in the factor price wit. Equations (1)-(2) are a first-order log-linear approximation to
the optimal behavior of firms. This approximation is exact if demand and factor supply are
isoelastic and production function is Cobb-Douglas. Since variation in technology ait across
firms is not controversial (e.g., Bartelsman and Doms 2000), in the next section I focus on factor
price wit as a source of variation in (1)-(2).
2.3 ON SOURCES OF VARIATION
In the model (1)-(2), I use variation in the factor price wit to address two stylized facts. First,

inputs and output are not collinear in the data. Second, there is enormous variation in input
mixes. For example, the interquantile (Q3-Q1) range of log(capital/labor) and log(materials/labor)
for Chilean and U.S. manufacturing firms is typically above 100% even at four-digit SIC
industries. Note that in any model that assumes Hicks-neutral technology such variation in input
mixes can happen only if firms face different input prices or technology or firms cannot satisfy
profit maximizing (cost minimizing) conditions (e.g., because of managerial errors).
This paper does not seek to explain why firms face different input prices. Possible
reasons include unionization, regulation, location, composition of capital, and subjective beliefs
of the management about factor prices. Search and information costs result in equilibrium price
dispersion even if firms are identical ex ante (e.g., Stigler 1961, Salop and Stiglitz 1982, Burdett
and Judd 1983, Stahl 1989).
There is substantial direct evidence on the dispersion of prices even for precisely defined
products (Stigler 1961, Pratt, Wise and Zeckhauser 1979, Dahlby and West 1986, Abbott 1992,
Sorensen 2000). Using firm-level U.S. Census data, Abbott (1992) reports that the mean

5

Under stronger assumptions it is possible to separate demand and technology shocks. For example, Katayama, Lu
and Tybout (2003) assume Bertrand pricing and constant marginal cost to identify demand and technology shocks.

10

coefficient of variation for output prices at 7-digit product codes is at least 55% (see also Roberts
and Supina 1996). Even prices of homogenous inputs such as cement have significant dispersion
at local markets (Abbott 1992, Adams 1997, Lach 2002, Yoskowitz 2002). For 70% of firms,
other firms are the main customers (Fabiani et al 2004) and, thus, such price dispersion is an
important source of variation in input mixes.
Likewise, there is voluminous evidence that similar workers are paid different wages
(e.g., Mortensen 2003 and references cited therein). Abowd, Creecy and Kramarz (2002) find
that approximately 40-50% of wage dispersion in France and the state of Washington in U.S. is
determined by firm effects. Price dispersion in capital/financial markets is less documented yet it
exists (see Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) for an example of dispersion of fees charged by mutual
index funds). Multiplicity of interest rates also suggests that different firms face different prices
of capital even within the same industry and location. Furthermore, firms may have different

shadow prices of inputs (because of adjustment costs, for example) even when they face the
same posted market prices for inputs.
There are alternative explanations for variation in input mixes. Early studies (e.g.,
Marschak and Andrews 1944, Hoch 1961, Zellner, Kmenta and Dreze 1966) assumed that
managerial errors determine the variation in input ratios. In another interpretation (e.g., Stigler
1976, McElroy 1987), managerial errors reflect constraints known to the management but
unobserved by the econometrician.6
Although the managerial errors theory may be right, it can hardly explain immense
variation in input mixes. (Recall that the interquantile range of log input ratios is generally above
100%.) In addition, all measures of dispersion for input ratios increase with aggregation. It is
hard to reconcile these facts with managerial errors theory because there is no reason to expect

6

Another explanation of variability in input mixes is variation in parameters of the production function. A typical
approach to estimate models with parameter heterogeneity (e.g., Mairesse and Griliches 1990, Biorn, Lindquist and
Skjerpen 2002) is to use the random coefficients estimator (Swamy 1970) that assumes zero covariance between
random coefficients and regressors. This assumption is, however, clearly violated in the context of production
functions if management knows the parameters of its production function. Consider the model in (1)-(2) with no
measurement errors, μ = 1 and random firm-specific RTS parameter γi such that γ i ~ iid (γ , σ γ ) and
2

cov( wit , γ i ) = cov( ait , γ i ) = 0 .

The

estimated

model

is

yit = γ i zit + uit .

It

is

not

hard

to

find

cov( xit , γ i ) ≈ −[γ (γ − 1)(γ − 2) + σ γ ] /(γ − 1) < 0 . Because cov( xit , γ i ) ≠ 0 , the estimator is not consistent and results
2

2

2

should be interpreted very carefully.

11

that managerial errors become more important with aggregation. In contrast, variation in prices
for labor, capital and materials can approximately explain the volatility in input mixes.7
Differences in interpretation, however, do not generally imply differences in estimates of
RTS. For example, suppose that factor prices are the same across firms and consider a CobbDouglas production function with labor Lit and capital Kit inputs and managerial errors ζ itK , ζ itL in
the first order conditions so that β KYit Kit = Rt exp(ζ itK ) and β LYit Lit = Wt exp(ζ itL ) , where βK

and βL are elasticities of the revenue function with respect to capital and labor, Yit is revenue, Rt
is the cost of capital and Wt is wages. After taking logs and ignoring uninteresting constants, one
has yit = kit + ζ itK and yit = lit + ζ itL . If one assumes firm-specific factor prices, the corresponding
first order conditions lead to yit = kit + rit and yit = lit + wit . Thus, the models are observationally
equivalent and give identical estimates of parameters in the revenue function. As a result, I treat
factor prices as generic shocks to input ratios.
2.4 WHAT DO “PRODUCTION FUNCTION” REGRESSIONS ESTIMATE?
Firm-level data sets (e.g., Longitudinal Business Database at the U.S. Census Bureau) rarely

contain information about prices paid/charged by firms or quantities consumed/produced by
firms. In the vast majority of cases, the econometrician observes only inputs and revenue of the
firm and, hence, a typical production function regression is
yit − pt = bzit + uit ,

(4)

where pt is the industry price index, b is estimated RTS, uit is the error term, and the dependent
variable is the firm revenue deflated by industry price index.8 In the standard framework of
monopolistic

competition

(Dixit

and

Stiglitz

1977),

the

demand

function

is

pit = pt − σ1 qit + git + const and
7

For example, Abowd, Creecy and Kramarz (2002) report that the standard deviation of log real hourly wages is
53%. If one takes the coefficient of variation as a proxy for the standard deviation of log deviations from the mean,
then the standard deviation of material prices is 55% (Abbott 1992) at the 7-digit level. At the 4-digit level, the
standard deviation is likely to be several times larger. Hence, variation in the ratio of prices for labor and materials,
which is equal to log(labor/materials), can be as large as 100%. Likewise, the standard deviation of log fees in
mutual funds is about 50% (Hortaçsu and Syverson 2004), which, however, can be an upper bound. Hence, variation
in the log wage-to-capital price, which is equal to the log labor-to-capital ratio, can also be as volatile as 100%. Of
course, the observed variation can be endogenous, yet this calculation is suggestive. Note that this simple calculation
ignores possible variation in shadow prices which can be considerably larger than the variation in posted prices
because shadow prices can differ across firms due to adjustment costs, complementarity of inputs, composition of
inputs (especially vintages of capital), etc.
8
Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2005) is an important exception. They consider firms producing homogenous
goods so that information on revenue and physical output is available.

12

yit − pt = ( pit + qit ) − pt = (1 − σ1 ) qit + git + const
= (1/ μ )(γ zit + μ ait ) + git + const = η zit + (ait + git ) + const .

(5)

Clearly, the coefficient b in (4) reflects returns in the revenue function η, not returns to scale in
production γ. Furthermore, because firms face different productivity and/or wage realizations, the
price of the good varies across firms and, as I discussed in the previous section, dispersion of
prices is not trivial even in narrowly defined industries. Therefore, deflating the firm’s revenue
with an industry price index pt does not generally yield the firm’s output. In the limiting case
where the share of the firm in industry output converges to zero and shocks to productivity and
factor prices are not perfectly correlated across firms, the cross-sectional variation of ( yit − pt )
converges to the cross-sectional variation in yit, i.e., the dependent variable in typical firm-level
production function regressions is effectively the firm’s revenue yit, not the firm’s output qit.9
One has to be careful with the interpretation of the residual in (4). Note that the error term
in (5) combines demand shocks Git and technology shocks Ait and, hence, one should not
attribute large residuals to high technology because a large residual can stem from a large
demand shock. Likewise, large variation of uit in (4) should not be interpreted as large variation
in technology.
Nonetheless, uit is an extremely interesting object from the economic standpoint. The
entry/exit decisions of firms depend on both technology and demand conditions and uit
conveniently summarizes this information about profitability or revenue generating ability of
firms (see e.g. Foster, Haltiwnager, and Syverson 2005). Specifically, firms with large uit are
more likely to survive and to attract resources than firms with low uit. Thus, even when one does
not measure technology ait, the measured uit is still a very useful statistic.
2.5 DISCUSSION
This section makes several points. First, because of data limitations, typical production function

regressions based on firm level data use revenue as the dependent variable and, hence, estimate
RTS in the revenue function and do not yield the Solow residual measuring technical efficiency
of firms. However, residual from the revenue function regression contains important economic
information about firms’ viability. Second, profit share in revenue sπ should be used as a robust
nonparametric diagnostic for the estimates of RTS in the revenue function. Third, increasing or
9

See Klette and Griliches (1996) for further discussion. Also note that time dummies are often included in (4) so
that deflation by pt is irrelevant.

13

decreasing RTS in the revenue function and a small profit share sπ can be reconciled by φ , the
elasticity of the cost with respect to inputs. Hence, the parameter φ is of central importance.
Fourth, there is sizable variation in factor prices across firms.
Unfortunately, available estimators either do not yield an estimate of φ or hinge critically
on the assumption that φ = 1 (see Section 4). To address this problem, I develop a fullinformation estimator that deals with the production and cost sides simultaneously.

3

COVARIANCE ESTIMATOR

To consistently estimate parameters of production (revenue) and cost functions, I suggest an
estimator based on explicit specification and modeling of unobserved shocks (i.e., productivity,
demand, wages, etc.) where factor price shocks are treated symmetrically with productivity
shocks, instead of just focusing on productivity shocks. The idea of the estimator is to identify
and estimate parameters of the model by matching the covariance matrix implied by the model to
the empirical covariance matrix of observed choices of firms.10 In contrast to single equation
estimators (e.g., OLS), this structural estimator models outputs and inputs simultaneously
(system approach) by deriving optimal output and factor demands from a profit maximization or
cost minimization problem. In this section I explain the intuition behind the estimator, which I
call the covariance estimator, and discuss identification and estimation.
3.1 INTUITION
To illustrate the workings and intuition of the estimator, consider model (1)-(2) and assume—for

reasons discussed later—that φ = 1 and ait and wit have variances σ a2 and σ w2 with ρ (ait , wit ) = 0 .
These assumptions are restrictive and later I will show that the estimator works under less
stringent conditions.
Because ait and wit are not observed, one cannot run a regression of zit and/or yit on these
shocks

to

estimate

the

var( zit ) = (η − 1) −2 (σ w2 + σ a2 ) ,

RTS

in

the

revenue

function

η . Note, however, that

var( yit ) = (η − 1) −2 (η 2σ w2 + σ a2 ) , and cov( yit , zit ) = (η − 1) −2 (ησ w2 + σ a2 )

with unknowns η , σ a2 , σ w2 . One can solve this system of equations for η:

η=

var( yit ) − cov( yit , zit )
.
cov( yit , zit ) − var( zit )

(6)

10

This approach is also called structural equation modeling, MIMIC, LISREL and other names (see Bollen 1989 for
a general discussion).

14

Thus, one can estimate η from the observed second moments of the data. This was the insight of
the seminal paper by Marschak and Andrews (1944). I will call (6) and expressions analogous to
(6) the covariance (COV) estimator. Why is the estimator working?
Equations (1)-(2) describe the optimal profit-maximizing behavior of firms and
optimization imposes restrictions on how firms respond to shocks. Specifically, the assumption
of Hicks-neutral technology and perfectly elastic factor supply curve result in the restriction that
revenue and input demand respond equally strongly to an innovation in technology. In other
words, the coefficient on the structural shock ait is the same in equations (1) and (2).
Furthermore, the assumption of the perfectly elastic factor supply curve implies the restriction
that the response of revenue to a shock in the factor price wit is η times stronger than the response
of the factor demand zit to the factor price shock. Put differently, the coefficient on wit in
equation (2) is equal to the coefficient on wit in (1) multiplied by η. The economic restrictions of
Hicks-neutral technology and perfect elasticity of the factor supply are complemented with the
technical restriction ρ (ait , wit ) = 0 . This latter condition ensures that one can separate technology
shocks and factor price shocks. If technology and factor prices are correlated, this simple model
is not identified.
This estimator can have an instrumental variables interpretation. Equation (6) can be
equivalently written as

η=

cov( yit , yit − zit )
cov( zit , yit − zit )

(7)

and, hence, yit-zit is an instrumental variable for zit. Because of the Hicks-neutral technology and
perfectly elastic factor supply, profit maximization imposes that revenue yit and input zit respond
equally strongly to productivity shocks ait and, hence, yit − zit ∝ wit . Given the assumption

ρ (ait , wit ) = 0 , yit − zit is correlated with zit and uncorrelated with ait. In this simple case,
covariance and instrumental variable estimators are equivalent. However, as I will discuss below,
explicit instrumental variables like yit − zit are not always available and typically the instrument
depends on an unknown parameter. In section 3.3 I consider identification of the covariance
estimator in a more general setting.
3.2 MODEL FRAMEWORK
The basic model (3) (or model (39) describing a more general specification) can be extended

along several dimensions. First, I specify the dynamics of unobserved technology and factor
15

prices collected in the vector Fit. Second, measurement errors are salient in micro-level data sets.
To address this important fact, I augment (3) with measurement errors. In summary, the general
model is

X it = ΛFit + X i + εit ,

(8)

Fi ,t +1 = ΠFit + υit ,

(9)

where Xit is the vector of n observed variables (inputs and revenue), Fit is the vector of m
unobserved variables (factor prices, productivity), the matrix Λ summarizes the responses of
observed variable to Fit, X i is a vector of unobserved permanent firm-specific effects for Xit, εit
is a vector of i.i.d. zero-mean measurement or expectations errors, υit is a vector of i.i.d.
structural zero-mean innovations to Fit, and the matrix Π captures the dynamics of Fit.11 The
matrix Λ for the n-input case is given in equation (39), Appendix A. I collect parameters of the
model in the vector θ and assume here and henceforth that the mapping from θ to
Π, Λ, Ω ≡ E (υit υit′ ) and Ψ ≡ E ( εit εit′ ) is one-to-one in the admissible domain of θ.
This state space representation of the problem nests many important cases such as
dynamic factor models (m<n), log-linearized rational expectations models in state-space form
and serially correlated measurement errors.12 I do not take a stand on time series properties of Fit
and the contemporaneous correlation of innovations in υit as economic theory may have few
restrictions on how variables in Fit evolve over time or how υit is correlated. Note that variables
in Fit can be correlated because either Π or Ω is not diagonal. Likewise, I do not impose any
structure on X i .
The model (8)-(9) has much in common with dynamic factor models. However, in
contrast to dynamic factor models, the factor loadings embodied in the matrix Λ can be identified
11

Since dependence of Xit on observed exogenous variables (e.g., time dummies) can be easily eliminated by
projection methods, I abstract from such dependence without loss of generality.
12
The latter is important in practice because econometricians rarely have reliable estimates of capital stock, effort,
etc. For example, there are two popular estimates of capital: 1) real capital stock computed by inventory methods; 2)
book value of fixed assets. In either case, measurement error is likely to be serially correlated. Suppose that the
*

econometrician uses a noisy measure of investment such that et, the error in true investment I t , is classical (the
measurement error can arise from using an investment price index to deflate firm-level investment expenditures).
The true capital stock evolves according to K t = (1 − δ ) K t −1 + I t . Then the estimated capital stock is
*

K t = (1 − δ ) K t −1 + I t = K t

*

+

∑

∞
s =0

*

*

(1 − δ ) et − s = = K t + ε t with ε t = (1 − δ )ε t −1 + et , that is, measurement error
s

*

k

k

k

k

ε t ~ AR (1) . Importantly, serially correlated measurement errors invalidate instrumental variables based on
leads/lags of inputs/outputs or input mixes. Similarly, true labor input may be measured with serially correlated error
because of labor hoarding.

16

under certain conditions and, thus, factors can have a structural interpretation. In the next section,
I present the conditions under which θ is identified.

3.3 IDENTIFICATION
The key question for the COV estimator is the identification of parameters because many models
can be consistent with observed covariances. Local identification of these parameters in the static
model (8) and dynamic model (8)-(9) is discussed elsewhere (e.g., Hoch 1958, Maravall and
Aigner 1977, Maravall 1979, Bollen 1989, Bekker, Merkens and Wansbeek 1994). In effect,
local identification requires showing that the appropriate Jacobian has full rank. Obviously, the
necessary condition for identification is that the number of parameters in θ is not greater than the
number of unique moments in the considered covariance and autocovariance matrices.
Global identification is more subtle. In factor analysis terminology, global identification
reduces to proving that there is no rotation matrix T producing

{Λ, Π, Ω, Ψ} =

{ΛT , T −1ΠT , Ψ, T −1ΩT ′−1} that satisfies the restrictions imposed on {Λ, Π, Ω, Ψ} (see Theorem 5
in Tse and Anton 1972). Profit maximization imposes many restrictions on the matrix Λ and,
thus, on admissible rotation matrices T. Yet, these restrictions do not eliminate rotational
equivalence in (8)-(9). Further restrictions on Ω and Π can guarantee identification. The
following proposition proves global identification for two important special cases.
Proposition 2
Assume that

i) the matrix Π is invertible,
ii) the eigenvalues of Π are in the unit circle,
iii) the system in (8)-(9) is observable and controllable,
iv) E ( εit ) = E (υit ) = 0 and E (υit υ′jt ) = E (υit υis′ ) = E ( εit υ′jp ) = E ( εit εis′ ) = E ( εit ε ′jt ) = 0 for any t,i,p,j
and s ≠ t ,
v) firms maximize profits so that the matrix of loadings Λ is as in (39),
vi) at least one of the factors is supplied in a competitive market.
Then the model (8)-(9) is uniquely globally identified if
a) innovations in υit are not correlated (i.e., the covariance matrix Ω is diagonal), or
b) the matrix Π is diagonal (i.e., there are no dynamic cross-variable responses in Fit)
Proof: see Appendix B.
17

The first three assumptions are technical: the system does not have redundant (linearly
dependent) shocks; unobservables are stationary; and one can back out the behavior of the
system if one can control unobservables. The assumption that one of the factors is supplied in a
perfectly competitive market fixes the elasticity of the factor supply curve for other inputs which,
in turn, fixes the parameters of the revenue function. Note that factor price and productivity can
be correlated in both (a) or (b). Identification is achieved by imposing restrictions on the
correlation of innovations in factor prices and technology (Ω is diagonal) or by imposing
restrictions on the propagation of the shocks to technology and factor prices (Π is diagonal). It is
also possible to identify θ if combinations of restrictions on Π or Ω are available.13
Local identification of models with serially correlated measurement error is discussed in
Maravall (1979) and Maravall and Aigner (1977). In the next proposition, I present conditions
under which the model is globally identified.
Proposition 3
Suppose that (i) serially correlated measurement errors in observed inputs and outputs are not

correlated across inputs and outputs at all leads and lags; (ii) measurement errors are not
correlated with factor prices and productivity and the number of serially correlated
measurement errors k cannot exceed the number of observed variables n; (iii) serially correlated
measurement errors are AR(1) and covariance stationary. Then Λ, Π, and Ω identified almost
everywhere if and only if Λ, Π, and Ω are identified in the absence of measurement errors.
Proof: see Appendix B.
Note that in Proposition 2 and Proposition 3 I use only time series variation in factor
prices and technology to identify parameters of the model. In other words, I do not use variation
in X i . However, it is possible to use restrictions on the distribution of X i to achieve
identification in otherwise underidentified models. For example, one may be willing to impose

13

Glover and Willems (1974) show that one needs to modify the conditions slightly if observed and latent variables
can respond contemporaneously for the same set of shocks.

18

X i = ΛFi with Var ( Fi ) being diagonal. Such restrictions can be particularly important if
between variation is large relative to within variation.14

3.4 ESTIMATION AND INFERENCE
Since I do not model entry and exit decisions, I assume that the panel of the firms is balanced
with t=0,…,T observations for each cross-section.15 The number of i.i.d. cross-sections is N. I
collect the parameters of interest in the vector θ, which I assume to be locally identified. I
assume that Xit is stationary. The estimation strategy is to find θ that minimizes the distance
between the appropriate sample covariance matrix and the covariance structure implied by θ.
There are many possible ways to construct a metric of discrepancy between the sample and
model-implied covariance matrices. I focus on maximum-likelihood methods since they tend to
have somewhat better performance in estimating covariance structures in finite samples (see e.g.
Clark 1996).
It is convenient for further derivations to stack observed choices for each firm in vector

X i = [ X i′0

X i′1 ... X iT′ ]′ where X it = X i + ΛFit + εit and Fit = ΠFi ,t −1 + υit . Suppose that

υi = [υ0′i υ1′i ... υTi′ ]′ ~ N (0, Ω ⊗ I T )

εi = [ε 0′i

and

ε1′i ... ε1′T ]′ ~ N (0, Ψ ⊗ I T )

(i.e.,

measurement error εit and structural shocks υit are normally distributed and serially uncorrelated)
and E (υi εi′) = 0 (i.e., structural shocks and measurement errors are not correlated at all leads and
lags). Provided X i = 0 , one can find that X i ~ N (0, Φ T ) where

⎡ Σ0
⎢Σ
Φ T ≡ E ( X i X i′) = ⎢ 1
⎢
⎢
⎣ ΣT

Σ1

⎤ ⎡ ΛΓ 0 Λ ′ + Ψ
⎥ ⎢ ΛΓ ΠΛ ′
0
⎥=⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥ ⎢
Σ 0 ⎦ ⎣ ΛΓ 0 Π T Λ ′

⎤
⎥
⎥ , (10)
⎥
⎥
ΛΓ 0 ΠΛ ′ ΛΓ 0 Λ ′ + Ψ ⎦

with Σ s = E ( X it X i′,t − s ) , Γ s = E ( Fit Fi′,t − s ) , Γ0 : Γ 0 = ΠΓ 0 Π′ + Ω . To simplify the notation, I use Φ
instead of ΦT(θ), which explicitly indicates that ΦT is a function of parameters collected in the
vector θ. Hence, the likelihood function is given by
14

In applications, it may happen that η, returns to scale in the revenue function, is identified while other parameters
in θ are not. In such cases, one can impose fairly arbitrary restrictions on unidentified parameters to have a welldefined estimation problem without affecting the identification of η (see Bollen 1989 for a discussion). If η is
identified locally but not globally, it may be possible to rule out implausible cases, e.g., η<0. If η is not locally
identified, one can follow Marschak and Andrews (1944) and put economic bounds on possible values of η. This
amounts to constructing the set of values that parameters can take for all admissible rotations.
15
One may use weighting techniques similar in spirit of Olley and Pakes (1995) to control for entry/exit decisions.
Modeling exit/entry is beyond the scope of this paper.

19

∑

N
i =1

ˆ Φ −1} − ln | Φ
ˆ | −Tn
l ( X i , θ ) = ln | Φ T | +trace{Φ
T
T
T

ˆ =
where Φ
T

1
N

∑

N
i=1

(11)

X i X i′ , n is the number of observed choices of firms and the maximum

likelihood estimate of θ maximizes (11). Since rational expectations models can be represented
in a state-space form like (8)-(9), it is an easy step to extend (11) to estimate models with
elements of rational expectations (see Appendix A).16
For the case where steady state levels of inputs and output are treated as random, suppose
that X i ~ N (0, Ξ ) and E ( X i ui′) = 0 and observe that Φ T = E ( X i X i′) = (Ξ ⊗ J T J T′ ) + Φ T , where
JT is the (T + 1) × 1 vector of ones. It is straightforward to find that the associated likelihood
satisfies

∑

N
i =1

ˆ Φ −1} . If X is treated as a fixed parameter, one can
l ( X i , θ ) ∝ − ln | Φ T | −trace{Φ
T
T
i

transform the data to eliminate the incidental parameters X i , e.g., apply first differencing as in
Hsiao, Pesaran, and Tahmiscioglu (2002). The log-likelihood for first-differenced Xi satisfies:

∑

N
i =1

ˆ D′)( DΦ D′) −1} where D is the nT × n(T + 1) firstl ( DX i , θ ) ∝ − ln | DΦ T D′ | −trace{( DΦ
T
T

difference matrix. Alternatively, one can use a conditional likelihood approach, which under
certain conditions is equivalent to applying a transformation (e.g., Arellano 2003).
Since Xi is not necessarily normally distributed, one may want to use the standard quasimaximum likelihood tools to construct standard errors for the estimates, i.e.,
N
N
Var (θˆ) = N −1H −1GH −1 where H = N −1 ∑ i =1 ∇θ2 l and G = N −1 ∑ i =1 ∇θ l ⋅ ∇θ l ′ . In the course of

specification searches, one can use overidentifying restrictions tests since dynamic models such
as (8)-(9) are typically overidentified. If the researcher is not satisfied with standard asymptotic
inference, he or she can evaluate the distribution of a test statistic using bootstrap procedures
(e.g., Horowitz 1998) or rely on a statistic that is more robust to non-normality in finite samples
(e.g., Bollen 1989).17

16

A popular alternative is generalized method of moments (GMM) with the objective function
ˆ ∗ − Φ ∗ (θ )]′W −1 [Φ
ˆ ∗ − Φ ∗ (θ )] where Φ ′∗ ≡ [ vech ( Σ )′ vec ( Σ )′ … vec ( Σ )′] , Φ
ˆ ∗ is a sample
J = N [Φ
T
T
T
T
T
0
1
q
T
∗

estimate of Φ T , W is a weighting matrix of conformable size. GMM and ML are asymptotically equivalent
(Anderson and Amemiya 1988). If factor prices and productivity are uncorrelated, GMM and MLE are equivalent to
IV estimator with (if necessary, leads or lags of) input ratios as instruments (Schmidt 1988).
17
Monte-Carlo experiments (not reported here) suggest that finite sample performance of the COV estimator can be
improved if a relatively small number of moments (sufficient for identification) are used in estimation. This
enhancement is possible because low-order autocovariances can be estimated more precisely than in the presented
formulation. For example, the first-order autocovaraince can be estimated using NT observations while in the

20

3.5 DISCUSSION
The structural approach embodied in the suggested estimator is built on earlier works by
Marschak and Andrews (1944) and Schmidt (1988). I extend their static full-information
maximum likelihood (FIML) estimators to dynamic settings and improve upon their FIML in
several respects. First, I allow factor prices to be correlated with technology. This correlation can
arise because of rent/profit sharing, complementarity of worker skills and technology,
monopsony power, overtime premia, etc. In contrast, the static models considered in previous
studies are not identified if ait and factor prices are correlated. Furthermore, many popular
dynamic estimators of returns to scale do not allow correlation between technology and factor
prices or innovations in technology and factor prices. Second, my extension permits i.i.d. and
serially correlated measurement errors while static FIML is not identified if there is any
measurement error. Third, I show that static and dynamic models can be identified and estimated
when factor markets are imperfectly competitive, i.e., factor supply curves are not perfectly
elastic. Specifically, I show that having at least one input with a perfectly elastic factor supply is
sufficient for identification. Furthermore, I show in Appendix A that the covariance estimator
can be extended to cases where the profit-maximizing firm faces adjustment costs or production
function is constant elasticity of substitution (CES).
There is a cost of using the covariance estimator. Like any other FIML estimator, the
COV estimator is more sensitive to misspecification than single-equation methods (e.g., OLS).
Since the COV estimator works with higher moments, it may be more sensitive to outliers.

4

ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATORS OF THE RETURNS TO SCALE

In this section I analyze alternative estimators. I start with OLS to highlight the problems of
estimating production (revenue) functions and then proceed with the analysis of popular
solutions to these problems. To contrast estimators, I use the dynamic model (8)-(9) with
observed input z and output (revenue) y, measurement errors ε itz , ε ity , and unobserved factor price
wit and technology ait:
zit = η −1φ wit − η −1φ ait + ε itz ,

(12)

presented formulation only N observations are used for the estimation. This issue is similar to choosing optimal
number of moments in GMM application and is left for future research.

21

yit = ηη−φ wit − ηφ−φ ait + ε ity ,

(13)

wi ,t +1 = ρ w wit + υitw ,

(14)

ai ,t +1 = ρ a ait + υita .

(15)

To simplify the presentation, I abstract from firm-specific effects. The estimated equation is
yit = η zit + ait + ε ity = η zit + error .

(16)

This model makes exposition clear, yet my conclusions apply to more realistic cases as well.
4.1 OLS
Consider a firm characterized by (12)-(15) and assume that variables are measured without error
and ait and wit are uncorrelated i.i.d. zero-mean shocks with ρ a = 0 and ρ w = 0 and variances

σ a2 and σ w2 .18 Using the structural equations in (12)-(15), I find the probability limit of ηˆOLS in
(16):
p limηˆOLS =

cov( yit , zit ) φσ a2 + ησ w2
σ a2 σ w2
=
=
+
−
>η .
η
φ
η
(
)
σ a2 + σ w2
var( zit )
1 + σ a2 σ w2

The upward bias in the OLS estimates is “the transmission bias” identified by Marschak and
Andrews (1944). The asymptotic bias is decreasing in the variance of factor prices and, if the
only source of variation is productivity, the OLS estimate is φ , the elasticity of the cost,
irrespective of the true η, the elasticity of the revenue function.
How big is the bias? If wage and productivity shocks are uncorrelated, then
bias =

(φ − η )σ a2
< (φ − η ) = φ sπ because φ − η = φ sπ by Proposition 1. Since the profit share is
σ a2 + σ w2

3% or less (e.g., Basu and Fernald, 1997) and φ is likely to be no greater than 1.5, the bias is
positive but likely to be smaller than 0.045. Intuitively, the OLS estimate is between η and φ .
Because these two quantities are close to each other, there is only a narrow range in which the
OLS estimate can fall. Even if wage and productivity shocks are correlated, the asymptotic bias

18

If firm-specific productivity is time invariant, then one can use panel data techniques to control productivity with
firm-specific fixed effects (FE). This happy situation is not universally applicable and FE is not consistent if
productivity is time varying. Furthermore, as Griliches and Mairesse (1995) observe, FE aggravates other problems
(e.g., attenuation bias of measurement errors) precisely because of assuming time invariant differences in
productivity across firms.

22

is likely to be small.19 The same conclusion is likely to hold for cases with multiple inputs.20 A
relatively small bias in RTS, however, does not imply a small bias in the OLS estimate of the
coefficient for a given input. Put differently, an upward bias in one of the coefficients is offset by
a downward bias in other coefficients. This result, however, can be distorted by measurement
errors.
It is also instructive to consider the correlation between true productivity shocks and
measured productivity shocks. Using (12)-(13), one can show that the measured productivity
shock is
aˆit = yit − ηˆ zit = ait + (η − φ )

σ a2 σ w2
( 1 wit − η −1φ ait ) = σ σ+σ ait + σ σ+σ wit
2
2 η −φ
1+σa σw
2
w

2
w

2
a

2
a

2
w

2
a

and therefore
var(aˆit ) = σ w2σ a2 /(σ w2 + σ a2 ) < var( ait ) ,
cov( ait , aˆit ) = σ a2σ w2 /(σ w2 + σ a2 ) < var( ait ) ,

ρ (ait , aˆit ) =

1
1 + (σ a / σ w ) 2

< 1.

Apparently, the measured productivity is necessarily less volatile than and imperfectly
correlated with the true productivity. Note that, for example, correlation does not depend on
(φ − η ) as long as it is non-zero because productivity and factor price shocks are amplified in the
same proportion and comovement between measured and true shocks depends only on the ratio
of volatilities of productivity and factor price shocks.

19

If wage and productivity shocks are correlated, the asymptotic bias is (φ − η )(σ a − ρσ aσ w ) /(σ a + σ w − 2 ρσ aσ w )
2

2

2

where ρ ≡ ρ(ait,wit). The OLS estimate of η can exceed φ if and only if –ρ > σw/σa or fall below η if and only if ρ >
σa/σw. The first case requires a negative correlation between productivity and factor price, which is a possible but a
less likely case. The second case is more plausible but it still requires that productivity be less volatile than base
wage. Bartelsman and Doms (2000) report that the ratio of the ninth decile of the distribution of ait across firms to
the first decile is typically about two to three. Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) report that the log wage differential
between the 90th and 10th percentiles in the private sector is about 1.5 and the differential is about 1.1 after
controlling for observed labor force characteristics. Hence, σa/σw is likely to be large. If the correlation between ait
and wit is in the range (–σw/σa ,σa/σw), the bound presented above is still appropriate, i.e., the bias is likely to be less
than 0.045.
20
The expression for the bias becomes complicated with multiple inputs and the upper bound for the bias depends
on the elasticities of cost for specific inputs and relative variability of factor prices. Note that a small bias in the
estimates of returns to scale does not imply that individual elasticities (e.g., elasticity of revenue with respect to
labor input) have small biases.

23

4.2 IV/GMM ESTIMATORS
The transmission bias can be eliminated if the researcher has an instrumental variable (IV)
explaining variation in zit unrelated to productivity shocks ait. In the simple setup of uncorrelated
wit and ait, the best instrument is wit, the price of zit. The problem is that factor prices wit are
almost never collected and therefore such an IV is infeasible in the vast majority of cases. To
rectify this problem, Schmidt (1988) suggests using input/output ratios as instruments, e.g., yit –
zit in (7). If the production function is Cobb-Douglas, then Schmidt’s IV (SIV) is identical to the
IV estimator with factor prices as instruments. However, SIV is not consistent if factor prices
and productivity are correlated, supply curve for at least one of the factors is not perfectly elastic
(i.e., φ ≠ 1 ), or if either the output (revenue) or inputs are measured with a serially correlated
error. All of these cases are empirically important and, hence, although SIV can help in certain
circumstance, its assumptions may be too restrictive.
Alternatively, Blundell and Bond (1998, 1999, henceforth BB) suggest using (i)
transformations of the variables to eliminate ait from (16) and (ii) lags of inputs and outputs as
instruments. Specifically, BB suggest two types of moment conditions: levels and differences.21
Define ϑit ≡ yit − ρ yi ,t −1 − η zit + ρη zi ,t −1 , the residual from the quasi-differenced production
(revenue) function (16). The differences moment condition is E ( Δϑit sit ) = 0 , where sit is any
combination of yi ,t − j , zi ,t − j , j ≥ 3 . The levels moment condition is E (ϑit sit ) = 0 , where sit is any
combination of Δyi ,t − j , Δzi ,t − j , j ≥ 2 . Since technology is an AR(1) process by assumption, the
two sets of moment conditions are valid. Two options for estimation are available. First, estimate
the unrestricted model (i.e., let ϑit ≡ yit − b1 yi ,t −1 − b2 zit − b3 zi ,t −1 with b1, b2, b3 being free
parameters) and take the coefficient on zit as η̂ . Second, estimate the restricted model.
The following result can be proven for the restricted specification:

Proposition 4
Consider profit-maximizing firms as in (8)-(9) and estimate the production (revenue) function
using the restricted specification of the BB estimator. Then the model is not globally identified.
In particular, the model has multiple locally-identified solutions, provided that the matrix П has
21

Since Arellano and Bond (1991) consider a subset of moments in Blundell-Bond estimator the subsequent
discussion applies to Arellano-Bond estimator as well.

24

distinct eigenvalues. The number of solutions is no greater than n+1 where n is the number of
inputs. If the matrix П has repeated eigenvalues, then the model is not identified.
Proof: see Appendix B.
To get the intuition behind this result, consider, without loss of generality, the “levels”
moments

E{( yit − ρ yi ,t −1 − η zit + ρη zi ,t −1 ) sit } = 0

where

sit

is

a

subset

of

Δyi ,t −2 , Δyi ,t −3 ,..., Δzi ,t −2 , Δzi ,t −3 ,... . Use (12)-(13) to eliminate yit and zit from the moment condition
and observe that two sets of parameter values satisfy the moment condition:
ˆ ˆ zi ,t −1 ) = υita ,
Solution #1: ρˆ = ρ a ,ηˆ = η which yields ( yit − ρˆ yi ,t −1 − ηˆ zit + ρη

ˆ ˆ zi ,t −1 ) = υitw .
Solution #2: ρˆ = ρ w ,ηˆ = 1 which yields ( yit − ρˆ yi ,t −1 − ηˆ zit + ρη

In this simple case technology is Hicks-neutral and factor supply is perfectly elastic. Under these
assumptions, profit maximization imposes that

yit − zit ∝ wit

and

yit − η zit ∝ ait . After

appropriate quasi-differencing, each of these expressions is proportional to a serially
uncorrelated shock. Thus, the objective function of the estimator in this simple case has two local
minima.
In principle, the standard prescription is to choose a solution that gives the global
minimum of some objective function (e.g., residual sum of squares), yet this heuristic may
choose the incorrect solution #2. It may be hard to rule out some of the solutions on economic
grounds. For example, in the presented one-input/one-output case, both solutions can be
appealing. Furthermore, since the empirically observed profit share is small, η is likely to be
close to unity (given perfect competition in factor markets) and, hence, the estimator may be
poorly identified even locally.
The consequences of having multiple solutions become particularly acute in the
unrestricted specification since it is possible to take linear combinations of solutions such as
above so that the model is not identified locally. The following proposition shows this formally.

Proposition 5
Consider profit-maximizing firms as in (8)-(9) or in a modification of (8)-(9) that allows for a
contemporaneous response of observed variables to innovations in Fit. Then in the unrestricted

25

specification, the Jacobian of the moment conditions (either in levels or differences or both)
based on lags of inputs or revenue or their differences does not have full rank.
Proof: see Appendix B.
This proposition demonstrates that the rank of the Jacobian for the moment conditions is
smaller than the number of parameters to be estimated in the unrestricted specification and,
hence, the model is not identified. Note that the problem is not in the weak correlation of lags of
variables with their current values (which is the point addressed by using level moment
conditions). The reduced rank problem arises because profit maximization imposes restrictions
on how inputs and outputs comove over time so that some moments are collinear. In other words,
one cannot treat choices of firms as independent. Optimization not only ensures the simultaneity
in the choice of inputs and output but also it puts a precise structure on how the outcomes are
related to each other. Such relationship in the context of profit-maximizing firms is so tight that
observed choices (moment conditions) are linearly dependent. Because of the weak
identification, the estimator is likely to have a flat density. Furthermore, I show in Appendix A
that, to a first order approximation, BB can be poorly identified even when it is costly to adjust
inputs. It is critical to use the restricted specification to attenuate the problem of weak
identification. Mavroeidis (2004) notes a similar problem with using lags as instruments in
estimation of rational-expectations macroeconomic models.
Note that Proposition 4 and Proposition 5 do not show poor identification of system
GMM rather they show that poor identification can be a serious problem when the estimator is
applied to estimating returns to scale for optimizing firms.22

4.3 INVERSION (CONTROL FUNCTION) ESTIMATORS
In this section I consider inversion estimators that use demands for inputs, investment or other
observable choices of firms to construct a proxy for firm’s productivity and condition inputs in

22

The BB estimator can be identified from nonlinearities in decision rules captured by second-order effects. In
addition, one may expect a better performance of the BB estimator if shocks to factor prices have higher orders of
correlation than shocks to productivity. For example, factor prices with AR(2) structure are sufficient to guarantee
identification of the BB estimator if productivity is AR(1). However, if the roots (other than the largest root) of the
lag polynomial for factor prices are small, the BB moments can be almost collinear in finite samples and the
estimator can behave erratically. Furthermore, there is no a priori reason to believe that wage shocks have a higher
order of autocorrelation than productivity shocks. Likewise, identification from second-order effects can be fragile.
BB can be identified if it is costly to adjust all inputs.

26

the production (revenue) function on the proxy. A typical regression in this control-function
approach is
yit = η zit + λ ait + ϑit = η zit + λ ait + error ,

(17)

where a is the proxy for the productivity of a firm. The critical assumption of these estimators is
that the mapping (inversion function) from observed characteristics to productivity (or its proxy)
is non-stochastic. I focus on the Levinsohn-Petrin (2003, henceforth LP) estimator but my
conclusions are also relevant to similar estimators (e.g., Olley and Pakes 1996, Pavcnik 2002).
Following LP, consider the Cobb-Douglas revenue function with capital, labor and
material inputs, that is, Yit = exp( ait ) Kitβ K LβitL M itβ M where the productivity shock ait is an AR(1)
process: ait = ρ a ai ,t −1 + υita and υita ~ iid (0, σ υ2a ) . In the notation of LP, ωit = ait and ξit = υita and,
for convenience, define τ it = E (ωit | ωi ,t −1 ) = ρ a ai ,t −1 . Capital is chosen in the beginning of period t
when ξit is not observed but τit and factor prices are observed. Labor and materials are chosen
when ξit is known, that is, variable inputs can be adjusted when more information is available. I
denote (log) factor prices for capital, labor and materials with rit, wit, and pitM . All factors are
supplied in perfectly competitive markets. There is no measurement error. The rest of the
problem is unchanged and the estimated production (revenue) function is
yit = β K kit + β Llit + β M mit + ωit ,

(18)

where η = β K + β L + β M is RTS in the revenue function.
The idea of the LP estimator is to invert demands for capital and materials to infer
productivity shocks ωit and then use the estimated productivity shock as a regressor in the
production (revenue) function—that is, condition (18) on ωit. The problem, however, is in the
poor quality of the estimates of the productivity shocks.
Note from profit maximization that the observed variables kit, lit, mit and yit can be
expressed in terms of unobserved variables rit, wit, pitM , τit, and ξit:
(η − 1)kit = (1 + β K − η ) rit + β L wit + β M pitM − τ it ,

(19)

(η − 1)lit = β K rit + (1 + β L − η ) wit + β M pitM − τ it − (η − 1)(η − 1 − β K ) −1ξit ,

(20)

(η − 1)mit = β K rit + β M wit + (1 + β M − η ) pitM − τ it − (η − 1)(η − 1 − β K ) −1ξit ,

(21)

(η − 1) yit = β K rit + β L wit + β M pitM − τ it − (η − 1)(η − 1 − β K ) −1ξit .

(22)

It is straightforward to invert factor demands to firm’s productivity ωit = τ it + ξit :
27

τ it = (1 − η )kit + (1 + β K − η )rit + β L wit + β M pitM ,

(23)

ξit = −(1 + β K − η )(kit − mit + rit − pitM ) .

(24)

There is a one-to-one non-stochastic mapping between factor demands and productivity
shocks if and only if factor prices are the same across firms. But if factor prices are the same
across firms then labor and materials are collinear. To see this point, suppose that factor prices
are the same across firms in any given period t. Because inversion of factor demands is indexed
by time, one can conveniently set rit=rt=0, wit=wt=0, and pitM = ptM = 0 . Clearly, this leads to
mit = lit = η−−11 τ it + η −1−−1β K ξit and, thus, mit and lit are collinear. Even if the responses of lit and mit to
τit and ξit are different (e.g., factor supply curves for labor and materials have different slopes),
there is no unexplained variation in lit after it is conditioned on mit and kit:
lit − E (lit | kit , mit ) = lit − E (lit | τ it , ξit ) = lit − lit = 0 . Put differently, once (18) is conditioned on ωit
there is no variation in labor/materials ratio and coefficients β L , β M are not identified.23 This
point is raised by Basu (1999) and further discussed in Ackerberg and Caves (2003) and Bond
and Soderbom (2005).24
On the other hand, if factor prices are not the same across firms, then the assumption of a
non-stochastic inversion function is violated. Therefore, inversion of factor demands and
conditioning (18) on estimated productivity shocks are internally inconsistent. In applications,
identification of LP must come from misspecification of the model.
What happens if volatility in factor prices is ignored? After all, LP indeed moves the
estimates in the direction predicted by the theory, e.g., β LOLS > β LLP and β KOLS < β KLP . To
understand why LP can improve upon OLS, observe that the control function that combines kit,
mit and ωit in (18) is

ζ (kit , mit ) = β K kit + β M mit + ωit = (1 + β M + β K − η )(mit + pitM ) + β L wit ,

(25)

which is correlated with prices wit and pitM . What are the consequences? Consider a simple case
of one input with perfectly elastic supply and ait = ait + χ wit as a control function in (17) where

ρ ( ait , wit ) ≠ 0 if χ ≠ 0 . Using projection methods, one can find
23

Likewise labor and materials are collinear if one augments the conditioning set with factor prices.
Ackerberg and Caves (2003) propose alternative timing assumptions to remove this identification problem. Bond
and Soderbom (2005) propose to utilize non-linearities and to introduce shocks to adjustment costs to all inputs to
identify parameters.

24

28

′ =
p limηˆOLS

cov( yit , zit ) var( ait ) − cov( yit , ait ) cov( zit , ait )
χ
= η + (1 − η )
.
2
var( ait ) var( zit ) − cov( zit , ait )
1+ χ

Clearly, the estimated coefficient is inconsistent unless χ = 0 . From (25), it is likely that χ is
′ is biased upward. The performance of LP depends critically on the parameter
positive and ηˆOLS
χ. Specifically, as χ increases, the bias in LP estimate increases. However, for small χ, LP is
likely to have large standard errors since variation of zit condition on ait is small. (To reiterate, if
χ = 0, LP is not identified.) Hence, for reasonably small χ, LP can have a smaller bias than OLS
does.25 Using nonparametric techniques or polynomials does not resolve the misspecification in
(25) and the subsequent identification problem in (18) because identification of LP does not
depend on the functional forms. Furthermore, this exercise shows that LP cannot have
technology shocks correlated with factor prices.
Measurement errors present another problem in the inversion estimators because the
assumption of non-stochastic inversion of observable choices does not hold and upward biases
are likely to arise. More generally, conditioning on a proxy variable contaminated with
measurement error leads to inconsistent estimates. To get intuition, consider a simple case of one
input and ait = ait + ζ it as a control function in (17), where ζ it ~ iid (0, σ ζ2 ) is a classical
measurement error. It follows that
′′ =
p limηˆOLS

σ aσ ζ
cov( yit , zit ) var( ait ) − cov( yit , ait ) cov( zit , ait )
.
= η + (1 − η ) 2 2
2
var( ait ) var( zit ) − cov( zit , ait )
σ a σ w + (σ a2 + σ w2 )σ ζ2
2

2

Clearly, this estimate is not consistent unless σ ζ2 = 0 . Intuitively, because zit is correlated with ait,
the attenuation bias in the estimate λ translates into upward bias in the estimate of η. Note that
′′ is strictly increasing in σ ζ2 and, as informativeness of ait falls (i.e., σ ζ2 → ∞ ),
the bias in ηˆOLS
′′ converges to the probability limit of ηˆOLS . Thus, measurement error
the probability limit of ηˆOLS
in the productivity proxy leads to inconsistent estimates of η although the bias is smaller than in
the case of OLS estimates.
Overall, LP estimates of RTS are likely to be biased upward, although the bias is likely to
be smaller than in OLS. The same problems can arise in other inversion-based estimators (e.g.,
Olley-Pakes 1996, Pavcnik 2002) because the dispersion of factor prices across firms does not
allow non-stochastic inversion of firm’s observed choices into firm’s unobserved productivity.
25

If χ is very large, the OLS bias (1 − η )(σ a / σ w ) /(1 + σ a / σ w ) can be smaller than the LP bias (1 − η ) χ /(1 + χ ) .
2

2

2

29

2

Inversion estimators can be a tenuous solution to the transmission bias problem because they
ignore the variation in input mixes and/or measurement errors in inputs.

5

MONTE CARLO EXPERIMENTS

In this section I run a series of Monte Carlo experiments to evaluate the performance of the COV
estimator and its alternatives. In each of these experiments, I draw factor prices, productivity and
other shocks from the normal distribution and for given realizations of the shocks I compute
profit maximizing choices of revenue and inputs. Starting values of shocks are drawn from the
corresponding unconditional distributions. For each replication, I generate a panel of 1,000 firms
observed for 10 periods, which is close to typical sizes in applied work. I feed the generated data
into various estimators and compute the estimates for structural parameters. I repeat the
procedure 1,000 times and report median bias, standard deviation and root mean squared error
(MSE) for each of the considered estimators.
In all experiments, RTS is γ = 1.1 , which is consistent with the estimates of RTS from
reports compiled by engineers (e.g., Pratten 1988), and the markup is μ = 2 . RTS in the revenue
function is η = γ μ = 0.55 . Factors are supplied in perfectly competitive markets unless
otherwise specified. I choose a large markup to contrast the performance of the estimators (recall
that bias increases in profit share which is 1-η in the considered case).
I consider the following estimators: OLS, fixed effects (FE), Schmidt’s instrumental
variables (SIV), Blundell-Bond (BB), COV and, where possible, Levinsohn-Petrin (LP). I use
STATA’s commands xtabond2 and levpet for the BB and LP estimators, respectively.
Schmidt’s (1988) IV estimator uses (if necessary leads or lags of) input ratios as instruments for
inputs. In designing COV estimator, I impose restrictions that are relevant for the given data
generating process. Identification of the covariance estimator is ensured by Proposition 2 and
Proposition 3.

5.1 ONE-INPUT/ONE-OUTPUT
The data generating process (DGP) for this set of experiments is given in (12)-(15). I start with
the simplest calibration that allows no measurement error (Panel A, Table 2). SIV with ( yit − zit )
as the instrument for zit is consistent. Note, however, that COV is overidentified while SIV is

30

exactly identified and thus SIV has larger variance than COV.26 OLS and FE have a predictably
large bias in the estimated RTS. Although BB has a smaller bias than OLS, the reduction in the
bias is small and the standard deviation of the estimates increases substantially. Figure 1 presents
the kernel densities of the estimates. In agreement with my theoretical predictions, the density of
the BB estimator is essentially flat, which is typical for all experiments and parameterizations
that I consider.
Next, I add measurement error to y and z (Panel B, Table 2). SIV with ( yi ,t −1 − zi ,t −1 ) as
the instrument is consistent but it has standard deviation larger than that of COV. BB is
considerably worse than FE in terms of MSE. Even OLS has a smaller MSE than BB. The
somewhat better performance of OLS and FE can be explained by the fact that the measurement
error attenuation (downward bias) partially offsets the upward transmission bias. This is
particularly important for FE because the signal to noise ratio for FE falls more than that for OLS
(see Griliches and Hausman 1986).
In the next experiment, I add serially correlated measurement errors to the input zit (Panel
C, Table 2). In particular, I assume that the measurement error is ε itz = ρ zε iz,t −1 + eit with

ρ z = 0.8, σ e2 = 1 . Note that SIV is not consistent because the input/output ratio is correlated with
the measurement error and, consequently, the SIV’s instrument is correlated with the error term
in the revenue function at all leads and lags. Serial correlation of the measurement error
deteriorates the signal to noise ratio and the attenuation bias becomes stronger. The performance
of BB (quasi-differenced twice) remains poor: the bias and standard error are large.
Finally I consider the case when the factor price and productivity shocks are positively
correlated (Panel D, Table 2). Specifically, I set ρ (ait , wit ) = 0.7 . This correlation invalidates the
SIV estimator because any lead/lag of ( yit − zit ) is correlated with the residual in the revenue
function. To highlight the consequences of the correlation, I assume no measurement errors.
Because ρ ( wit , ait ) ≠ 0 , SIV has a very large downward bias so that the estimate of RTS is
negative. COV is the only consistent estimator. Note that the bias in OLS, FE and BB estimates
of RTS increases considerably because there is less exogenous variation in factor prices. FE is
more biased than BB but FE dominates BB in terms of MSE.

26

In fact, SIV does not have even first moments because it is exactly identified (Kinal 1980). It is an easy extension
to make SIV overidentified by using leads or lags of input ratios wherever appropriate.

31

Note that in all simulations productivity measured according to OLS, FE or BB estimates
is poorly correlated with the true productivity. SIV provides a good correlation only when it is
consistent. In contrast, COV estimates yield productivity measures that are highly correlated with
true productivity.

5.2 MULTI-INPUT/ONE-OUTPUT
In this section I consider a more realistic setup with multiple inputs (capital, labor and materials)
as in Section 4.3. The data generating process is given by (19)-(22) and the estimated revenue
function is (18). I set β K = 0.1η , β L = 0.2η , β M = 0.7η . I assume diagonal Ω and Π , i.e., factor
price and productivity are uncorrelated. Because capital is predetermined at time t, the
appropriate instrument for capital in SIV is ( yi ,t +1 − ki ,t +1 ) = −(η − 1 − β K ) −1υia,t +1 + rit +1 that is
uncorrelated with ai,t-1 and υita .27
In the first experiment, I consider the case with no measurement error (Panel A, Table 3).
COV has the smallest median bias and MSE. SIV has no bias in estimated RTS in the revenue
function η but the variance of the estimate is large (recall that SIV is exactly identified). The LP
estimator does better than OLS but LP still has a sizable upward bias, which is consistent with
my theoretical predictions. Furthermore, computationally simpler FE has performance very close
to that of the LP estimator. The BB estimator has a large negative bias in the coefficient on
materials and a large upward bias on the coefficient on labor. Nonetheless, BB has a relatively
small bias in the estimated RTS. I plot the kernel density of the estimators in Figure 2. Observe
that the density of the LP estimator almost coincides with FE’s density. Also note the flat density
of the BB estimator.
To show the importance of the small profit share for the estimate of the bias, I vary the
demand elasticity so that profit share ranges from 50% to 0.1%. Figure 3 plots the bias as a
function of the profit share. Note that BB, SIV, and LP reduce the bias relative to OLS but as
profit share falls these estimators yield only a minor reduction in the bias. Interestingly, LP only
marginally improves upon FE. Given that LP and BB tend to have larger variance than OLS, it is
not clear if popular solutions to the transmission bias are better in terms of MSE than the OLS
estimate.

27

Timing of shocks modifies the moments used in the BB estimator. However, the fact that output, labor and
materials are determined simultaneously and the response of labor, materials and revenue to υa is identical leads to
the reduced rank problem for the BB estimator (see proof of Proposition 5).

32

In the next experiment, I add a small measurement error to inputs and revenue to assess
the sensitivity of BB and inversion-based LP to measurement errors (Panel B, Table 3).
Predictably, the attenuation bias partially offsets the transmission bias and, thus, the estimates of
RTS are less biased than in the absence of measurement errors. Nonetheless, BB has an
increased bias because one has to take more distant lags in the moment conditions. This greatly
deteriorates the performance of the estimator. Although the LP estimator has a smaller bias in the
estimated RTS η, the upward bias in the coefficient on materials is reallocated to the upward bias
in the coefficients on capital and labor. Overall, LP is very similar to FE. Only SIV and COV
yield consistent estimates in this experiment.
Next I examine the case with an upward-sloping labor supply curve. I set the elasticity of
the labor cost to φL = 1.5 and I assume no measurement error (Panel C, Table 3). Importantly,
although the base wage log(Wit) is uncorrelated with productivity ait, the log of wage Wit Lφit−1 is
correlated with ait. Since the log wage is correlated with ait, SIV is not consistent. Note that the
OLS, BB and FE estimates exceed unity although the true RTS in the revenue function is 0.55.
Only COV estimate the parameters consistently. Note that in this scenario the correlation
between true productivity and productivity measured according to SIV estimates becomes
negative.
In the next series of experiments, I assume quadratic costs of adjustment for capital and
keep the rest of the assumptions unchanged. In brief, the firm solves the following dynamic
problem:
max E0 ∑ t =0 (Yit − Rit I it − Wit Lit − PitM M it − 12 ψ ( I it / Ki ,t −1 − δ ) 2 Ki ,t −1 )
∞

s.t.

(26)

Yit = Ait Kiβ,tK−1LβitL M itβ M ,
Kit = (1 − δ ) Ki ,t −1 + I it ,
Wit = Wit0 Lφit−1 ,
rit = ρ r ri ,t −1 + υitr ,
wit0 = ρ w wi0,t −1 + υitw ,
pitM = ρ p M piM,t −1 + υitM ,
a = ρ a ai ,t −1 + υita ,

where I is investment, ψ is the adjustment cost parameter, small letter denote logs of the
respective variables. In all simulations I set ψ = 6 , which is consistent with the available
estimates of adjustment costs (e.g., Gordon 1992), and estimate other parameters of the model. I
33

log-linearize the first-order conditions and constraints given perfect foresight. Because the
analytical solution to the above problem is complicated, it is hard to establish that the covariance
estimator is uniquely globally identified. However, since the numeric solution can be readily
written in the state-space form (see Appendix A), it is straightforward to establish local
identification of the parameters by checking the rank of the Jacobian.
Using the log-linearized solution to the model, I generate artificial data sets and feed
them into various estimators. Table 4 presents the results for the cases with perfectly and
imperfectly elastic factor supply curves and with/without measurement errors. In the baseline
experiment with perfect competition in factor markets ( φ = 1 ) and no measurement errors (panel
A, Table 4), OLS, FE and BB estimates are biased so much that the estimated RTS are increasing
(recall that the true RTS in the revenue function is equal to 0.55). Consistent with the argument
in section 4.2, BB estimates have large standard errors, which indicate poor identification of the
estimator. Although the LP estimator has a smaller bias than other estimators, the size of the bias
remains very large. SIV produces implausible estimates because the shadow price of capital is
correlated with technology and, hence, no lead or lag of the output-to-capital ratio is a valid
instrument for the level of the capital stock. This correlation of the shadow price of capital and
technology is the key to understanding why the conventional estimators yield increasing RTS
even when true returns are well below unity. Because of the attenuation bias, adding
measurement error (panel B, Table 4) reduces the bias in the estimated RTS. In the case with an
upward-sloping labor supply curve ( φ = 1.5 , panel C, Table 4) the bias tends to increase in the
estimate of β L and decrease in the estimate of β K . Nonetheless, because β L and β K have a
small contribution to the RTS (recall that the elasticity of output with respect to material is 0.7),
the bias in the estimate of RTS barely changes.
Note that in all simulations with multiple inputs popular estimators lead to inferior
productivity measures. Specifically, small departures from the assumptions required by SIV can
produce a negative correlation between true productivity and productivity measured according to
SIV estimates. In all simulations, other estimators (OLS, LP, FE, BB) yield low correlation
between true and measured productivity. Typically, the correlation for these estimators is well
below 0.4. The covariance estimator performs well in terms of measuring productivity and
capturing returns to scale, although the standard error of the coefficient on capital is somewhat
large.

34

5.3 DISCUSSION
The results of Monte Carlo experiments are in agreement with my theoretical predictions that LP
is biased upwards and BB is poorly identified. SIV is extremely sensitive to serially correlated
measurement errors and (shadow) factor prices being correlated with technology. The
experiments show that simpler OLS and FE have performance comparable to that of BB and LP.
If the profit share is small, the reduction in the bias from using BB and LP is offset by an
increase in the variance of the estimates. Hence, in empirically plausible settings with small
profit shares, it is useful to compare estimates from sophisticated techniques with OLS estimates.
Furthermore, the researcher can reach incorrect conclusions about relative productivity of
firms and magnitudes of productivity differences across firms when he or she uses inconsistent
estimates. Specifically, the experiments suggest that OLS, FE, BB, and LP tend to yield
productivity measures that are poorly correlated with true productivity.28 SIV’s performance
varies from good to disastrous. If the assumptions of SIV are satisfied, the correlation is close to
one. Slight departures from SIV’s assumptions can lead to a negative correlation between
measured and true productivity. These results are true irrespective of the absolute size of the bias
in the estimates because productivity and factor price shocks are amplified in the same
proportion for observed optimized choices of firms. In contrast, productivity measures
constructed on the basis of COV estimates are highly correlated with true productivity.
Importantly, the Monte Carlo experiments suggest that the puzzling estimates of RTS in
the revenue function can arise because statistical estimators fail to provide consistent estimates.
In the next section, I contrast the estimates of competing techniques when applied to real data.

6

APPLICATION

In this section, I apply the COV estimator to a well-known data set of Chilean manufacturing
plants. Lui (1991, 1993), Lui and Tybout (1996), Pavcnik (2002) and Petrin and Levinsohn
(2005) describe the data in detail. To illustrate the estimator, I focus on the SIC 3240 industry
(manufacture of footware).29 The annual data spans from 1982 to 1996. Descriptive statistics for
logs of real value added, real capital stock and labor are presented in Table 5 and Table 6.
I assume that the inverse demand function is given by Pit ∝ Qit−1 σ where σ is the demand
elasticity so that the markup is μ = σ (σ − 1) . The production function is described by
28

Productivity measured as a cost-based Solow residual can be poorly correlated with the true productivity when
factor supply curves are upward sloping.
29
I am grateful to Jim Levinsohn for providing me with the data.

35

Qit = Aitμ min{M it , cKitα K LαitL } , where Qit is output in physical units, Mit is the input of materials, Kit
is capital, Lit is the number of employees, Ait is the level of Hicks-neutral technology ( Ait to the
power of μ is a normalization), and c is a constant of proportionality. This functional form
imposes zero substitution between materials and combined capital/labor inputs. Since at the
optimum no resources are wasted, M it = cKitα K LαitL and, hence, the profit function is given by

π it = PitQit − pitM M it − Rit Kit − Wit Lit = VAit − Rit Kit − Wit Lit = Ait Kitβ Lβit − Rit Kit − Wit Lit , where VAit
K

L

is the value added, Rit and Wit are the cost of capital and labor for firm i at time t.30 In the data,
the share of materials in total cost is 0.66.
I assume that capital is supplied in perfectly competitive markets. The slope of the labor
supply curve is a free parameter. In particular, I assume that the wage function is given by
Wit ( L) = Wit Lφit−1 so that the wage bill is Wit ( Lit ) Lit = Wit Lφit . I further assume that capital, labor,
and revenue are chosen simultaneously. I allow serially correlated errors in all observed
variables, which are capital, labor and revenue. Unobserved technology and factor prices are
serially correlated and there could be feedback from technology to factor prices and vice versa. I
assume that innovations to technology and factor prices are uncorrelated. In summary, the
estimated model is
yit* − kit* = rit ,

(27)

yit* − lit* = wit + (φ − 1)lit* ,

(28)

y = ait + β k + β l ,
*
it

*
K it

*
L it

(29)

ait = ρ aa ai ,t −1 + ρ aw wi ,t −1 + ρ ar ri ,t −1 + υ ,

(30)

wit0 = ρ wa ai ,t −1 + ρ ww wi0,t −1 + ρ wr ri ,t −1 + υitw ,

(31)

rit = ρ ra ai ,t −1 + ρ rw wi ,t −1 + ρ rr ri ,t −1 + υitr ,

(32)

yit = yit* + uity ,

(33)

k
it

kit = k + u ,

(34)

lit = lit* + uitl ,

(35)

a
it

*
it

30

Since I analyze value added, I do not need to measure the quantity of the materials input. Note that in the vast
majority of cases the researcher knows only the nominal spending on materials and the quantity of the material input
is obtained by deflating the nominal spending with the industry-level material price index. Since the mix of
intermediate inputs varies across firms and the price index is the same for all firms in any given period, the
computed quantity of the material input can be poorly correlated with the true quantity of the material input. In the
case of the Cobb-Douglas production function, nominal spending on materials is proportional to revenue and, hence,
including the deflated expenditures on materials should yield perfect collinearity. Stochastic errors (e.g.,
optimization errors, measurement errors) can break the collinearity but the coefficient is still likely to be close to
unity, which is often the case in applications.

36

uity = ρ y uiy,t −1 + ε ity ,

(36)

uitk = ρ k uik,t −1 + ε itk ,

(37)

uitl = ρ l uil,t −1 + ε itl ,

(38)

where small letters denote logs of the respective variables with yit = ln VAit , stars denote true
values, and {υita ,υitw ,υitr , ε ity , ε itk , ε itl } are uncorrelated i.i.d. innovations. Parameters of interest are

β K , β L , φ and η = β K + β L . Equations (27) and (28) are the first order conditions for capital
and labor. Equation (29) is the value-added function (analogue to the revenue function).
Equations (30)-(32) describe the evolution of structural shocks to productivity and factor prices.
Measurement equations are collected in (33)-(35). Dynamics of the measurement errors are in
equations (36)-(38). The equations can be succinctly rewritten in the matrix form that
corresponds to the state space representation in (8)-(9):
⎡ −φ
⎡ yit ⎤ ⎢ β L + β K φ −φ
−φ
X it ≡ ⎢ kit ⎥ = ⎢ β L + β K φ −φ
⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎢⎣ lit ⎥⎦ ⎢ −1
⎣ β L + β K φ −φ
⎡ ait ⎤ ⎡ ρ aa
⎢w ⎥ ⎢ρ
⎢ it ⎥ ⎢ wa
⎢ r ⎥ ⎢ρ
Fit ≡ ⎢ ity ⎥ = ⎢ ra
⎢ uit ⎥ ⎢ 0
⎢ uitk ⎥ ⎢ 0
⎢ l⎥ ⎢
⎣ uit ⎦ ⎣ 0

βL
β L + β K φ −φ

φβ K
β L + β K φ −φ

βL
β L + β K φ −φ

φ − βL
β L + β K φ −φ

1− β K
β L + β K φ −φ

βK
β L + β K φ −φ

ρ aw ρ ar
ρ ww ρ wr
ρ rw ρ rr

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

ρy

0
0

0

0

0

ρk

0

0

0

0

⎡ ait ⎤
⎢ ⎥
1 0 0 ⎤ ⎢ wit ⎥
⎥⎢ r ⎥
0 1 0 ⎥ ⎢ ity ⎥ = [ Λ
⎥ ⎢ uit ⎥
0 0 1⎥⎦ ⎢ u k ⎥
it
⎢ l⎥
⎣ uit ⎦

0 ⎤ ⎡ ai ,t −1 ⎤ ⎡υita ⎤
0 ⎥ ⎢⎢ wi ,t −1 ⎥⎥ ⎢⎢υitw ⎥⎥
⎥
0 ⎥ ⎢ ri ,t −1 ⎥ ⎢υitr ⎥ ⎡ Π
⎥+⎢ ⎥= ⎢
⎥⎢
0 ⎥ ⎢ uiy,t −1 ⎥ ⎢ ε ity ⎥ ⎣ 0
0 ⎥ ⎢ uik,t −1 ⎥ ⎢ ε itk ⎥
⎥ ⎢ ⎥
⎥⎢
ρ l ⎦ ⎣ uil,t −1 ⎦ ⎣⎢ ε itl ⎦⎥

I 3 ] Fit ,

0⎤
⎡υit ⎤
.
+
F
R ⎥⎦ it ⎢⎢ εit ⎥⎥
⎣ ⎦

The model has 21 parameters:

θ = {β K , β L , φ , ρ aa , ρ aw , ρ ar , ρ wa , ρ ww , ρ wr , ρ ra , ρ rw , ρ rr , σ υ a , σ υ w , σ υ r , σ ε y , σ ε k , σ ε l , ρ y , ρ k , ρ l } ,
where σ υ a , σ υ w , σ υ r are standard deviations of innovations to productivity ( υita ), wages ( υitw ) and
the interest rate (υitr ), and σ ε y , σ ε k , σ ε l are innovations to measurement errors in value added
( ε ity ), capital stock ( ε itk ), and labor input ( ε itl ). Global identification is guaranteed by Proposition
2 and Proposition 3. I use MLE given in (11) to estimate the model with T=5.

37

I report the estimation results in Table 7, column 1. Since the data are not normally
distributed, I bootstrap the estimates to correct the bias and improve the confidence intervals.31
Using bootstrapped critical values, I do not reject the model at any conventional significance
level (p-value=0.4). To contrast the results, I estimate the value-added function
yit = β K kit + β Llit + ξit by OLS, FE, LP, and BB estimators and report these results in columns 2
to 7 in Table 7. I report two versions of the BB estimator: quasi-differenced (column 6) and
twice-quasi-differenced (column 7).
BB, LP and FE estimators yield RTS in a 0.62 to 0.9 range. These estimates suggest a
very large 10-38% profit share in value added if factor markets are perfectly competitive. In
contrast, the observed (accounting) profit share in value added is 2%.32 Also observe that,
consistent with our theoretical results and Monte Carlo experiments, the BB estimator has very
large standard errors and LP estimates are close to FE estimates. On the other hand, the OLS
estimate (RTS=1.30) is inconsistent with profit maximization if factor markets are perfectly
competitive. In addition, the OLS estimate of βL implies increasing returns in labor. The SIV
estimator yields implausibly large RTS. This cacophony in the estimates can be reconciled by the
COV estimates.
First, note that the COV estimates RTS in the revenue function to be 1.17, which is in
line with our argument that the bias in the OLS estimate of RTS is likely to be relatively small.
Second, the estimate of φ is greater than unity and, thus, firms face an upward-sloping labor
supply curve. Since the OLS estimate is biased to φ , the OLS estimate of RTS is greater than
COV estimate of RTS. Third, I find relatively large serially correlated measurement errors.
These errors tend to attenuate the estimates toward zero, especially when estimates are from
within variation. This can explain why FE, BB, and LP produce low RTS. Note that the small
coefficient on capital in BB is consistent with strong downward bias in βK in my Monte Carlo
experiments with serially correlated measurement errors. Finally, since the SIV estimator uses
output to input ratios as instruments and measurement error is present in inputs and factor prices

31

I use non-parametric bootstrap with resampling firms. See Horowitz (1998) for the discussion of bootstrap for
covariance structures.
32
The profit share is computed as the ratio of aggregate gross profit to aggregate value added. Although it is hard to
sign the bias of the accounting profit as a measure of economic profit, the small magnitude of the profit share is
consistent with the discussion in section 2. Alternative definitions of the profit share are in the range of 0.2% to
2.5%.

38

are correlated with technology, the instruments used in the SIV are correlated with the error term
in the revenue function so that the estimates of βL and βK behave wildly.
Increasing returns in the revenue function do not contradict profit maximization because
the labor supply curve is upward sloping. Specifically, the elasticity of the labor cost φ = 1.42
(i.e., the wage premium is 42%) is generally in agreement with the estimates from previous
studies. For example, Shapiro (1986, 1996) and Bils (1987) estimate from aggregate US data that
the shift premium is about 25-40%. Manning (2004) observes that a plausible elasticity of labor
supply is between 2 and 10. In the present case, the point estimate of the implied elasticity of the
labor supply curve 1/(φ − 1) = 2.4 falls nicely in this interval.
According to (41) in Appendix A, I find that the implied elasticity of the cost of capital
and labor is 1.21 and elasticity of the cost of all inputs is 1.07. Using (42) in Appendix A to
compute the profit share from the COV estimates, I find that the profit share in value added is
1.3%, which is a significant improvement in comparison to other estimators.
The correlation between productivity measured according to COV estimates and
productivity measured according to OLS, FE, SIV, LP, BB and BB2 estimates is 0.884, 0.637,
0.248, 0.361, 0.666, and 0.671 respectively. Given these low correlations, one can reach
strikingly different conclusions about which firms are relatively productive when he or she uses
different estimates to construct productivity measures. In light of Monte Carlo simulations, one
may trust COV measures of productivity more than measures of productivity constructed on the
basis of other estimators.33
Note that variation in factor prices is comparable to variation in productivity ait.
Specifically, the point estimates in Table 7 imply that σ (ait ) = 0.332 , σ ( wit ) = 0.513 ,

σ ( rit ) = 0.230 . This supports other evidence on the dispersion of prices even in narrowly defined
industries. I also conclude that ignoring variation in factor prices across firms can lead to serious
identification problems for the inversion-based estimators. Finally, since the markup μ ≥ 1 and
returns to scale in the production function γ = μη ≥ η , one can expect sizable increasing returns
to scale in production.

33

It would be highly informative to compare various productivity measures with measurements based on detailed
case studies or expert assessments of relative performance. Unfortunately, this external information is not available.

39

7

CONCLUSION

This paper has critical and constructive parts. In the critical part, I demonstrate that under weak
assumptions estimates from production function regressions using firm-level data are often
inconsistent with profit maximization or imply implausibly large profits. Specifically, I argue
that firm-level data limitations lead to estimating returns to scale in the revenue function, not
production function. On the other hand, I show that returns to scale in the revenue function
cannot be greater than unity or significantly less than unity as long as the profit share in revenue
is non-negative and factor supplies are perfectly elastic. This prediction sharply contrasts with
the frequent finding that returns to scale in the revenue function at the firm level exceed unity or
are well below unity. On the econometric front, I point out that inversion-based estimators (e.g.,
Olley and Pakes 1996, Pavcnik 2002, Levinsohn and Petrin 2003) lead to inconsistent estimates
because they ignore variation in input mixes (factor prices). I also show that GMM/IV estimators
using lags of endogenous variables as instruments (e.g., Blundell and Bond 1998, 1999) can be
poorly identified in the context of estimating production (revenue) functions because of
economic restrictions on the comovement of inputs and output. Furthermore, I show that these
misspecifications greatly distort measures of productivity so that the researcher using these
estimators can be led to grossly incorrect conclusions about the relative productivity of firms and
magnitudes of productivity differences across firms. In summary, puzzling estimates can stem
from applying misspecified or poorly identified estimators.
In the constructive part, I show that under weak assumptions the elasticity of the factor
supply can reconcile increasing or large decreasing returns in the revenue function and a small
non-negative profit share. Furthermore, I argue that simple structural estimators that model the
cost and the revenue function simultaneously and treat unobserved heterogeneity in productivity
and factor prices symmetrically can resolve many of the problems I identify above. I provide an
example and illustrate the strength of the suggested estimator in Monte Carlo simulations and in
an empirical application.
The paper has broader implications. First, I argue that the profit share can be used as a
robust non-parametric economic diagnostic for estimates of returns to scale. Second, although I
analyze only one industry, it is clear that variation in product and factor prices at the firm-level is
not trivial. This entails important consequences for aggregating firm-level data (and devastating
effects on the inversion-based estimators). Specifically, reallocation effects due to heterogeneity
in factor prices are likely to be of first-order importance. Furthermore, productivity aggregates
40

measure revenue-generating ability in the industry rather than technical efficiency. Third, since it
is fairly common to find constant returns to scale in the revenue function at the firm level and the
markup is not less than unity, returns to scale in production at the firm level can be sizeable.
Hence, business cycle and trade models appropriately calibrated to capture increasing returns to
scale in production (not constant returns to scale in revenue!) can produce qualitatively different
results. In addition, the gap between RTS in production at the aggregate level and RTS in
production at the firm level is smaller than thought before because RTS in production at the
aggregate level were compared to RTS in revenue at the micro level. Fourth, factor supply
curves are likely to be upward-sloping at the firm level. This means that the cost-weighted
composite input does not measure total input correctly and, hence, cost-based Solow residual can
be procyclical.

41

8

REFERENCES

Abbott, Thomas A. III. 1992. “Price Dispersion in U.S. Manufacturing: Implications for the
Aggregation of Products and Firms,” CES Working Paper 92-3.
Abowd, John M., Creecy, Robert H., Kramarz, Francis. 2002. “Computing Person and Firm
Effects Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data,” mimeo.
Ackerberg, D. and Caves, K., 2003. Structural Identification of Production Functions. Mimeo.
Adams, A. Frank, 1997. “Search Costs and Price Dispersion in a Localized, Homogeneous
Product Market: Some Empirical Evidence,” Review of Industrial Organization 12 (5-6),
801-808.
Anderson T. W., Amemiya, Yasuo, 1988. “The Asymptotic Normal Distribution of Estimators in
Factor Analysis under General Conditions,” The Annals of Statistics 16(2), 759-771.
Arellano, Manuel. 2003. Panel Data Econometrics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arrelano, Manual and Stephen Bond, 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies
58(2), 277-297.
Bartelsman, Eric J., and Mark Doms, 2000. “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from
Longitudinal Microdata,” Journal of Economic Literature 38(3), 569-594.
Bartelsman, Eric J., and Phoebus J. Dhrymes, 1998. “Productivity dynamics: US manufacturing
plants, 1972-1986,” Journal of Productivity Analysis 9(1), 5-34.
Basu, Susanto, 1999. “Discussion of “Estimating production function using intermediate inputs
to control for unobservables” by A. Petrin and J. Levinsohn,” NBER Productivity
Program meeting.
Basu, Susanto, Fernald, John G., 1997. “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications,” Journal of Political Economy 105(2), 249-283.
Bekker, Paul A., Arjen Merckens, and Tom J. Wansbeek, 1994. Identification, Equivalent
Models and Computer Algebra. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bils, Mark, 1987. “The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price,” American Economic
Review 77(5), 838-855.
Biorn, Erik, Kjersti-Gro Lindquist, Terje Skjerpen, 2002. “Heterogeneity in Returns to Scale: A
Random Coefficient Analysis with Unbalanced Panel Data,” Journal of Productivity
Analysis 18, 39-57.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Charles M. Kahn, 1980. “The Solution of Linear Difference Models
under Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 48(5), 1305-1312.
Blundell, Richard, Bond, Stephen, 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics 87, 115-143.
Blundell, Richard, Bond, Stephen, 1999. “GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An
Application to Production Functions,” IFS Working paper #W99/4.
Bollen, Kenneth A., 1989. Structural Equations with Latent Variables. Wiley.
Bond, Stephen and Mans Soderborm, 2005. Adjustment Costs and the Identification of CobbDouglas Production Functions. Institute of Fiscal Studies WP 05/04.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., 1988. “Empirical studies of industries with market power,” in R.
Schmalensee and R. Willig, eds. Handbook of industrial organization. Vol. 2,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1011-1057.
Burdett, Kenneth, Judd, Kenneth L. 1983. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Econometrica 51,
955–969.

42

Clark, Todd E., 1996. “Small-Sample Properties of Estimators of Nonlinear Models of
Covariance Structure,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14(3), 367-373.
Dahlby, Bev, West, Douglas S. 1986. “Price Dispersion in an Automobile Insurance Market,”
Journal of Political Economy 94, 418–438.
Fabiani, S., M. Druant, I. Hernando, C. Kwapil, B. Landau, C., Loupias, F. Martins, T. Mathä, R.
Sabbatini, H. Stahl, A. Stockman. 2004. “The Pricing Behavior of Firms in the Euro
Area,” mimeo.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2005. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” mimeo.
Glover, Keith, Willems, Jan C., 1974. “Parameterizations of Linear Dynamical Systems:
Canonical Forms and Identifiability,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 19(6):
640-646.
Gordon, Stephen, 1992. “Costs of adjustment, the aggregation problem and investment,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 74(3), 422-429.
Griliches, Zvi and Vidar Ringstad, 1971. “Economies of scale and the form of the production
function; an econometric study of Norwegian manufacturing establishment data,”
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Griliches, Zvi, and Hausman, Jerry A., 1986. “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of
Econometrics 40, 93-118.
Griliches, Zvi, and Mairesse, Jacques, 1995. “Production Functions: the Search for
Identification,” NBER Working Paper # 5067.
Hoch, Irving, 1958. “Simultaneous Equation Bias in the Context of the Cobb-Douglas
Production Function,” Econometrica 36(4): 566-578.
Hoch, Irving, 1961. “Estimation of Production Function Parameters Combining Time-Series and
Cross Section Data,” Econometrica 30(1): 34-53.
Horowitz, Joel L., 1998. “Bootstrap Methods for Covariance Structures,” Journal of Human
Resources 33(1), 39-61.
Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, 2004. “Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and
Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2), 402-456.
Hsiao, C., M.H. Pesaran, A.K. Tahmisciouglu, 2002. “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Fixed
Effects Dynamic Panel Data Models Covering Short Time Periods,” Journal of
Econometrics 109(1), 107-150.
Juhn, Chinhui, Murphy, Kevin M., Pierce, Brooks, 1993. “Wage inequality and the rise in the
returns to skill,” Journal of Political Economy 101, 410-442.
Katayama, Haijime, Shihua Lu, and James Tybout, 2003. “Why Plant-Level Productivity Studies
are Often Misleading, and an Alternative Approach to Interference,” NBER Working
Paper #9617.
Kinal, Terrence W., 1980. “The Existence of Moments of k-class estimators,” Econometrica
48(1), 241-250.
Klette, Tor Jakob, and Zvi Griliches, 1996. “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators
When Output Prices are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics
11(4), 343-361.
Korn, Granito A., and Theresa M. Korn, 1968. Mathematical Handbook for Scientists and
Engineers. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Lach, Saul, 2002. “Existence and Persistence of Price Dispersion: An Empirical Analysis,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3): 433-444.
43

Levinsohn, James, Petrin, Amil, 2003. “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies 70, 317-341.
Lui, L. 1991. Entry-Exit and Productivity Changes: An Empirical Analysis of Efficiency
Frontiers. Ph.D. thesis, University of Michigan.
Lui, L. 1993. “Entry, exit and learning in the Chilean manufacturing sector,” Journal of
Development Economics 42, 217-242.
Lui, L., and Tybout , J. 1996. Productivity growth in Columbia and Chile: Panel-based evidence
on the role of entry, exit, and learning, in Roberts, M., and Tybout J., eds., Producer
Heterogeneity and Performance in the Semi-Industrialized Countries Chapter 4, World
Bank.
Mairesse, Jacques, Griliches, Zvi, 1990. “Heterogeneity in Panel Data: Are There Stable
production Functions,” in Peter Champsaur, Michael Deleau, Jean-Michel Grandmont,
Roger Guesnerie, Claude Henry, Jean-Jacque Laffont, Guy Laroque, Jacques Mairesse,
Alain Monfort and Yves Younes (eds), Essays in Honor of Edmond Malinvaud, Vol. 3.,
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, pp. 192-231.
Maravall, Agustin, 1979. Identification in Dynamic Shock-Error Models, Berlin: SpringerVerlag.
Maravall, Agustin, and Dennis J. Aigner, 1977. “Identification of the Dynamic Shock-Error
Model: The Case of Dynamic Regression,” in D.J. Aigner and A.S. Goldberger, eds.,
Latent Variables in Socio-economic Models, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Marschak, J., Andrews, W.H., 1944. “Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory of
Production,” Econometrica 12(3/4), 143-205.
Mavroeidis, Sophocles, 2004. “Weak Identification of Forward-Looking Models in Monetary
Economics,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 66(0), 609-635.
McElroy, Marjorie B., 1987. “Additive General Error Models for Production, Cost, and Derived
Demand or Share Systems,” Journal of Political Economy 95(4), 737-757.
Mortensen, Dale T., 2003. Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Differently? MIT
Press.
Mundlak, Yaari, 1961. “Empirical Production Function Free of Management Bias,” Journal of
Farm Economics 43, 44-56.
Olley, Steven G., Pakes, Ariel, 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry,” Econometrica 64(6), 1263-1297.
Pavcnik, Nina, 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from
Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies 69(1), 245-276.
Pratt, John W., Wise, David A., Zeckhauser, Richard, 1979. “Price Differences in Almost
Competitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(2), 189-211.
Pratten, Cliff. 1988. “A Survey of the Economies of Scale,” in Commission of the European
Communities, Research on the Cost on Non-Europe, vol. 2., Brussels: Commission of the
European Communities.
Roberts, Mark J., Supina, Dylan, 1996. “Output Prices and Markup Dispersion in Micro Data:
The Roles of Producer and Heterogeneity and Noise,” European Economic Review 40,
909-921.
Salop, Steven C., and Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1982. “The Theory of Sales: A Simple Model of
Equilibrium Price Dispersion with Identical Agents,” American Economic Review 72,
1121–1130.
Schmidt, Peter, 1988. “Estimation of a Fixed-Effect Cobb-Douglas System Using Panel Data,”
Journal of Econometrics 37, 361-380.
44

Shapiro, Matthew D., 1986. “The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101(3), 513-542.
Sorensen, Alan T., 2000. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription
Drugs,” Journal of Political Economy 108(4), 833-850.
Stahl, Dale O., II. 1989. “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” American
Economic review 79, 700–712.
Stigler, George J., 1961. “The Economics of Information,” Journal of Political Economy 69,
213–225.
Stigler, George J., 1976. “The Xistence of X-Efficiency,” American Economic Review 66, 213–
216.
Swamy, P.A.V.B., 1970. “Efficient Estimation in A Random Coefficient Regression Model,”
Econometrica 38, 311-323.
Tse, Edison, Anton, John J., 1972. “On the Identifiability of Parameters,” IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control 17(5): 637-646.
Tybout, James R., Westbrook, M. Daniel, 1996. “Scale Economies as a Source of Efficiency
Gains,” In: Roberts, Mark J., Tybout, James R., eds., Industrial Evolution in Developing
Countries. Oxford University Press, Cambridge, pp. 104-141.
Yoskowitz, David W., 2002. “Price Dispersion and Price Discrimination: Empirical Evidence
from a Spot Market for Water,” Review of Industrial Organization 20(3), 283-289.
Zellner, A., Kmenta, J., Dreze, J., 1966. “Specification and Estimation of Cobb-Douglas
Production Function Models,” Econometrica 34(4), 784-795.

45

Table 1. Profit share sπ as a function of returns to scale in the revenue
function and the elasticity of the cost with respect to inputs
Returns to scale
in the revenue
function

Elasticity of the cost
with respect to inputs
φ <1
φ ≈1
φ >1

η <1

small sπ

large sπ

large sπ

η ≈1

negative sπ

small sπ

large sπ

η >1

negative sπ

negative sπ

small sπ

46

Table 2. Estimates of returns to scale: One input
OLS
(1)

η

ρ (aˆit , ait )

η

ρ (aˆit , ait )

η

ρ (aˆit , ait )

η

ρ (aˆit , ait )

FE
(2)

BB
(3)

SIV
(4)

COV
(5)

-0.001
0.013
0.013

0.001
0.006
0.006

0.381

1.000

1.000

Panel B: i.i.d. measurement error
Median bias
0.332
0.217
0.225
Standard deviation
0.004
0.005
0.259
Root MSE
0.332
0.217
0.348

-0.001
0.039
0.039

0.001
0.007
0.008

1.000

1.000

Panel C: serially correlated measurement error
Median bias
0.288
0.192
0.145
-0.267
Standard deviation
0.006
0.005
0.200
0.024
Root MSE
0.288
0.193
0.247
0.269

0.000
0.018
0.018

Median estimate

0.916

0.997

Panel D: correlated factor prices and productivity
Median bias
0.423
0.313
0.223
-1.773
Standard deviation
0.004
0.005
0.413
0.323
Root MSE
0.423
0.313
0.475
1.844

0.001
0.008
0.008

Median estimate

0.987

Panel A: no measurement error
Median bias
0.359
0.272
0.221
Standard deviation
0.003
0.003
0.112
Root MSE
0.359
0.272
0.251
Median estimate

Median estimate

0.658

0.454

0.450

0.341

0.501

0.412

0.465

0.322

0.281

0.339

0.240

0.975

Note: The table reports median bias, standard deviation and root MSE for OLS, Schmidt’s
instrumental variables (SIV), covariance (COV), fixed effects (FE), and Blundell-Bond (BB)
estimators. The data generating process is (12)-(15): one input and one output. Each experiment
is simulated 1,000 times. In all experiments, ρ a = 0.9, ρ w = 0.5, σ υ a = σ υ w = 1 . In panel A,

ρ (υitw ,υita ) = 0, σ ε z = σ ε y = 0 . In panel B, ρ (υitw ,υita ) = 0, σ ε z = σ ε y = 1 . In panel C, ρ (υitw ,υita ) = 0 ,
σ ε y = 0 , ε itz = ρ zε iz,t −e + eit , σ e2 = 1 , ρ z = 0.8 . In panel D, ρ (υitw ,υita ) = 0.7, σ ε z = σ ε y = 0 .
ρ (aˆit , ait ) is the correlation between true productivity ait and measured productivity aˆit given
the estimate of η . See text for further details.

47

Table 3. Estimates of returns to scale: Multiple inputs
Parameter values

OLS
(1)

FE
(2)

BB
(3)

LP
(4)

SIV
(5)

COV
(6)

-0.009
0.100

0.000
0.007

βK

Median bias
St. Dev.

Panel A: no measurement error
0.033
-0.011
-0.019
0.001
0.004
0.003
0.054
0.003

βL

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.265
0.006

0.270
0.006

0.482
0.206

0.265
0.006

-0.001
0.034

-0.001
0.010

βM

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.123
0.006

0.096
0.006

-0.302
0.130

0.087
0.006

0.004
0.049

0.000
0.007

η

Median bias
St. Dev.
Root MSE

0.421
0.002
0.421

0.356
0.003
0.356

0.161
0.074
0.177

0.353
0.004
0.353

-0.006
0.054
0.054

0.000
0.007
0.007

Median est.

0.505

0.389

0.342

0.666

1.000

1.000

Panel B: i.i.d. measurement error
0.077
0.032
0.042
0.048
0.006
0.006
0.230
0.007

-0.017
0.144

0.000
0.011

ρ (aˆit , ait )

βK

Median bias
St. Dev.

βL

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.269
0.007

0.259
0.008

0.254
0.274

0.269
0.007

-0.007
0.077

0.001
0.025

βM

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.069
0.007

0.042
0.008

0.092
0.264

0.014
0.010

0.000
0.099

0.000
0.038

η

Median bias
St. Dev.
Root MSE

0.415
0.003
0.415

0.334
0.005
0.334

0.388
0.260
0.467

0.331
0.008
0.331

-0.024
0.126
0.129

0.001
0.025
0.025

0.612

0.420

0.391

0.709

1.000

1.000

ρ (aˆit , ait )

Median est.
(continued on next page)

48

Table 3 (continued)
Parameter values

OLS
(1)

FE
(2)

BB
(3)

LP
(4)

Panel C: upward sloping labor supply curve
Median bias
0.044
-0.002
-0.017
0.010
St. Dev.
0.004
0.004
0.052
0.003

βK

SIV
(5)

COV
(6)

-0.075
0.069

0.000
0.008

βL

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.443
0.009

0.446
0.009

0.791
0.285

0.443
0.009

1.810
0.120

-0.001
0.017

βM

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.117
0.006

0.093
0.006

-0.297
0.108

0.083
0.006

-0.500
0.026

0.000
0.008

η

Median bias
St. Dev.
Root MSE

0.604
0.004
0.604

0.536
0.005
0.536

0.477
0.178
0.509

0.536
0.006
0.536

1.235
0.045
1.236

-0.001
0.013
0.013

Median est.

0.310

0.253

0.203

0.552

-0.414

0.999

ρ (aˆit , ait )

Note: The table reports median bias, st. dev. and MSE of OLS, Schmidt’s instrumental variables
(SIV), covariance (COV), fixed effects (FE), Blundell-Bond (BB), and Levinsohn-Petrin (LP)
estimators. The data generating process is (19)-(22): three inputs and one output. The estimated
revenue function is (18). Each experiment is simulated 1,000 times. In all parameterizations,
βK=0.1η,
βL=0.1η,
βM=0.1η,
η=0.55,
ρr=0.5,
ρw=0.6,
ρ p M =0.4,
ρa=0.9,

συ r = σ υ w = συ p = σ υ a = 1 . In panel A, συy= σεk= σεl=0, φ = 1 . In panel B, συy= σεk= σεl=1, φ = 1 .
M

In panel C, συy= σεk= σεl =0, φ = 1.5 . ρ ( aˆit , ait ) is the correlation between true productivity ait
and measured productivity aˆit given the estimates of βK, βL, and βM. See text for further details.

49

Table 4. Estimates of returns to scale: Multiple inputs with adjustment costs
Parameter values

OLS
(1)

FE
(2)

BB
(3)

LP
(4)

SIV
(5)

COV
(6)

3.714
0.512

-0.002
0.044

βK

Median bias
St. Dev.

Panel A: no measurement error
0.169
0.250
0.285
0.187
0.011
0.025
0.495
0.014

βL

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.442
0.007

0.389
0.006

0.345
0.170

0.442
0.007

-0.093
0.084

0.000
0.018

βM

Median bias
St. Dev.

-0.096
0.005

-0.087
0.005

0.106
0.163

-0.186
0.007

-0.079
0.035

0.000
0.011

η

Median bias
St. Dev.
Root MSE

0.516
0.009
0.266

0.552
0.023
0.305

0.735
0.454
0.747

0.443
0.011
0.197

3.542
0.444
12.741

-0.002
0.045
0.002

ρ (aˆit , ait )

Median est.

0.361

0.276

0.121

0.487

-0.486

1.000

βK

Median bias
St. Dev.

Panel B: i.i.d. measurement error
0.153
0.059
0.032
0.154
0.011
0.014
0.178
0.011

-0.055
61.911

0.008
0.061

βL

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.369
0.008

0.317
0.008

1.105
0.339

0.369
0.008

2.385
51.015

-0.001
0.034

βM

Median bias
St. Dev.

-0.037
0.008

-0.047
0.007

-0.696
0.312

-0.086
0.010

-1.893
35.505

-0.002
0.018

Median bias
St. Dev.
Root MSE

0.486
0.009
0.236

0.329
0.015
0.108

0.441
0.230
0.248

0.437
0.014
0.191

0.437
46.387
2151.950

0.005
0.057
0.003

Median est.
(continued on next page)

0.294

0.206

0.065

0.218

-0.436

0.999

η

ρ (aˆit , ait )

50

Table 4 continued
Parameter values

βK

OLS
(1)

FE
(2)

BB
(3)

LP
(4)

Panel C: upward sloping labor supply curve
Median bias -0.014
-0.021
0.339
-0.004
St. Dev.
0.005
0.013
0.454
0.016

SIV
(5)

COV
(6)

3.026
0.369

0.000
0.046

βL

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.455
0.005

0.398
0.005

0.628
0.228

0.455
0.005

-0.014
0.059

-0.001
0.028

βM

Median bias
St. Dev.

0.039
0.004

0.062
0.004

-0.140
0.074

0.021
0.010

-0.012
0.032

0.000
0.011

η

Median bias
St. Dev.
Root MSE

0.481
0.003
0.231

0.439
0.011
0.193

0.827
0.442
0.880

0.472
0.011
0.223

2.999
0.315
9.096

-0.001
0.048
0.002

ρ (aˆit , ait )

Median est.

0.267

0.237

0.349

0.154

-0.492

0.989

Note: The table reports median bias, st. dev. and MSE of OLS, Schmidt’s instrumental variables
(SIV), covariance (COV), fixed effects (FE), Blundell-Bond (BB), and Levinsohn-Petrin (LP)
estimators. The data generating process is (26). The estimated revenue function is (18). Each
experiment is simulated 1,000 times. In all parameterizations, βK=0.1η, βL=0.1η, βM=0.1η,
η=0.55, ρr=0.5, ρw=0.6, ρ p M =0.4, ρa=0.9, σ υ r = σ υ w = σ υ p M = σ υ a = 1 , ψ = 6 . In panel A, συy=
σεk= σεl=0, φ = 1 . In panel B, συy= σεk= σεl=1, φ = 1 . In panel C, συy= σεk= σεl =0, φ = 1.5 .
ρ (aˆit , ait ) is the correlation between true productivity ait and measured productivity aˆit given
the estimates of βK, βL, and βM. See text for further details.

51

Table 5. Descriptive statistics
Variable
Ln(real value added)

Ln(real capital stock)
Ln(number of employees)

variation
overall
between
within
overall
between
within
overall
between
within

Mean
4.190

7.649
3.763

Std. Dev.
1.636
1.548
0.528
1.799
1.701
0.448
1.078
0.986
0.325

Min
0.269
0.793
1.790
3.432
3.935
4.973
2.303
2.303
1.982

Max
9.437
8.816
6.355
12.492
12.330
9.627
7.145
6.709
5.095

Note: This table reports descriptive statistics for Chilean manufacturing plants in SIC 3240
industry (Manufacture of footware). The time span is from 1982 to 1996. Real value added is
nominal value added deflated by the industry price index. Employment includes production and
non-production workers. Capital stock, which includes machines and structures, is constructed
by perpetual inventory method. See references cited in the text for further information.

52

Table 6. Covariance and autocovariance matrices
Yt
Kt
Lt
Yt-1
Kt-1
Lt-1
Yt-2
Kt-2
Lt-2
Yt-3
Kt-3
Lt-3
Yt-4
Kt-4
Lt-4

Kt
256.3
344.8
176.3
251.3
333.4
172.5
248.0
324.0
169.2
245.1
316.1
166.5
243.6
308.2
163.5

Yt
261.5
256.3
168.0
244.8
249.2
163.5
239.3
244.0
159.5
233.3
239.5
155.6
230.4
234.1
152.4

Lt
168.0
176.3
126.0
163.7
171.9
120.0
160.7
167.8
116.0
157.3
164.2
112.3
155.3
159.9
109.2

Note: This table presents covariance and autocovariance matrices for logs of value added (Yt),
capital stock (Kt) and labor (Lt) after projecting these variables on the complete set of time
dummies. See note to Table 5 for further details.

53

Table 7. Estimation results

βK
βL

φ
η

συa
συw
συr

COV
(1)
0.498
[0.423, 0.514]
0.697
[0.510, 0.730]
1.420
[1.307, 1.578]
1.172
[1.008, 1.226]

OLS
(2)
0.198
(0.017)
1.105
(0.029)

FE
(3)
0.146
(0.029)
0.677
(0.047)

SIV
(4)
-0.398
(0.050)
2.952
(0.131)

LP
(5)
0.135
(0.054)
0.672
(0.073)

BB
(6)
0.197
(0.130)
0.676
(0.132)

BB-2
(7)
0.2099
(0.123)
0.6897
(0.128)

1.302
(0.017)

0.822
(0.043)

2.554
(0.089)

0.807
(0.112)

0.874
(0.161)

0.899
(0.160)

Factor prices and technology: standard deviation of innovations and serial correlation
ρaa
ρaw
ρar
0.0306
0.9059
-0.0602
[0.002, 0.408]
[0.732, 0.961]
[-0.163, 0.031]
ρwa
ρww
ρwr
0.0163
0.3118
0.8177
[0.001, 0.442]
[-0.315, 0.533]
[0.074, 0.915]
ρ
ρ
ρrr
0.0657
-0.5024
-0.0359
ra
rw
[0.001, 0.520]
[-0.795, -0.147]
[-0.181, 0.097]

(continued on next page)

54

-0.2719
[-0.463, -0.042]
0.0398
[-0.090, 0.264]
0.1579
[-0.443, 0.408]

Table 7 continued
σεv
σεk
σkl

Measurement errors: standard deviation of innovations and serial correlation
ρv
1.862
0.143
[1.665, 2.008]
[-0.110, 0.439]
ρk
1.8052
0.9305
[1.581, 1.972]
[0.903, 0.957]
ρl
1.5222
0.7609
[1.331, 1.668]
[0.651, 0.844]

Note: The COV model is described in (27)-(38). 95% bootstrap confidence interval is in square parentheses. FE is fixed
effects, LP is Levinsohn-Petrin estimator, BB is Blundell-Bond estimator, SIV is Schmidt’s instrumental variables
estimator. BB estimator is unrestricted and the reported coefficients are on the current kit and lit. Standard errors are in
parentheses. R2 in the OLS regression is 0.92. The LM test does not reject AR(1) model for the error term in the BB
estimator.

55

150

Figure 1. Kernel density of estimates for returns to scale: One input

0

50

100

True value

.4

.6
OLS

.8
BB

1
FE

SIV

1.2
COV

Note: The figure plots Epanechnikov kernel densities of the returns to scale in the revenue
function for OLS, Schmidt’s instrumental variables (SIV), covariance (COV), fixed effects (FE),
and Bond-Blundell (BB) estimators. Parameter values of the data generating process are for the
scenario reported in Panel A, Table 2. Returns to scale are on horizontal axis. The data
generating process is (12)-(15). The estimated revenue function is (16). Each experiment is
simulated 1,000 times. See text and Table 2 for further details.

56

100

150

200

Figure 2. Kernel density of estimates for returns to scale: Multiple inputs

0

50

True value

.4

.6

.8

OLS
COV

BB
SIV

1
FE
LP

Note: The figure plots Epanechnikov kernel densities of the returns to scale in the revenue
function for OLS, Schmidt’s instrumental variables (SIV), covariance (COV), fixed effects (FE),
and Bond-Blundell (BB), and Levinsohn-Petrin (LP) estimators. Parameter values of the data
generating process are for the scenario reported in Panel A, Table 3. Returns to scale are on
horizontal axis. The data generating process is (19)-(22): three inputs and one output. The
estimated revenue function is (18). Each experiment is simulated 1,000 times. See text and Table
3 for further details.

57

0

.1

Bias
.2

.3

.4

Figure 3. Profit share and bias in returns to scale

0

.1

.2

Profit share

OLS
LP

BB
SIV

.3

.4

.5

FE
COV

Note: The figure reports the bias in the estimated returns to scale in the revenue functions for
various values of the profit share. The lines are from lowess which smoothes over 100
replications for each value of the profit share. Parameterization is as in Panel A of Table 3. The
data generating process is (19)-(22): three inputs and one output. The estimated revenue function
is (18). BB is Blundell-Bond estimator, FE is fixed effects, SIV is Schmidt’s IV, LP is
Levinsohn-Petrin estimator, COV is the covariance estimator. SIV essentially coincides with
COV in this figure.

58

Appendix A: Extensions
Multi-input case
This section presents the n-input analogue for the model considered in Section 2.1. One could

derive results as first order approximations but without loss of generality it is convenient to work
with specific functional forms. The production function is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas:
Qit = Aitμ ∏ j =1 L j ,jit where i, t, j index firms, time, and inputs, γ = ∑ j =1 α j is returns to scale in
α

n

n

production, Ait is Hicks-neutral firm-specific productivity, and Lj,it is jth input. The inverse
demand function is isoelastic Pit = Git ⋅ Qit−1/ σ where Pit is the price of the good, Qit is the quantity
of the good, G is a demand shifter, and σ is the elasticity of demand. The markup is

μ = σ /(σ − 1) .

Hence,

the

revenue

function

is

Yit = PitQit = Git ( Aitμ ∏ j =1 L j ,jit )1−1 σ = Git Ait ∏ j =1 L j ,jit , where β i = αi μ , and η = ∑ j =1 β j is RTS in
n

α

n

β

n

the revenue function. Also note that Ait and Git are isomorphic in the revenue function so that the
econometrician cannot separate these shocks. Hence, I drop Git from the analysis and concentrate
φ

on Ait only. The cost for input j is given by C j ( L j ) = W j ,it L jj,it where φ j is the elasticity of the cost
of input j. The profit maximization problem is then max { L1.it ,...,Ln . it } π it where

π it ≡ Yit − ∑ j =1 C j ( L j ) = Ait ∏ j =1 L j ,it − ∑ j =1W j ,it L j ,it .
n

n

βj

n

φj

I take logs of the first order conditions, suppress uninteresting constants, partial out industrywide shocks, and get the following expressions for optimal input choices and revenue
0
⎡ −φ1
⎢ 0
−φ2
⎢
0
⎢ 0
⎢
⎢
⎢ 0
0
⎢
⎣ − β1 − β 2

0
0

0
0

−φ3

0

0
− β3

−φn
−βn

1⎤
1⎥ ⎡ l1,it ⎤ ⎡ w1,it ⎤
⎥
⎥
1⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
=
⎥
⎥ ⎢ln ,it ⎥ ⎢ wn ,it ⎥
⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎥
1⎥ ⎣ yit ⎦ ⎣ ait ⎦
⎥
1⎦

⎡ l1,it ⎤
⎡ w1,it ⎤
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⇒ X it ≡
=Λ
= ΛFit ,
⎢ ln ,it ⎥
⎢ wn ,it ⎥
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎣ yit ⎦
⎣ ait ⎦

where
⎡ψ 11 − ∑ βψ
ψ 12 β 2
ψ 13β 3
i ≠1 i 1i
⎢
⎢
ψ 21β1
ψ 22 − ∑ i ≠2 βψ
ψ 13β 3
i 2i
⎢
⎢
ψ 31β1
ψ 32 β 2
ψ 33 − ∑ i ≠3 βψ
1
i 3i
⎢
Λ= n
n
⎢
β
ψ
−
φ
∑
∏
j jj
i
⎢
j =1
i =1
ψ n ,1β1
ψ n ,2 β 2
ψ 13β 3
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
ψ 11β1
ψ 22 β 2
ψ 33β 3

59

ψ 1,n −1β n −1
ψ 1,n −1β n −1
ψ 1,n β n
ψ n ,n − ∑ i ≠n βψ
i n ,i
ψ n ,n β n

−ψ 11 ⎤
⎥
−ψ 22 ⎥ ,
⎥
−ψ 33 ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
−ψ n ,n ⎥
⎥
n
−∏ i=1φi ⎥⎦

(39)

ψ ij = ∏ s ≠i , j φs
n

ψ ij = 1

and

s ≠ i, j

if

is

an

empty

set.

Observe

that

det Λ = ∑ j =1 β jψ jj − ∏ i =1 φi < 0 which is the necessary and sufficient condition for the profit
n

n

function to be concave.
One can use information from the first order conditions to compute the cost shares.
φ −1

Observe that for each input j, the first order condition is β j Yit L j ,it = φ jW j ,it L jj,it . Hence,
φ

C j ( L j ) = W j ,it L jj,it = β j Yit φ j . If follows that the cost share for input j is given by

ωj =

C j (Lj )

∑ h=1 Ch ( Lh )
n

=

β j φj

∑ h=1 β h φh
n

.

(40)

The elasticity of the cost with respect to all inputs is

∑ β
=
∑ β φ
n

φ = ∑ h =1 ωhφh
n

h

h =1

n

h =1

h

.

(41)

h

Using this expression one can find the profit share in terms of cost and revenue elasticities:
sπ = 1 −

n
γ
= 1 − ∑ h =1 β h φh .
μφ

(42)

Constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function
Consider the CES production function Q = Aμ (ωK K ρ + ωL Lρ )γ / ρ where

1
1− ρ

is the elasticity of

substitution. In this example, I assume that productivity and factor prices are mutually
uncorrelated. Otherwise the structure is the same as in the Cobb-Douglas case. The profit
function is given by: π = A(ωK K ρ + ωL Lρ )γ

( μρ )

− RK − WL . The first order conditions with

respect to capital and labor are: η sKY / K = R , η sLY / L = W where sK = ωK K ρ /(ωK K ρ + ωL Lρ ) ,
sL = 1 − sK . After log-linearizing first-order conditions and the revenue function, one has the
following

structural

equations:

y = η s K k + η sL l + a ,

y − l + ρ sK (l − k ) = w . The reduced form is
⎡ 1
⎢1 − η
⎡ y⎤ ⎢
⎢ 1
X = ⎢k ⎥ = ⎢
⎢ ⎥ 1 −η
⎣⎢ l ⎦⎥ ⎢ 1
⎢
⎢1 − η
⎣

⎤
η sK
η (1 − sK )
−
⎥
1 −η
1 −η
⎥ ⎡a⎤
1 − η + sK (η − ρ )
(η − ρ )(1 − sK ) ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
r .
−
−
(1 − ρ )(1 − η )
(1 − ρ )(1 − η ) ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
⎥ ⎢ w⎥
sK (η − ρ )
1 − ρ − sK (η − ρ ) ⎥ ⎣ ⎦
−
−
(1 − ρ )(1 − η )
(1 − ρ )(1 − η ) ⎥⎦
−

60

y − k + ρ sL ( k − l ) = r ,

The model has six parameters: θ = {η , sK , ρ , σ a , σ w , σ r } . It is straightforward (but tedious) to
show that ∇θ E ( XX ′) has full rank and, hence, the model is locally identified almost everywhere.

Rational Expectations models
Following Blanchard and Kahn (1980), one can show that, after log-linearization, rational profit-

maximizing producer behavior can be summarized as follows:
⎡ Gt ⎤ ⎡0 Π12
St ≡ ⎢ H t ⎥ = ⎢0 Π 22
⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎢⎣ Z t ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣0 0

Π13 ⎤ ⎡ Gt −1 ⎤ ⎡ B1 ⎤
Π 23 ⎥ ⎢ H t −1 ⎥ + ⎢ B2 ⎥ υt = ΠSt −1 + Bυt ,
⎥⎢
⎥ ⎢ ⎥
Π 33 ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣ Z t −1 ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣ B3 ⎥⎦

(43)

where Gt is p×1 vector of endogenous non-predetermined variables (e.g., materials), Ht is m×1
vector of endogenous predetermined variables (e.g., capital), Zt is n×1 vector of exogenous
variables, υt is vector of serially uncorrelated innovations. The econometrician observes only Gt
and Ht. The number of shocks is not less than the number of observed variables, i.e., n ≥ m + p .
No assumptions are made about the sources of shocks υt, which can be shocks to adjustment
costs, factor prices, productivity, etc. Hence, the setup is very general.
The autocovariance matrix of the observed variables collected in X t = [Gt′ H t′]′ = ϒSt
with ϒ ≡ [ I p + m

0] is given by Γ k ≡ E ( X t X t′−k ) = ϒΠ k Γ0 ϒ′ , k=0,1,…, where Γ0 ≡ E ( St St′) ,

vec( Γ 0 ) = ( I m + p +n − Π ⊗ Π ) −1 vec( BΩB′) , and Ω ≡ E (υt υt′) . Given that Γ k , k=0,1,…, and

matrices Π, B are deterministic one-to-one functions of structural parameters, one can use
methods presented in section 3.4 to set up likelihood function for MLE. Specifically, the loglikelihood function for the no-firm-specific-effects and no-measurement-error case is given by

∑

N

ˆ Φ −1} − ln | Φ
ˆ | −Tn where Φ
ˆ =
l ( X i , θ ) = ln | Φ T | +trace{Φ
T
T
T
T
i =1

1
N

∑

N
i =1

X i X i′ , n is the number

of observed choices of firms, and

⎡ Γ0
⎢
Γ
ΦT ≡ ⎢ 1
⎢
⎢
⎣ ΓT

Γ1

⎤ ⎡⎢ ϒΓ 0 ϒ′
⎥ ⎢
⎥ = ⎢ ϒΠΓ 0 ϒ′
⎥ ⎢
⎥
Γ 0 ⎦ ⎢ ϒΠ T Γ ϒ′
0
⎣

ϒΠΓ 0 ϒ′

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥.
⎥
⎥
ϒΓ 0 ϒ′ ⎦

The likelihood can be easily extended to cases with measurement errors and firm-specific effects.

61

Note that model (43) is highly nonlinear in structural parameters. Hence, global identification
is hard to prove in general. Local identification is easy to verify (numerically) by checking the
rank of the relevant Jacobian.
Identification in models with adjustment costs

In this section I show that, under certain assumptions, the Blundell-Bond estimator is not
identified even in the presence of adjustment costs. In the spirit to the results in Section 4.2, poor
identification arises because profit maximization imposes restrictions on the dynamic and
contemporaneous comovement of inputs and output. The following proposition gives the
necessary condition for identification of the BB estimator for any rational expectation model
described by (43).

Proposition 6
Consider rational profit-maximizing firm characterized by the reduced-form dynamics as in (43).
Then if n < 2p+m–1, the unconstrained Blundell-Bond estimator is not identified.
Proof: see Appendix B.
Profit maximization can impose further restrictions on the dynamic and contemporaneous
correlation between variables so that the estimator is not identified even when the presented
necessary condition is satisfied. The following proposition provides an important example where
BB is not identified although the necessary condition is satisfied.

Proposition 7
Consider rational profit-maximizing firm characterized by the reduced-form dynamics as in (43).
Suppose that Π 33 is diagonal and that output and one of the inputs are free to adjust
contemporaneously in response to shocks. Then, irrespective of the number of the structural
shocks, the unconstrained Blundell-Bond estimator is not identified to a first-order log-linear
approximation.
Proof: see Appendix B.
If production function is Cobb-Douglas, then log-linear approximation is exact and, thus,
even higher order approximation cannot identify the parameters. Using the argument of
Proposition 4 it is straightforward to show that even when BB is locally identified, there could be
several solutions.

62

Appendix B: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.
Consider

cost

minimization

problem,

which

is

implied

by

profit

maximization:

L ≡ ( L1 ,..., Ls ) = arg min{∑ j =1 C j ( L j ) : f ( L) = Q} , where f is the production function, C j ( L j ) is
n

L

the cost of input Lj, Q is output.
The first order condition gives C ′j ( L j ) = λ f j′( L) for j = 1,..., n where λ is the Lagrange
multiplier and f is the production function. Multiply both sides by Lj for each j and sum over j to
get

∑

C ′ ( L j ) L j = λ ∑ j =1 f j′( L) L j
j =1 j

n

n

n

Q ⋅ AC (Q ) ⋅ ∑
j =1

C ′j ( L j ) L j C j ( L j )

C j ( L j ) TC ( Q )

⇔
n

= MC (Q ) ⋅ ∑ f j′( L) L j

⇔

j =1

⎞ 1 n
AC (Q )
AC (Q ) ⎛ n
φ =γ ,
φ
ω
⎜ ∑ j j ⎟ = ∑ f j′( L) L j ⇔ (by Euler’s theorem)
MC
(
Q
)
MC (Q ) ⎝ j =1
Q
j
=
1
⎠

where φ j is the elasticity of jth factor price, ωj is the share of factor i in total cost TC(Q),

φ = ∑ j =1φ jω j is the elasticity of the cost with respect to inputs, AC(Q) and MC(Q) are average
n

and marginal costs. If factor markets are competitive, φ j = 1 for all j and hence φ = 1 . Now
observe that profit share is equal to sπ =

PQ − AC (Q ) ⋅ Q
AC (Q )
. It follows that
= 1−
PQ
P

γ = φ AC (Q ) MC (Q ) = φ (1 − sπ ) μ ⇔ γ μφ = (1 − sπ ) , where μ = P MC (Q ) is the markup.
Since marginal revenue (MR) is equal to marginal cost for a profit-maximizing firm, one
has ∂TR ∂L j = MR (∂Q ∂L j ) ⇒ ∑ j =1 (∂TR ∂L j ) L j = MC ∑ j =1 (∂Q ∂L j ) L j = ( MC P )γ PQ
n

∑
hence η =

n
j =1

(∂TR ∂L j ) L j
PQ

=

n

and

γ
.■
μ

Proof of Corollary 1.
Consider cost minimization problem:
L ≡ ( L1 ,..., Lk , Lk +1 ,..., Ln ) = arg min {∑ j =1 C j ( L j ) : f ( L) = Q} , where C j ( L j ) is the cost of input
n

L1 ,..., Lk

Lj, f is the production function and Q is output and k+1,…,n inputs are fixed. Using the
arguments of Proposition 1, one can show that the first order condition with respect to variable
C ′j ( L j ) = λ f j′( L) for j = 1,..., k ( λ is the Lagrange multiplier) yield:

63

∑

k
j =1

C ′j ( L j ) L j = λ ∑ j =1 f j′( L) L j ⇔
k

⎞ 1 k
AC (Q ) ∑ i =1 Ci ( Li ) Li ⎛ k
AC (Q ) * *
φ ω = γ *,
⎜ ∑ φ jω j ⎟ = ∑ f j′( L) L j ⇔
MC (Q )
TC (Q ) ⎝ j =1
MC (Q )
⎠ Q j =1
k

where ω * is the cost share of variable inputs in total cost, φ * = ∑ j =1 φ jω j is the elasticity of cost
k

with respect to variable inputs, γ * is RTS in production with respect to variable inputs, AC(Q)
and MC(Q) are average and marginal costs. Now observe that profit share is equal to
sπ* = 1 − AC (Q ) / P . It follows that
AC (Q ) * *
AC (Q )
P
φ ω =γ* ⇔
φ *ω * = γ * ⇔ (1 − sπ* ) μφ *ω * = γ *
MC (Q )
P MC (Q )
where μ = P MC (Q ) is the markup.
Since marginal revenue (MR) is equal to marginal cost for a profit-maximizing firm, one
has
∂TR ∂L j = MR (∂Q ∂L j ) ⇒

∑
η*

∑
=

k
j =1

k

(∂TR ∂L j ) L j = MC ∑ j =1 (∂Q ∂L j ) L j = ( MC P )γˆ PQ ⇒
k

j =1

(∂TR ∂L j ) L j
PQ

=

γ*
,
μ

where η * is RTS in the revenue function with respect to variable inputs. By combining the
results, one can find: η * = γ * μ = (1 − sπ* )φ *ω * .■
Proof of Proposition 2
Without loss of generality assume that there are two inputs and one output, the first input
is supplied in a competitive market. Suppose there are two solutions θ and θ . To satisfy
restrictions imposed by profit maximization, the matrix Λ must possess the same structure and
properties as Λ .
Because Λ , Λ , T are invertible, Λ = ΛT −1 implies that
T = Λ −1Λ
⎡
β1 φ2 + β 2 − φ2
⎢
β1 (φ2 − φ2 )
=
β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 ⎢
⎢ − β1 (φ1 − β1 ) − β 2 β1 + φ2 β1
⎣
1

0

β 2 − φ2 (1 − β1 )
-β1β 2 − β 2 (1 − β1 )+β1

⎤
⎥
φ2 − φ2
⎥
β 2 − φ2 (1 − β1 ) ⎥⎦
0

(44)

Note that det(T ) = ( β1 φ2 + β 2 − φ2 ) ( β1 φ2 + β 2 − φ2 ) ≠ 0 and the solution θ must have

β1 φ2 + β 2 − φ2 < 0 . Thus, the model is not identified unless further restrictions are imposed.
Now consider
64

⎡ D11
⎢D
Ω = T ΩT ′ =
2 ⎢ 21
( β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 )
⎢⎣ D31
1

D22
D32

⎤
⎥,
⎥
D33 ⎥⎦

where D11, D22, D33 are positive quantities and
D21 = ( β 2 +β1φ2 − φ2 ) β1 (φ2 − φ2 )σ 11 , D31 = ( β 2 +β1φ2 − φ2 )[ − β1 (φ2 -β 2 ) + β1 (φ2 − β 2 )]σ 11 ,

D32 = β1 (φ2 − φ2 )[ β1 (φ2 − β 2 ) − β1 (φ2 − β 2 )]σ 11 +[β 2 − φ2 (1-β1 )][β 2 − β1β 2 − β 2 (1-β1 )]σ 22 +
+(φ2 − φ2 )(β1φ2 +β 2 − φ2 )σ 33.
The restriction that Ω is diagonal implies that D21 = D31 = D32 = 0 . From D21=0 it
follows that φ2 = φ2 since β1 ≠ 0 . Hence, D31 = D32 = 0 implies that

β1 (φ2 − β 2 ) − β1 (φ2 -β 2 ) = 0

(45)

β 2 (1 − β1 ) − β 2 (1-β1 ) = 0

(46)

The only solution to this system of equations is β1 = β1 and β 2 = β 2 implying that T=I
and, thus, the model is uniquely globally identified.
For a general model with a productivity shock and n inputs and associated factor prices,
the first entry of the first row of T in (44) will continue to be non-zero while other entries of the
row are zeros. This fixes φ j = φ j for j=2,…,n and then it is an easy step to show that n-input
analogue of (45)-(46) has unique solution β j = β j for j=1,…,n. This proves part a.
To prove part b, again, without loss of generality, assume that there are two inputs and
one output and that the first input is supplied in a competitive market. Suppose there are two
solutions θ and θ . Then by assumptions of the proposition, the following matrix must be
diagonal

⎡ D11
1 ⎢
D21
Π = T ΠT =
| T || Λ | ⎢
⎢⎣ D31
−1

0
D22
D32

0 ⎤
D23 ⎥
⎥
D33 ⎥⎦

where D11, D22, D33 are non-zero quantities and
D21 = (φ2 − φ2 )[| Λ | β1Π11 − ( β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 ) β1Π 22 − ( β1 (φ2 − β 2 ) − β1 (φ2 -β 2 ))Π 33 ] ,

D31 =| Λ | [ β1 (φ2 − β 2 )-β1 (φ2 − β 2 )]Π11 -[β1 (1 − β 2 )-β1 (1 − β 2 )]β1 (φ2 − φ2 )Π 22 +
+(β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 )[β1 (φ2 − β 2 ) − β1 (φ2 − β 2 )]Π 33 ,
D32 = [ β 2 (1 − β1 ) − β 2 (1 − β1 )]( β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 )( Π 33 − Π 22 ) ,
D23 = ( β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 )(φ2 − φ2 )( Π 22 − Π 33 ) .

65

The restriction that T −1ΠT is diagonal, implies that D21 = D23 = D31 = D32 = 0 . Suppose
that Π 22 ≠ Π 33 . From D23=0, (φ2 − φ2 )( β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 ) = 0 . Suppose that φ2 = φ2 . Then D21=0 and
D31=D32=0 imply that

β1 (φ2 − β 2 ) − β1 (φ2 − β 2 ) = 0

(47)

β 2 (1 − β1 ) − β 2 (1 − β1 ) = 0

(48)

provided that Π 33 − Π11 ≠ 0 . The only solution to (47) and (48) is β1 = β1 and β 2 = β 2 implying
that T=I and, thus, the model is uniquely globally identified almost everywhere.
Now suppose that φ2 ≠ φ2 so that β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 = 0 ⇔ φ2 = β 2 (1 − β1 ) . Suppose that

β 2 (1 − β1 ) − β 2 (1 − β1 ) = 0 ⇔ β 2 = β 2 (1 − β1 ) (1 − β1 ) from D32=0. Substitute φ2 , β 2 in D21=0 and
reach the contradiction that β 2 = 0 . Now suppose that β1φ2 + β 2 − φ2 = 0 ⇔ β 2 = φ2 (1 − β1 ) from
D32=0. Substitute φ2 , β 2 into | Λ | and find that | Λ |= 0 which contradicts | T |≠ 0 . Hence, φ2 ≠ φ2
leads to contradiction.
For a general case with n inputs, one again uses the fact that φ1 = 1 to fix φ j = φ j for
j=2,…,n and then it is a tedious but straightforward step to show that n-input analogue of (47)(48) has unique solution is β j = β j for j=1,…,n almost everywhere. This proves part b. ■
Proof of Proposition 3.
Under assumptions of the proposition, system (8)-(9) can be re-formulated as follows:
⎡F ⎤
X it = [ Λ | B ] ⎢ it ⎥ + εit ,
⎣ M it ⎦

(49)

⎡ Fit ⎤ ⎡ Π
⎢M ⎥ = ⎢ 0
⎣ it ⎦ ⎣

(50)

0 ⎤ ⎡ Fi ,t −1 ⎤ ⎡ υit ⎤
+
,
R ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣ M i ,t −1 ⎥⎦ ⎢⎣ ωit ⎥⎦

where B is the known matrix whose columns are selection vectors ei (that is ei is the ith column of
matrix In) with unity in the row corresponding to the variable with a serially correlated
measurement error, Mit is a vector of measurement errors, R is a diagonal nonsingular matrix
with entries less than unity in absolute value (stationarity of measurement errors), E ( ωit ωit′ ) = Ω1
is

a

diagonal

nonsingular

matrix,

E ( ωit ω′js ) = 0

for

all

i,

j

and

s ≠ 0,

and

E ( εit ω′js ) = E (υit ω′js ) = 0 for all i, j, s.
To prove global identification, it is sufficient to show that there is no rotation matrix T
that preserves the structure of the model. Suppose that such T exits. Then a rotationally
equivalent solution must satisfy

66

[Λ

⎡T11 T12 ⎤
B] ⎢
⎥ = [ΛT11 + BT21 ΛT12 + BT22 ] .
T
T
21
22
⎣
⎦

B ] = [Λ

Hence,
Λ = ΛT11 + BT21 ⇔ T11 = Λ −1Λ − Λ −1 BT21

(51)

B = ΛT12 + BT22 ⇔ T12 = Λ −1B( I − T22 )

(52)

Furthermore, there are nonlinear restrictions imposed by uncorrelatedness of υt and ωt and
⎡Π
block diagonal structure of ⎢
⎣0

0⎤
. In particular,
R ⎥⎦

n × k restrictions: T21ΩT11′ + T22 Ω1T12′ = 0
1
2

(53)

k ( k − 1) restrictions: T21ΩT21′ + T22 Ω1T22′ is a diagonal matrix

(54)

n × k restrictions: ΠT12 − T12T22−1RT22 = 0

(55)

n × k restrictions: T21 (T11 − T12T22−1T21 ) −1 Π (T11 − T12T22−1T21 ) = RT21

(56)

one restriction: det | T22 |≠ 0

(57)

one restriction: det | T11 |≠ 0

(58)

Because matrices Λ, Π, B, R have full rank, (51)-(58) form an overidentified system of quadratic
equations. It is easy to verify that T11 = I n , T12 = 0, T21 = 0, T22 = I k is a solution to the system for
any Ω, Ω1 , Π, R . It is straightforward to verify for low dimensional systems (i.e., k ≤ n ≤ 3 ) that
T12 = 0, T21 = 0, T22 = I k is the unique real solution. For higher dimensional cases, consider the
worst case when n=k so that B=I. Substitute T12 from (52) into (55) so that after rearranging
terms
AT22 = T22 R

(59)

where A ≡ ΛΠΛ −1 and T22 ≡ ( I − T22−1 ) . Note that A has full rank. It is convenient to treat
matrices as linear operators. Note that the space X on which a linear operator Q is defined is
given by X = Im(Q ) ⊕ Ker (Q ) , where Im(Q) is the image of Q and Ker(Q) is the core of Q.
Suppose that x ∈ Ker (T22 ) . Then by the definition of the core, 0 = AT22 x = T22 Rx
⇒ Rx ∈ Ker (T22 )

⇒ R( Ker (T22 )) ⊂ Ker (T22 ) .

R( Ker (T22 )) = Ker (T22 )

and,

Since

R

is

invertible

R(Im(T22 )) = Im(T22 )

consequently,

by

from

assumption,

the

orthogonal

decomposition.
On

the

other

Ay = T22 z, Rx = z ∈ Im(T22 )

hand,

for

x ∈ Im(T22 )

⇒ Ay ∈ Im(T22 ) .

Since

A(Im(T22 )) = Im(T22 ) .

67

one
A

has
is

T22 x = y ∈ Im(T22 ) .

invertible,

it

follows

Then
that

Note that by the properties of the core, the operator T22 on Ker (T22 ) is equal to I. Consider
equation (59) on Im(T22 ) . As has been established, there is a T22−1 operator defined on Im(T22 ) .
Apply this operator to both sides of (59) and get R = T22−1 AT22 . Suppose that the dimension of
Im(T22 ) is at least one. In this case, operators A and R are equal on Im(T22 ) (Korn and Korn,
1968, §14.6-2). The measure of this event, however, is zero. Hence, almost everywhere the
dimension of Im(T22 ) is zero, Ker (T22 ) = X and T22 = I on X. Since Ω has full rank and Ω1 is
diagonal, it follows that T12 = I and T21=0 and, hence, T12 = 0, T21 = 0, T22 = I k is the unique
solution almost everywhere.
Restrictions on T22, T21 and T12 do not pin down the matrix T11. Even if
T12 = 0, T21 = 0, T22 = I k , T11 = Λ −1Λ and, therefore, the model is identified if model (8)-(9) is
uniquely identified. The “only if” direction follows trivially. ■
Proof of Proposition 4.
Without loss of generality, consider the system without firm specific effects and measurement
error εit . Collect inputs in vector Lit and partition matrix Λ = [ Λ1′ Λ′2 ]′ so that Λ1 and Λ 2
correspond to Lit and yit respectively. The residual of the quasi-differenced production (revenue)
function is
ϑ = y − ρˆ y − bˆL + ρˆ bˆL = ( Λ − bˆΛ )υ + ( Λ − bˆΛ )( Π − ρˆ I )F ,
it

it

i ,t −1

it

i ,t −1

2

1

it

2

1

i ,t −1

where ρˆ ,bˆ are “candidate” parameter values for the serial correlation of technology and
elasticities of output with respect to inputs. This residual is orthogonal to inputs and output
lagged two or more periods if and only if ( Λ 2 − bˆΛ1 )( Π − ρˆ I ) = 0 (Fit is serially correlated while
υit is not).
Note that b̂ is a 1 × (n − 1) vector and ρ̂ is a scalar. Hence, both Λ 2 − bˆΛ1 = 0 and
Π − ρˆ I = 0 are overidentified because each system has n equations. However, some rows of
Π − ρˆ I can be non-zero when the corresponding columns of Λ 2 − b̂Λ1 are equal to zero and vice

versa.
Consider first a simple case where the matrix Π is diagonal. If ρ̂ is equal to Πjj, one of
the diagonal entries of Π, one of the equations in Λ 2 − bˆΛ1 = 0 can be eliminated, the system
becomes just identified and bˆ = Λ1−1j Λ 2 j where Λ ij is the matrix Λ i without the jth column. The
Blundell-Bond estimator assumes that the ρ̂ is equal to the autocorrelation coefficient for
productivity ρ a so that b̂ = β . However, there are other solutions. For example, the above logic
suggests that ρ̂ can be equal to the autocorrelation coefficient for wage shocks ρ w and this
68

choice of ρ̂ gives a different solution for b̂ . It is straightforward to verify that these solutions
are locally identified, i.e., the rank of the Jacobian is full:
−1
⎧
⎫
⎪ ⎛ ⎡ − yi ,t −1 + bLi ,t −1 ⎤ ⎞
⎪
⎪⎧ ⎡ Λ 2 − Λ1 j Λ 2 j Λ1 ⎤
⎪⎫
′
Sit ⎟
rank ⎨ E ⎜ ⎢
E ( Fi ,t −1Sit′ ) ⎬ = n ,
= rank ⎨ ⎢
⎥
⎬
⎥
⎜ − Lit + ρ Li ,t −1
⎟
⎣
⎦ ⎠ ρ =a jj ,b=Λ1−1j Λ 2 j ⎪
⎪⎩ ⎣⎢ Λ1 ( Π − Π jj I ) ⎦⎥
⎪⎭
⎩⎪ ⎝
⎭
where Sit is the vector of appropriately transformed lags of right hand side variables. It follows
that there can be n different solutions to ( Λ − bˆΛ )( Π − ρˆ I ) = 0 for the case with n inputs.
2

1

Now suppose that Π is not diagonal. Let ρ̂ be equal to an eigenvalue of Π. Then
rank ( Π − ρˆ I ) = n − 1 and, thus, one is back to the case with a diagonal Π, i.e., multiply
Λ 2 − b̂Λ1 by a singular matrix. Hence, for each eigenvalue of Π there is a unique locally-

identified solution for b̂ . Since Π can have n distinct eigenvalues (for n-1 inputs), there can be n
solutions for b̂ .
To prove the last result, note that if ρ̂ is equal to a repeated eigenvalue, the rank of
( Π − ρˆ I ) is at most n-2. Hence, at least two columns in Λ1 , Λ 2 can be deleted and Λ 2 − bˆΛ1 = 0

is underidentified so that there are infinitely many solutions for b̂ . ■
Proof of Proposition 5.
This proof is for the case with multiple inputs which are collected in the vector Lit. Partition
⎡L ⎤
⎡L ⎤
⎡ Λ ⎤ ⎡w ⎤ ⎡ L ⎤
matrix Λ so that ⎢ it ⎥ = ΛFit + ⎢ i ⎥ + εit = ⎢ 1 ⎥ ⎢ it ⎥ + ⎢ i ⎥ + εit , where Li ,Yi are time invariant
⎣ Λ 2 ⎦ ⎣ ait ⎦ ⎣Yi ⎦
⎣Yit ⎦
⎣Yi ⎦

effects. For convenience, I define E ( Fit Fit′) = Σ . It is sufficient to show that the rank of the
Jacobian for the moment conditions does not have full rank, i.e., the rank of the Jacobian is
smaller
than
the
number
of
parameters
in
the
model.
Define

ϑit ≡ Yit − γ [ Lit′

Li′,t −1 Yi′,t −1 ]′ = Yit − γ Vit , which corresponds to the residual from quasi-

differenced production (revenue) function. Apart from having a permanent component, the error
term ϑit has MA(1) structure because of the error term εit .
Consider
Sit = [ ΔLi′,t −2 … ΔLi′,t − k

the

level

moments

E (ϑit Sit′ ) = 0

ΔYi′,t −2 … ΔYi ′,t − p ]′ . The expected value of the Jacobian of the moment

conditions is
E ( −Vit Sit′ )

where

⎛ Lit ( Li ,t −3 − Li ,t −2 )′ … Lit ( Li ,t − k +1 − Li ,t −k )′
Lit (Yi ,t −3 − Yi ,t −2 )′ … Lit (Yi ,t − p +1 − Yi ,t − p )′ ⎞
⎜
⎟
= E ⎜ Li ,t −1 ( Li ,t −3 − Li ,t −2 )′ … Li ,t −1 ( Li ,t − k +1 − Li ,t −k )′ Li ,t −1 (Yi ,t −3 − Yi ,t −2 )′ … Li ,t −1 (Yi ,t − p+1 − Yi ,t − p )′ ⎟ =
⎜ Y ( L − L )′ … Y ( L
′ Yi ,t −1 (Yi ,t −3 − Yi ,t − 2 )′ … Yi ,t −1 (Yi ,t − p +1 − Yi ,t − p )′ ⎟
i ,t − 2
i ,t −1
i ,t − k +1 − Li ,t − k )
⎝ i ,t −1 i ,t −3
⎠

69

⎡ Λ1Π 2 D1 … Λ1Π k D1 Λ1Π 2 D2 … Λ1Π p D2 ⎤
⎢
⎥
= − ⎢ Λ1ΠD1 … Λ1Π k −1D1 Λ1ΠD2 … Λ1Π p −1D2 ⎥ =
⎢ Λ 2 ΠD1 … Λ 2 Π k −1D1 Λ 2 ΠD2 … Λ 2 Π p −1D2 ⎥
⎣
⎦
⎡ Λ1Π 2 D1 … Λ1Π k D1 Λ1Π 2 D2 … Λ1Π p D2 ⎤
= −⎢
⎥,
k −1
p −1
⎣⎢ ΛΠD1 … ΛΠ D1 ΛΠD2 … ΛΠ D2 ⎦⎥

where D1 = ( I − Π )ΣΛ1′ , D2 = ( I − Π )ΣΛ ′2 . Observe that the first row is Λ1ΠΛ −1 times the second
row; hence, the matrix E ( −Vit Sit′ ) does not have full rank and parameters of the model are not
identified.
Now consider the difference moment conditions E ( Δϑit Sit′ ) = E{( ΔYit − γΔVit ) Sit′ } = 0
where Sit = [ Li′,t −3 … Li′,t −k Yi′,t −3 … Yi′,t − p ]′ . Find that the Jacobian is
⎛ ( Li ,t −1 − Li ,t ) Li′,t −3 … ( Li ,t −1 − Li ,t ) Li ,t Li′,t −k
⎜
E ( −ΔVit Sit′ ) = − E ⎜ ( Li ,t −2 − Li ,t −1 ) Li′,t −3 … ( Li ,t −2 − Li ,t −1 ) Li′,t − k
⎜
′
′
⎝ (Yi ,t −2 − Yi ,t −1 ) Li ,t −3 … (Yi ,t −2 − Yi ,t −1 ) Li ,t −k

( Li ,t −1 − Li ,t )Yi′,t −3 … ( Li ,t −1 − Li ,t )Yi ′,t − p ⎞
⎟
( Li ,t − 2 − Li ,t −1 )Yi′,t −3 … ( Li ,t −2 − Li ,t −1 )Yi ′,t − p ⎟ =
(Yi ,t − 2 − Yi ,t −1 )Yi ′,t −3 … (Yi ,t −2 − Yi ,t −1 )Yi ′,t − p ⎟⎠

⎡ Λ1Π 2 D1 … Λ1Π k D1 Λ1Π 2 D2 … Λ1Π p D2 ⎤
=⎢
⎥.
k −1
p −1
⎣⎢ ΛΠD1 … ΛΠ D1 ΛΠD2 … ΛΠ D2 ⎦⎥

Hence, the difference moment conditions do not have full rank either because the first row is
Λ1ΠΛ −1 times the second row. The same conclusion follows for the case without measurement
errors, i.e., εit = 0 .
Now suppose that there is no firm-specific effect. Then E{(Yit − γ Vit ) Sit′ } = 0 with
Sit = [ Li′,t −2 … Li′,t −k Yi ′,t −2 … Yi′,t − p ]′ is a set of valid moment conditions. However, the

reduced rank is still a problem as the Jacobian does not have full rank:
⎡ Λ1Π 2ΣΛ1′ … Λ1Π k ΣΛ1′ Λ1Π 2ΣΛ ′2 … Λ1Π p ΣΛ ′2 ⎤
E (Vit Sit′ ) = ⎢
⎥
k −1
p −1
′
′
′
′
⎣⎢ ΛΠΣΛ1 … ΛΠ ΣΛ1 ΛΠΣΛ 2 … ΛΠ ΣΛ 2 ⎦⎥

where the first row is Λ1ΠΛ −1 times the second row.
⎡L ⎤ ⎡ B ⎤
⎡L ⎤
⎡L ⎤
Now consider ⎢ it ⎥ = ΛFit + ⎢ i ⎥ + ⎢ 1 ⎥ υit + εit = ΛFit + ⎢ i ⎥ + Bυit + εit that nests models
⎣Yit ⎦
⎣Yi ⎦ ⎣ B2 ⎦
⎣Yi ⎦
where some of the inputs can response contemporaneously to changes in productivity (the matrix
B is square). This modification also results in level and difference moments not having full rank
because the structure of the moment conditions is not changed. For example, consider the
difference moment conditions and find that the Jacobian is:
E ( −ΔVit Sit′ )

⎡ Λ1Π 2 D1 … Λ1Π k D1 Λ1Π 2 D2 … Λ1Π p D2 ⎤
=⎢
⎥+
k −1
p −1
⎢⎣ ΛΠD1 … ΛΠ D1 ΛΠD2 … ΛΠ D2 ⎥⎦

70

⎡ Λ1ΠD3 … Λ1Π k −1D3
+⎢
k −2
⎣⎢ ΛD3 … ΛΠ D3

Λ1ΠD4 … Λ1Π p −1 D4 ⎤
⎥,
ΛD4 … ΛΠ p − 2 D4 ⎦⎥

where Συ = E (υit υit′ ) , D3 = ( I − Π )Συ B1′ and D4 = ( I − Π )Συ B2′ . This matrix does not have full
rank because the first row is equal to Λ1ΠΛ −1 times the second row. ■
Proof of Proposition 6.
It is shown in Proposition 5 that level and difference moment conditions yield the same Jacobian
matrix:
⎡ Ψ ( Γ 2 − Γ3 ) Ψ ( Γ 3 − Γ 4 ) ... Ψ ( Γ d − Γ d +1 ) ⎤
D=⎢
⎥,
Γ2 − Γ3
Γ d −1 − Γ d ⎦
...
⎣ Γ1 − Γ 2

where Ψ ≡ [0 I p +m −1 ] . Given assumptions of the problem, identification of the Blundell-Bond
estimator requires that rank ( D ) = 2(m + p) − 1 .
Observe that

Γ k − Γ k +1 = ϒΠ k ( I − Π )Γ 0 ϒ′ . Consider matrix

⎡0 Π12
P = Ψ⎢
⎣0 Π 22

0⎤
.
0⎥⎦

Multiply the second row of D by P and subtract from the first row of D. Denote the resulting
matrix with D1:
⎡ΦΠ ( I − Π )Γ ϒ′ ΦΠ 2 ( I − Π )Γ ϒ′ ... ΦΠ d −1 ( I − Π )Γ ϒ′ ⎤
0
0
0
D1 = ⎢
⎥=
2
d −1
⎢⎣ ϒΠ ( I − Π ) Γ0 ϒ′ ϒΠ ( I − Π )Γ0 ϒ′ ... ϒΠ ( I − Π )Γ 0 ϒ′ ⎥⎦
⎡ΦΠ ⎤ ⎡
d −2
* †
⎤
′
=⎢
⎥ ⎣( I − Π ) Γ0 ϒ Π ( I − Π ) Γ0 ϒ′ ... Π ( I − Π )Γ0 ϒ′⎦ = D1 D1
ϒΠ
⎣
⎦
D1†

D1*

⎡0 0 Π13 ⎤
where Φ = Ψ ⎢
⎥ . Observe that
⎣0 0 Π 23 ⎦

rank ( D ) = rank ( D1 ) ≤ min{rank ( D1* ), rank ( D1† )} and
⎛ ⎡ ⎡0
⎜ ⎢Ψ ⎢
⎛ ⎡ΦΠ ⎤ ⎞
⎜ ⎢ ⎣0
rank ( D1* ) = rank ⎜ ⎢
⎟ = rank ⎜ ⎢
⎥
⎡0
⎝ ⎣ ϒΠ ⎦ ⎠
⎜⎢ ⎢
⎜ ⎢ ⎣0
⎝⎣

0 Π13Π 33 ⎤ ⎤ ⎞
⎥⎟
0 Π 23Π 33 ⎥⎦ ⎥ ⎟
≤m+n.
Π12 Π13 ⎤ ⎥ ⎟
⎥⎟
Π 22 Π 23 ⎥⎦ ⎥⎦ ⎟⎠

Hence the model can be identified if m + n ≥ 2( p + m) − 1 ⇔ n ≥ 2 p + m − 1 . ■
Proof of Proposition 7.
Order entries of Xt so that the first element in Xt (and Gt) is output y. Without loss of generality
suppose that there is only one freely-adjusted input l (labor) such that the first-order condition

71

with respect to this input is yt − φlt = wt where φ is some constant, wt = ew X t is an exogenous
shock, and ew is the selection vector (i.e., ew is equal to one at the position of wt in Xt and zero
otherwise). Also, without loss of generality, assume that all other inputs are predetermined.
Define Π y and Π l as rows of the matrix Π that correspond to the output yt and the freely
adjusted input lt. By (43),
( Π y − φΠ l ) X t −1 + ( B y − φ B l )υt = yt − φ lt = wt = ew X t = ew ΠX t −1 + ew Bυt .
Since this holds for any Xt and υt, ( Π y − φΠ l ) = ew and ( B y − φ B l ) = ew . It follows that
l
l
Π12y − φΠ12
= 0 and Π13y − φΠ13
= ew Π 33 . To a first-order log-linear approximation, production

(revenue)

function

yt = α Llt + α K t + at

imposes

another

restriction

on

Π:

l
l
Π13y − α L Π13
− ea Π 33 = αΠ 23 and Π12y − α L Π12
= αΠ 22 . Using these restrictions and the proof of

Proposition 6, one finds that the rank of the Jacobian matrix D is:
⎛ ⎡ ⎡0
⎜ ⎢Ψ ⎢
⎣0
*
rank ( D ) ≤ rank ( D1 ) = rank ⎜⎜ ⎢
⎢ ⎡0
⎜⎢ ⎢
⎜ ⎢ ⎣0
⎝⎣
⎛ 0
⎜
⎜ 0
= rank ⎜ Π12y
⎜ l
⎜ Π12
⎜Π
⎝ 22

⎛ 0
⎜
⎜ 0
= rank ⎜ 0
⎜
⎜ 0
⎜
⎝ Π 22

0 Π13Π 33 ⎤ ⎤ ⎞
⎥⎟
0 Π 23Π 33 ⎥⎦ ⎥ ⎟
Π12 Π13 ⎤ ⎥ ⎟
⎥⎟
Π 22 Π 23 ⎥⎦ ⎥⎦ ⎟⎠

l
− φ −1α L αΠ 23 )Π 33 ⎞
( Π13
⎟
Π 23Π 33
⎟
φ
y
Π13 − φ −α L αΠ 23 ⎟
⎟
l
− φ −1α L αΠ 23 ⎟
Π13
⎟⎟
Π 23
⎠
2
⎞
( φ −1α L ea − φ −1α L ew ) Π 33
0 ⎞
⎛ 0
⎟
⎜ 0 Π Π ⎟
Π 23Π 33
23 33 ⎟
⎟
⎜
⎟
ew Π 33 ⎟ ≤ 2( p + m) − 2
= rank ⎜ 0
ew Π 33
⎟
⎜
⎟
ea Π 33 ⎟
ea Π 33
⎟
⎜ 0
⎜
⎟
Π 23 ⎠⎟
Π 23
⎝ Π 22
⎠

l
⎛ 0
Π13
Π 33 ⎞
⎜
⎟
Π 23Π 33 ⎟
⎜ 0
y
Π13 ⎟ = rank ⎜ 0
⎜
⎟
l
Π13
⎜ 0
⎟
⎜⎜
⎟
Π 23 ⎠
⎝ Π 22

The last equality follows from Π 33 being diagonal. Since the rank is less than 2(p+m)-1, the
estimator is not identified. ■

72

