                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE GREAT MEXICAN EMIGRATION

                                         Gordon H. Hanson
                                          Craig McIntosh

                                        Working Paper 13675
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13675


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




We thank seminar participants at Columbia University, Princeton University, and UCSD for valuable
advice and Jeffrey Lin for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Gordon H. Hanson and Craig McIntosh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Great Mexican Emigration
Gordon H. Hanson and Craig McIntosh
NBER Working Paper No. 13675
December 20075HYLVHG2FWREHU
JEL No. F2,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we examine net emigration from Mexico over the period 1960 to 2000. The data are
consistent with labor-supply shocks having made a substantial contribution to Mexican emigration,
accounting for two fifths of Mexican labor flows to the U.S. over the last two decades of the 20th century.
Net emigration rates by Mexican state birth-year cohort display a strong positive correlation with the
initial size of the Mexican cohort, relative to the corresponding U.S. cohort. In states with long histories
of emigration, the effects of cohort size on emigration are relatively strong, consistent with the existence
of pre-existing networks.


Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

Craig McIntosh
IR/PS 0519
UCSD 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
ctmcintosh@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

         In the last two and a half decades, migration from Mexico to the U.S. has surged.

As a share of Mexico’s national population, the number of Mexican immigrants living in

the U.S. remained at 1.5% from 1960 to 1970, before rising to 3.3% in 1980, 5.2% in

1990, and 10.2% in 2005. Mexico is by far and away the largest source country for U.S.

immigration, accounting for one third of the current U.S. foreign-born population.

         Mexico-to-U.S. labor flows are a major policy issue for both countries. The U.S.

spends large sums on enforcing borders against illegal immigration. In Mexico, the

exodus of labor has reduced the population of working-age adults (Hanson, 2006), while

creating a financial windfall in the form of remittances (Woodruff and Zenteno, 2006).

Given the importance of migration for labor markets in North America, it is surprising

there is little academic research on the scale of regional labor flows. Existing literature

provides scant analysis of why–despite longstanding income differences between Mexico

and the U.S.–labor outflows from Mexico have grown dramatically only recently.

         There is work on other aspects of Mexican emigration, including how labor flows

affect U.S. and Mexican wages (Mishra, 2006; Borjas and Katz, 2007; Aydemir and

Borjas, 2007), the self-selection of emigrants (Chiquiar and Hanson, 2005; Ibarraran and

Lubotsky, 2007; Fernandez-Huertas, 2006), and the assimilation of immigrants in the

U.S. (Borjas, 1996; Grogger and Trejo, 2002; Smith, 2003; Blau and Kahn, 2007).1 While

there is research on individual migration decisions (Taylor, 1987; Massey and Espinosa,

1
    See Hanson (2006) for a review of literature on Mexico-U.S. migration and Massey and

Zenteno (1999) for work on migration dynamics using the Mexican Migration Project

data.



                                                                                         1
1997; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2005; McKenzie and Rapoport, 2007), much of this work

uses data from Mexican communities chosen for having high migration rates, making the

results difficult to generalize to the country as a whole.

         In this paper, we examine net emigration from Mexico from 1960 to 2000. To

measure net labor outflows, we compare the size of birth cohorts in Mexican states

between decennial censuses. By taking state birth cohorts as the unit of analysis, we

ignore how migration varies with schooling, income, or other individual characteristics,

on which previous literature dwells. The advantage of our approach is that we can study

emigration across regions within Mexico over long time periods, during which there have

been large changes in labor-market conditions in the country relative to the U.S.

         One seemingly obvious explanation for labor outflows from Mexico–which to

date has received little attention in the literature–is that labor supply in Mexico has

grown relative to the U.S., putting downward pressure on relative wages and making

emigration more attractive.2 Figure 1 shows that the U.S. baby boom matched rapid

population growth in Mexico between 1940 and 1960. Subsequently, Mexican birth

cohorts continued to grow for another two decades, while the size of U.S birth cohorts

actually began to fall. Between 1960 and 1980, there was a large shift in the relative size

of U.S.-Mexican cohorts, from 4:1 to less than 2:1. Given that birth cohorts enter the

labor market with a 15-20 year lag, the labor supply effects should have triggered

emigration from Mexico beginning in the late 1970s, consistent with observed patterns.




2
    There is cross-country evidence on the relationship between demographic structure and

international migration. See Hatton and Williamson (2003, 2005).



                                                                                         2
The focus of our analysis is to assess the contribution of relative labor supply shocks over

the last four decades to Mexico’s great wave of emigration.

       There are clearly other factors besides labor supply that affect Mexican labor

outflows. Since 1980, Mexico has been beset by periodic financial crises. Its per capita

GDP fell sharply in 1983 (after the onset of the Mexican debt crisis) and again in 1995

(after the Mexican peso crisis), leaving the difference in Mexico-U.S. per capita income

in 2005 little changed relative to two-and-a-half decades before (Table 1). Previous work

finds that Mexico-to-U.S. migration increases following real wage declines (Hanson and

Spilimbergo, 1999; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2005). U.S. immigration policy and migrant

networks also affect migration. Illegal immigrants appear to account for most new

arrivals from Mexico in the U.S. With the buildup in U.S. border enforcement since

1990, the fees smugglers charge migrants at the border have risen (Gathmann, 2004). At

the same time, expanding migrant networks have made moving abroad more attractive

(Munshi, 2003; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2005). In the presence of network effects,

migration may be self-reinforcing (Carrington et al., 1996). Our empirical framework

attempts to control for how these other shocks have affected Mexican emigration.

       In section 2, we present data on net labor outflows. In section 3, we outline a

simple dynamic model of emigration, which yields an estimating equation that specifies

the current emigration rate for a cohort in Mexico as a function of initial differences in

Mexico-U.S. labor supply, plus other controls. The model allows for migration networks

and for internal migration within Mexico. In section 4, we present estimation results, in

which we control for the initial level of development in Mexican states, subsequent

shocks to GDP, migration costs, and other factors.




                                                                                          3
         To preview the findings, the data are consistent with labor-supply shocks having

made a substantial contribution to Mexican emigration to the U.S. Our estimates indicate

that Mexican population growth can account for two fifths of total out-migration for the

20 years prior to 1997. Initial cohort size in Mexico (relative to the U.S.) has a strong

positive correlation with net emigration rates by Mexican state. The effects of cohort size

are strongest in states with long histories of migration, consistent with network effects.

Looking forward in time, as we do in section 5, recent rapid declines in Mexican fertility

should diminish binational differences in labor-supply growth as a motivation for

emigration from Mexico. The total fertility rate in Mexico was 7 in 1965, which then

plummeted over the next several decades, dropping to 2.5 by 2000, close to the U.S. level

of 2.1 (Tuiran et al, 2002). Holding other factors constant, the dramatic decline in

Mexico’s population growth implies that emigration rates from Mexico should peak with

the 1980 birth cohort and decline for successive birth cohorts, such that those born in

2010 would have emigration rates less than half as large as those born in 1980.



2. Data

         To calculate labor outflows from Mexico, we use the net-migration method,

which takes Mexican state/gender/birth-year cohorts as the unit of analysis, and apply it

to data from Mexico’s population censuses in 1960, 1970, 1990, and 2000.3 We begin by

identifying the base size for a cohort, which is the population the first time a cohort is

observed in the census. For example, we can count the number of men born in the state

3
    Data are from www.Ipums.umn.edu. The 1980 census was conducted but never made

available.



                                                                                         4
of Zacatecas aged 8 who appear in the 1960 Mexican census. By then observing how

many men born in Zacatecas are age 18 in the 1970 census, age 38 in the 1990 census,

and age 48 in the 2000 census, we are able to construct a series of 10-year emigration

rates that are specific to gender, age, state of birth, and year of birth. For birth year i,

gender j, and birth state s, the fraction of individuals which has emigrated as of time t is,

                    base cohort sizeijs − current cohort sizeijst
(1)       mijst =                                                   .
                                base cohort sizeijs

The ten-year time difference in mijst is the decadal emigration rate.4 In the regression

analysis, we exclude cohorts younger than 16, since their emigration is likely due to

decisions made by their parents, or older than 50, after which age few individuals

emigrate.5 These restrictions leave us with 6,081 observations on 10-year net emigration

rates for cohorts born between 1920 and 1984.

         The net-migration method has several advantages. At a mechanical level, because

the Mexican census asks both the state of birth and the state of residence, we can

calculate net emigration over the state of birth and avoid the bias in population by state of


4
    Wherever possible the base cohort size is taken from a cohort between the ages of one

and ten. However in the case of cohorts born before 1950 or born between 1970 and

1980 we have no census which lets us measure this quantity, and so we use instead the

population at the time the cohort first appears in the data.
5
    Although the migration of children under 16 may also be related to demographic

pressures, the driving factors likely relate to the parents’ cohorts and not those of the

child. In this paper we focus on the effects of own cohort size, and therefore consider

only those cohorts old enough to be making their own migration decisions.



                                                                                                5
residence that results from internal migration within Mexico.6            A more nuanced

advantage can be seen in the debate over the composition of Mexican migrants to the

U.S. Studies on Mexican immigrants using U.S. data find that emigrants have schooling

levels close to Mexico’s national mean (e.g., Chiquiar and Hanson, 2005; Orrenius and

Zavodny, 2005), while some analyses based on Mexican data (which contain information

on which family members have emigrated) find emigrants have below mean schooling

(e.g., Ibarraran and Lubotsky, 2007; Fernandez-Huertas, 2007). Either data source is

subject to bias, as the U.S. census may undercount lower-skilled recent immigrants, and

estimates of migration based on Mexican household data miss higher-skilled households

that have emigrated in their entirety. Martinez and Woodruff (2007) find that the net-

migration method generates estimates of total emigration and emigrant schooling

between those arising from U.S. and Mexican data, suggesting this method may be less

subject to biases affecting other approaches.7

          One concern about the net-migration method is that estimates tend to be noisy,

particularly when constructed from the 1% population samples available for the 1960 and

1970 censuses.       Also, older respondents appear to round their age (Martinez and

Woodruff, 2006), which could cause us to misestimate age-specific net migration rates.

The following table on cohort sizes and age illustrates this problem in a simple way:




6
    The U.S. census asks the country but not the state of birth for immigrants, and hence

does not allow us to observe sub-national Mexican variation in labor supply or migration.
7
    See Buck et al. (2007) for an application of the net-migration method in Brazil and

Mexico.



                                                                                          6
                                                       Age doesn't end in
                                Age ends in 0,5              0,5            Test of difference
Log base MX cohort size               9.588                  9.632                0.044
                                     (0.034)                (0.016)              (0.038)
Subsequent migration rate             0.032                  0.145               0.114
                                     (0.006)                (0.003)            (0.006)**
Standard errors in parentheses, ** significant at 1%




There is no significant difference in base size between cohorts whose age ends in 0 or 5

and other cohorts, meaning there is little misreporting in the ages of young children.

However, the subsequent net emigration of cohorts ending in 0 or 5 is less than a quarter

the rate of other cohorts. As respondents age, misreporting may cause them to ‘leave’

unrounded cohorts and ‘enter’ rounded cohorts. We address the issue by aggregating

cohorts around years in which rounding occurs, using three- or five-year intervals.8

         A final concern arises as a result of cohort-specific mortality. Martinez and

Woodruff (2006), who use only 1990 and 2000 data, correct their net-migration estimates

using cohort- and age-specific mortality rates. However, no such data exist for 1960 or

1970, and Mexican mortality data are based on the state in which the individual dies,

making it impossible to ascribe mortality to the state of birth. For the period from 1990


8
    Age-specific fixed effects will absorb systematic errors in estimates of net migration

which are particular to individuals of a given age. The three-year aggregation scheme

calculates cohorts using birth years 1959, 60, and 61; then 62 and 63; then 64, 65, and 66;

etc.; and the five-year scheme calculates cohorts using birth years 1958-62, then 63-67,

etc. The intent is to center cohorts around years in which rounding occurs, thereby

decreasing the likelihood that an individual is placed in the wrong birth cohort.



                                                                                                 7
to 2000, mortality is a non-negligible share of the observed net migration. In cohorts

aged 23-27, only 8.8% of the observed decrease in cohort size comes from mortality, but

in cohorts aged 43-47 observed net migration has fallen to 7.4% and mortality is 3.1%,

meaning that deaths account for 42% of the missing individuals. Since we use state and

birth-year fixed effects, mortality would introduce bias into our parameter estimates only

if there is variation that is both cross-state and cross-time. To examine this possibility,

we regress 2000 state/cohort-level mortality rates on 1990 rates, including fixed effects

for the state and five-year birth-year cohorts. The R2 in the regression is 0.96, suggesting

that the fixed effects absorb most of the regional heterogeneity in mortality.9

         Subject to these caveats, what do estimates of net-migration tell us?           Not

surprisingly, net labor outflows from Mexico have increased sharply over time. In 1970,

57,000 individuals aged 26 had left Mexico over the previous decade, in 1990 165,000

26-year olds had left over the previous decade, and in 2000 336,000 individuals had left

over the previous decade.       Figure 2 plots smoothed age- and gender-specific net

emigration rates. For men, a substantial fraction of individuals migrate by age 16, with

emigration increasing sharply until around 30 and decreasing thereafter, presumably as a

result of return migration. The pattern for women is different. There is less emigration

by age 16, with subsequent rates being relatively stable over the course of their lives. By

age 50, women have a net emigration rate that is similar to that for men.

         To examine how labor supply affects emigration from Mexico, we exploit inter-

9
    In addition, an unreported analysis of the 1990-2000 changes in birth cohort ratios and

cohort-level mortality rates found the cross-state, cross-time correlation in these variables

to be insignificant.



                                                                                           8
temporal and inter-regional variation in the relative size of birth cohorts. Table 1 shows

the data behind Figure 1. The increase in Mexico’s population relative to the U.S. is a

result of differences in the timing of the demographic transition in the two countries. In

the U.S., fertility rates began to fall in the late 1950s, while in Mexico they did not drop

for another two decades. Between 1950 and 1980, the Mexico-U.S. ratio of birth cohort

size grew from 0.31 to 0.66.

         Table 1 also shows the number of U.S. natives that fail to complete high school

according to birth year (where the number of high school dropouts is measured the first

time a cohort is observed after age 19).10 U.S. high school dropouts are the group

Mexican immigrants appear mostly likely to compete with (Aydemir and Borjas, 2007).

As the share of U.S. natives without a high school education has declined, Mexico’s

relative labor supply has grown. In 1970, the ratio of 20-year olds born in Mexico to 20-

year old high school dropouts born in the U.S. was 2.45; by 1990, it was 4.99.

         Within Mexico, there is considerable regional variation in the timing of fertility

declines. Figure 3 plots the number of children ever born to women over age 40 by year

of birth for the states that represent the quintiles of the 1960 distribution of fertility rates.

Fertility is lower and the demographic transition occurs earlier in wealthy, industrialized

states, such as the Federal District, whereas states in Mexico’s poor south, such as

Chiapas, have a quite different fertility trajectory. This cross-state, cross-time variation

in the timing of the demographic transition provides the identification for our analysis of

10
     For cohorts aged 16-19 we use the number of US high school dropouts observed in the

following US census so as to avoid miscounting the size of cohorts which are still

acquiring high school education.



                                                                                               9
Mexican labor supply shocks.          Explanations for heterogeneity in timing include

differential changes in female job opportunities, industrialization, mortality, or inequality

across states (Tuiran et al, 2002).      Because realizations on migration are observed

between 16 and 50 years after the shifts which caused the changes in birth cohort size, we

take these changes to be pre-determined for our analysis. We assume that, given state,

year, and cohort fixed effects, the most plausible explanation for correlation between

state-level birth cohort size and subsequent migration is the cohort size itself. Of course,

the size of birth cohorts may summarize more about a state than its labor supply. In

section 4, we discuss alternative interpretations of our results.

       Another source of variation among Mexican states is the strength and persistence

of migration networks. The correlation in state-level emigration rates to the U.S. from the

mid 1950s with those from the mid 1990s is 0.72 (Hanson, 2006). The literature relates

the emergence of migration networks in Mexico to the hiring practices of U.S.

agriculture, which utilized Mexico’s railroad network to recruit workers in the country’s

interior. Communities close to rail lines have had the highest emigration rates in the

country since at least the 1920s (Durand, Massey, and Zenteno, 2001).             Following

Woodruff and Zenteno (2006), we proxy for the strength of migration networks using

historical state-level migration rates and state access to Mexico’s railroad network.



3. Theory

3.1 Model

       To understand emigration from Mexico, consider a model of two national labor

markets that are linked by migration. In each economy, there is one sector of production.




                                                                                          10
Workers from Mexico are differentiated by age but are not otherwise distinguished by

their skill.11 To highlight the workings of the model, we suppress internal migration in

Mexico.      Our specifications of labor demand and labor-mobility costs build on the

models of internal migration in Blanchard and Katz (1992) and Borjas (2006).

          In Mexico, the national wage for age group i at time t is given by,

(2)               Wit = X it ( Lit )η ,

where Wit is the wage, Xit is a labor-demand shifter, Lit is the population of working-age

adults in Mexico, and η ≤ 0 is the inverse labor-demand elasticity. The supply of labor in

Mexico is the population of group i that has not emigrated, such that

(3)               Lit = Li 0 − M it

where Li0 is the pre-emigration population of group i and Mit is the number of individuals

in i that have emigrated to the U.S. by period t. Putting (2) and (3) together,

(4)               ln Wit = ln X it + η ln Li 0 − ηmit ,

where mit=Mit/Li0 is the fraction of group i in Mexico that has emigrated.12

          An individual in Mexico has the option of staying in the country or moving to the

U.S., in which the wage for experience group i is

(5)               Wit* = X it* ( L*i 0 + τM it )η ,




11
     We ignore other aspects of skill because in order to measure net migration by state of

birth in Mexico we need to track populations by characteristics which are invariant to

time.
12
     In (4), we utilize the approximation that, for small values of X/Y, ln(X+Y) ≈ lnX + Y/X.



                                                                                           11
where W*it is the U.S. wage, X*it is the U.S. labor-demand shifter, τ ∈ [0,1] is the

productivity discount associated with immigrant labor, L*i0 is the U.S. labor supply

(assumed equal to the population of U.S. native-born high school dropouts), and η is the

inverse labor-demand elasticity, assumed equal to that in Mexico.

         The wage equation in (5) implies that when expressed in productivity-equivalent

units, native and immigrant labor in the U.S. are perfect substitutes.13 However, the

productivity discount, τ, ensures that one immigrant worker substitutes for less than one

native worker.       Immigrant workers may be less productive because they are less-

educated, have a weaker command of English, or are less knowledgeable about U.S.

production practices. Expressing (5) in log form,

(6)              ln Wit* = ln X it* + η ln L*i 0 + ητλmit ,

where λ=Li0/L*i0 is the relative size of Mexico’s initial population.

         To allow for adjustment costs in labor mobility between countries, we assume that

migration from Mexico to the U.S. in any period t is a function of the lagged difference in

wages between the two countries:

(7)              vit* = σ* ( ln Wi *,t −1 − ln Wi ,t −1 − Ci ,t −1 ) ,




13
     U.S. evidence on the substitutability of native and immigrant labor is mixed. While

Aydemir and Borjas (2007) find native and immigrant workers are perfect substitutes

(within skill groups), Ottaviano and Peri (2006) find they are not. Borjas, Grogger, and

Hanson (2008) show that once one adopts conventional definitions of who is in the labor

force, Ottaviano and Peri’s results also support perfect substitutability.



                                                                                        12
where vit* = ∆M it / Li 0 is the net emigration rate for group i in Mexico at time t, σ* is the

supply elasticity, and Ci,t-1 is a wage discount that Mexican nationals associate with living

in the U.S. The wage discount reflects the disamenity of living in the U.S. To capture

network effects associated with emigration, we assume this disamenity is decreasing in

the fraction of an individual’s cohort that has previously migrated abroad, such that

                                t −1
(8)              Ci ,t = C − γ ∑ vis
                                s =1


where we assume 0 ≤ γ ≤ C (to ensure migration stops at or before U.S. and Mexican

wages are equalized). Using (7) and (8), the period t emigration rate from Mexico is,

                           ⎛                                t −1
                                                                     ⎞
(9)              vit* = σ* ⎜ ln Wi *,t −1 − ln Wi ,t −1 + γ ∑ vir −C ⎟ .
                           ⎝                                r =1     ⎠

A larger existing stock of emigrants in the U.S. makes future emigration more attractive.

In (9), migration networks operate within cohorts (through siblings and cousins) rather

than between cohorts (through fathers and uncles).14 In the empirical analysis, we control

for networks between cohorts by allowing for birth-state fixed effects and by letting the

supply elasticity, σ*, vary according to the strength of historical migration networks.

         To solve the model, define the pre-migration effective wage differential between

the U.S. and Mexico as,

(10)             ω*i 0 = ln Wi*0 − ln Wi 0 − C = η ln A*i 0 + ln xi*0 − C .




14
     Orrenius and Zavodny (2005) find that the likelihood a young Mexican male migrates

to the U.S. is positively correlated with the father having migrated and with the number

of siblings that have migrated.



                                                                                            13
where ln A*i 0 = ln L*i 0 − ln Li 0 is the log difference in U.S. and Mexico initial labor supplies

and ln xi*0 = ln X i*0 − ln X i 0 is the log difference in U.S. and Mexico initial labor demand

shifters. The U.S.-Mexico pre-migration wage difference is decreasing in U.S.-Mexico

relative labor supply (since η < 0), increasing in U.S.-Mexico relative labor demand, and

decreasing in the migration disamenity.15 Using (4), (6), and (9), we solve for the t = 0

emigration rate, and then iterate forward, solving for the wage and emigration rate in each

period. This reveals that the emigration rate for age group i in period t is,16

(11)                vit* = ω*i 0 σ* + ω*i 0 θ ( t − 1) .


where θ = ( σ* ) ⎡⎣ γ + η (1 + τλ ) ⎤⎦ . The first term on the right of (11) indicates that the
                     2




emigration rate is higher the larger is the initial wage differential between the U.S. and

Mexico. Larger monetary gains to emigration naturally make emigration more attractive.

Thus, emigration from Mexico will be greater the smaller is U.S. labor supply relative to

Mexico (ℓ*i0) or the stronger is U.S. labor demand relative to Mexico (x*i0).




15
     Here, we assume that labor demand is constant over time such that Xit=Xi0 and

X*it=X*i0. Unreported results (available on request) allow for time variation in labor

demand shocks and internal migration within Mexico.
16
     The precise solution to the model is vit* = σ*ω*i 0 (1 + σ* [ γ + η (1 + τλ )])t −1 . We obtain the

expression in (11) by applying the approximation that (1+x)t ≈ 1+tx.



                                                                                                           14
         The second term in (11) captures emigration dynamics. Over time, emigration

pushes wages up in Mexico and down in the U.S.17 Assume for a moment that γ = 0,

such that there are no network effects. In this case, θ = ( σ* ) η (1 + τλ ) < 0 , which implies
                                                                2




that the emigration rate for group i declines over time as emigration across successive

periods erodes the binational wage difference. Now, allow for network effects, such that

γ > 0. The emigration rate may accelerate or decelerate over time. If γ < −η (1 + τλ ) ,

then θ < 0 (recall that η<0). Network effects are weak and/or labor demand is inelastic

(η<<0), meaning that networks effects are not strong enough to counteract the depressive

effect that emigration has on the wage differential. Alternatively, if γ > −η (1 + τλ ) , then

θ > 0 . Network effects are sufficiently strong to compensate for the emigration-induced

decline in the wage differential, indicating that emigration accelerates over time until

U.S.-Mexico wage parity (adjusted for the emigration disamenity) is reached.18 The

estimating equation follows directly from (11).



3.2 Specification Issues


17
     The key predictions of the model for Mexican emigration still apply even if migration

from Mexico to the U.S. leaves U.S. wages unchanged. This case is equivalent to setting

λ equal to zero in (11).
18
     Implicit in our setup is that emigration is reversible, in which case individuals re-

optimize their migration decision in each period. There is no option value to delaying

emigration, as in Carrington et al. (1996). Our approach thus allows for return migration,

though it does not explicitly model why it might occur.



                                                                                             15
       For estimation purposes, we use (10) to rewrite (11) as

(12)    vit* = ln A*i 0 ⎡⎣ησ* + ηθ ( t − 1) ⎤⎦ + ⎡⎣ln xi*0 − C ⎤⎦ ⎡⎣σ* + θ ( t − 1) ⎤⎦

We use U.S. high school dropouts to measure U.S. labor supply (the numerator of A*i 0 ).

Treating U.S. high school dropouts as the relevant labor market for Mexican immigrants

follows the literature (e.g., Aydemir and Borjas, 2007). However, it may introduce

endogeneity into the estimation. If the decision by U.S. natives to complete high school

depends on the U.S. wage for high school dropouts, then shocks to Mexican emigration

may play a role in determining the number of U.S. high school dropouts. Mexican

emigration and the supply of low-skilled U.S. natives would then be jointly determined.

A related concern is that the number of high school dropouts may be a poor measure of

the supply of low-skilled U.S. workers, introducing measurement error into the

estimation. Many high school dropouts in the U.S. appear to have a weak attachment to

the labor force (see, e.g., Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson, 2008), meaning they may not

compete with full-time immigrant workers for jobs.

       We address concerns regarding endogeneity and measurement error in U.S. labor

supply by instrumenting for the number of U.S. high school dropouts using the size of the

corresponding U.S. birth cohort. Our identifying assumption is that the size of current

U.S. birth cohorts is uncorrelated with expected immigration from Mexico (20 years in

the future). In the first stage estimation, the log size of U.S. birth cohorts, along with

dummy variables for gender, census year, and birth year, can account for 97% of the

variation in the log number of U.S. native high-school dropouts.

       We model the initial wage in a Mexican state relative to the U.S. as a function of

the size of a state birth cohort relative to the size of the corresponding U.S. birth cohort



                                                                                         16
(as well as initial differences in labor demand). To allow for the fact that similarly aged

individuals are likely to be highly substitutable in production, we group birth cohorts by

three or five-year intervals (which also mitigates rounding error in birth years). The

implicit assumption is that each age group has its own production function and that other

production factors, including younger or older groups, can be subsumed into state per

capita GDP, or the gender, birth-year, and birth-state fixed effects included in the

regression. In the estimation, we consider the robustness of the results to this assumption

by adding controls for the size of adjacent birth cohorts. We also examine how the

results are affected by different aggregation schemes.



4. Empirical Results

4.1 Empirical Specification

       The dependent variable for our analysis is the flow of net emigration, ∆mijst ,

which is the ten-year time difference in the emigrant stock in (1) and which corresponds

exactly to vit* in (12). This value is the net share of a birth year (i), gender (j), and birth

state (s) cohort that has emigrated during the previous ten-year interval. In the main

results, we group birth cohorts by three-year intervals and in later results we use one- and

five-year intervals. Following (12), the regression equation we estimate is

(13)    ∆mijst = ln lijs ⎡⎣α1 + α 2 ( t − 1) ⎤⎦ + ln xis ⎡⎣ β1 + β 2 ( t − 1) ⎤⎦ + zstφ + I + J + S + T + ε ijst ,

where lijs is the size of a Mexican state birth cohort relative to the number of U.S. high

school dropouts in that birth cohort, xis is initial labor demand for a state birth cohort

relative to the U.S., zst captures labor-market shocks to state s in year t, and I, J, S, and T




                                                                                                                 17
are fixed effects for birth year, gender, birth state, and census year.19           By (12), the

relative initial size of a Mexican birth cohort (lijs) should be positively correlated with

emigration, while relative initial labor demand in Mexico (xis) should be negatively

correlated with emigration. We specify the initial difference in labor demand as the log

ratio of state per capita GDP to U.S. per capita GDP in the year a cohort first enters the

labor market (assumed to be age 16). This is an admittedly crude measure of labor

demand and we view the variable as controlling for initial conditions in a state more

broadly. We control for current-period labor-market shocks in a state using the 10-year

change in state per capita GDP. We discuss results using other variables, as well.

          From (12), the coefficient on initial relative labor supply in (13), α1 = ησ*,

depends on the emigrant supply elasticity, σ*, which may vary by gender, age, or region.

We begin with results that pool across gender, age, and state, and then disaggregate

across Mexican states and report results for specific age and gender subgroups. Under

the dynamics specified by the model, the impact of initial labor-market conditions on the

emigration rate may increase or decrease as a cohort ages, depending on whether network

effects dominate wage-convergence effects. As specified by (13), we interact initial

labor-market conditions with the time since a cohort entered the labor market (t-1).

Networks may also affect the responsiveness of emigration to labor-market shocks (σ*),



19
     To be precise, comparing (12) and (13) lijs is the inverse of A*i 0 and xis is the inverse of

xi*0 . We use the inverses to make the regression results easier to interpret (such that in

Mexico positive labor supply shocks increase emigration and positive labor demand

shocks decrease emigration).



                                                                                               18
which we allow for by interacting initial state labor-market conditions with measures of

historical state migration networks.



4.2 Baseline Estimation Results

       We begin with results for a sample of national aggregate birth cohorts for Mexico

and the U.S., shown in Table 2. Though we have only 166 observations on one-year

birth/gender cohorts at the national level, the specification is useful for seeing whether

there is any correlation between emigration and relative labor supply in aggregate data.

       In Table 2, there is a strong positive correlation between the size of a Mexican

birth cohort (relative to the number of U.S. high school dropouts in that cohort) and the

emigration rate for the cohort. Our dependent variable is expressed as a share and the

explanatory variables are in logs, so our parameter estimates give the decadal labor

supply elasticity of net migration. In column (1), which is based on OLS, a 10% increase

in the relative size of a Mexican cohort is associated with an increase in the decadal

emigration rate of 0.3 percentage points, with the effect precisely estimated. Consistent

with theory, larger Mexican birth cohorts have higher emigration rates. Initial relative

per capita GDP in Mexico is negatively correlated with emigration, also as predicted by

theory. State-level changes in per capita GDP enter with a negative sign, as predicted by

theory, but are imprecisely estimated. Column (2) gives instrumental variable estimates,

where we control for measurement error or endogeneity in the U.S. supply of low-skilled

labor by instrumenting for the ratio of Mexican birth cohort size to U.S. high school

dropouts with the ratio of Mexican birth cohort size to U.S. birth cohort size. The IV




                                                                                           19
estimates are twice as large as the OLS estimates and are precisely estimated.20 Columns

(3) and (4) break out cohorts by gender, revealing that the effects of cohort size on

emigration are larger for men than for women, a result we discuss below.

         Next, we turn to the main results for the sample of three-year birth cohorts using

individual Mexican state birth cohorts as the unit of analysis. Given small cohorts are

measured with less precision, estimates using state-level census data are noisy, making

net emigration heteroskedastic. To address measurement error, we use robust standard

errors clustered at the level of birth states and trim the 2.5% tails of net-emigration flows.

         The first column of Table 3 controls for birth-state fixed effects only. Mexico has

a long history of regional differences in income levels, income growth, and population

growth (Chiquiar, 2005). Birth-state fixed effects remove these and related sources of

state-level heterogeneity from the regression. Labor supply continues to work in the

manner theory predicts: increases in Mexico’s cohort size (relative to the U.S.) drive

emigration up. The correlation between emigration and initial GDP remains negative and

precisely estimated. In column (2) of Table 3, we introduce controls for gender, census

year, and 10-year birth cohorts.21 Census year fixed effects remove the effect of changes

20
     These results suggest that in OLS regressions inconsistency is due more to

measurement error in the supply of low-skilled U.S. native labor (which would tend to

bias coefficient estimates on relative cohort size toward zero) than to the endogeneity of

U.S. labor supply to shocks to Mexican migration (which would tend to introduce

positive bias in the coefficient on relative cohort size).
21
     Since a full set of birth-year fixed effects would eliminate all variation in U.S. labor

supply, we limit the controls to dummies for 10-year birth groups. In unreported results,



                                                                                           20
in border enforcement by U.S. immigration authorities, such as those introduced by the

Immigration Reform and Control Act in the late 1980s and the expansion in U.S. border

fortifications in the 1990s (Hanson, 2006), provided the impact of these changes is

experienced in a common way across cohorts in our study (those aged 16-50). Birth-year

fixed effects control for the size of the average Mexican birth cohort, cohort-specific

effects of U.S. enforcement policies, and other unexplained differences in migration

propensities between earlier and later-born cohorts.22

         These additional controls amplify the effect of labor supply on emigration but

drive the effect of initial per capita GDP to zero. Given the lack of substantial cross-

state, cross-time variation in Mexican GDP per capita (Chiquiar, 2005), census-year and

birth-year fixed effects appear to remove most of the explanatory power of the initial

level of development. We do not interpret these results as evidence that labor demand is

unimportant, but rather that even conditioning on initial average income there is a

powerful independent channel through which labor supply drives emigration.

         In column (3), we move from OLS to IV, following a similar strategy of

instrumentation as in Table 2. The IV estimates for labor supply are again larger. A 10%

increase in the base size of a Mexican cohort results in a 1.3% increase in out-migration


we find that relative cohort size remains positively and significantly correlated with

emigration, even with the full set of birth-year dummies in the regression. In this

specification, the effect of cohort size on emigration is identified entirely on variation in

population growth across Mexican states.
22
     Based on theoretical results available on request from the authors, birth-year fixed

effects also control for cohort-specific pressures to migrate internally.



                                                                                          21
per decade over the working years of that cohort. Columns (4) and (5) indicate that the

impact of labor supply on emigration is roughly twice as large for men as for women.

The migration decisions of men appear to be more responsive to labor-market conditions

upon entry into the labor force, perhaps reflecting the tendency of families to invest in the

migration of fathers and sons over mothers and daughters. Later results suggest that over

time, migration rates for women increase, allowing them to catch up (consistent with the

similar long run migration rates for men and women seen in Figure 2).

         Based on the results in Table 3, the correlation between initial labor supply and

emigration appears to be robustly positive. The coefficient estimates in column (3) imply

that moving a Mexican state from the 25th to the 75th percentile of relative labor supply

would raise the decennial emigration rate by 25 percentage points, against a mean

emigration rate of 7%.23



4.3 Network Effects and Migration Dynamics

         So far, we have constrained the estimated elasticities to be constant across regions

of Mexico. Pre-existing migration networks could affect the emigration elasticity, σ*, in

equation (19), by making regions with stronger networks more sensitive to changes in

labor-market conditions. We capture the strength of pre-existing migration networks

either by the state emigration rate in 1924 or the distance of a state to the railroad that ran




23
     To perform this calculation, we express state cohort sizes as deviations from each

state’s mean over the sample period and take the 25th and 75th percentiles of the

distribution of these within-state deviations.



                                                                                            22
down Mexico’s spine in 1910, which U.S. labor contractors initially used to locate

potential Mexican workers (Cardoso, 1980).24

          The first two columns of Table 4 show results in which we interact relative cohort

size with pre-existing migration networks (all regressions in Table 4 are based on IV

estimation).25 In column (1), the interaction term is positive, indicating that Mexican

states with a longer history of emigration are more responsive to variation in cohort size.

There is a similar result in column (2), where the interaction term is negative, implying

that states closer to the migration railroad respond more strongly to relative cohort size.

In unreported results, we found no precisely estimated interaction effect between

migration networks and initial relative per capita GDP.

          The interaction between cohort size and pre-existing migration patterns captures

intergenerational migration networks. Father and uncles may relay their experiences to

sons and nephews (and daughters and nieces), helping create regional persistence in

migration patterns. Munshi (2003), Orrenius and Zavodny (2005) and McKenzie and




24
     Consistent with a large literature on the subject, we find that distance to the U.S. border

is not a good proxy for the strength of migration networks, whereas distance to the

railroad is.
25
     As in previous regressions, the high school dropout cohort size ratio is instrumented

using the entire US native born population cohort size ratio. Each column in Table 4

interacts the HS dropout ratio with an exogenous variable, and in each case we

instrument for this using the interaction of the native population ratio with the same

exogenous variable.



                                                                                             23
Rapoport (2007) also provide evidence that networks (either within families or

communities) lower the cost of emigrating from Mexico.

       By their nature, intergenerational networks change slowly over time. Equation

(11) allows for intra-generational networks, which produce a dynamic migration response

to initial labor-market conditions. The shock caused to initial migration will have effects

that are dampened as a cohort ages if labor demand is relatively inelastic (η<<0), such

that θ < 0, or that are amplified as a cohort ages if network effects from migration are

strong (γ>>0), in which case θ > 0. The dynamic labor-supply elasticity, θ, can be

estimated by interacting initial labor-market conditions with the number of years since a

cohort entered the labor force, assumed to be the current cohort age minus sixteen.

       The third column of Table 4 shows these interactions estimated on the full sample

of birth cohorts. For shocks to relative labor supply, the pooled results indicate an

interaction effect which is in the same direction as the marginal effect, but insignificant.

The labor demand interaction, on the other hand, is in the opposite direction from the

uninteracted effect and strongly significant.      This suggests that the depression of

migration caused by a positive GDP shock at age 16 is transitory, and over subsequent

decades migrants compensate by leaving these states in larger numbers.

       Columns (4)-(6) repeat this exercise, dividing the sample according to the strength

of pre-existing migration networks.       These disaggregated results display intriguing

heterogeneity in the dynamic response to labor supply. In states with the strongest

history of migration (top tercile) the interaction effect is negative, suggesting that the

dampening response of wages to migration is dominant. States with intermediate levels

of historical migration display a strongly positive interaction between labor supply and




                                                                                         24
years since turning 16, indicating that migration accelerates over time. In states with

non-existent networks (bottom tercile), the dynamic interaction is insignificant. Taken

together, these results suggest that the networks created by labor supply-driven migration

are self-reinforcing over time only if those networks are new; states in which those

networks were already extant show a dampening, rather than an acceleration, over time.

Where historical migration networks are weakest, the migration networks initiated by

labor supply shocks may be too small to create new, self-reinforcing flows.



4.4 Robustness Checks

       Estimates of net migration are noisy, especially for smaller states in the sample.

We implement robustness checks to examine the extent to which measurement error may

be affecting the estimation. A particular concern is raised by the fact that the base cohort

size appears in the numerator and denominator of the dependent variable as well as in log

form as an independent variable. It might be the case that we are picking up a spurious

correlation arising from the fact that the base cohort size is observed with error and a

function of this measure error is then regressed on itself. Fortunately, we have a simple

way to modulate the degree of measurement error present in the data, which is to

aggregate over larger or smaller cohorts than the three-year birth-year groups used so far

in the analysis. As we calculate base cohort sizes and net migration rates on one-year

(five-year) cohorts we should increase (decrease) the measurement error, which allows us

to gauge the extent to which this matters for our results.

       In Table 5, we re-create the fixed effect regression presented in column (3) of

Table 3, using one-year, three-year, or five-year birth cohorts. As we move from less




                                                                                         25
aggregated to more aggregated cohorts, the magnitude of the coefficient on relative

cohort size increases, which is the exactly opposite pattern we would expect if

measurement error were responsible for our results. Also, the precision of the coefficient

estimates increases as we move to more aggregated cohorts, despite the fact that the

three-year cohort sample has 60% fewer observations than the one-year sample and the

five-year sample has 80% fewer observations. The clear implication from this exercise is

that rather than measurement error driving our results through spurious correlation, it

may understate the strength of the relationships due to attenuation bias.

       The use of five-year cohorts in Table 5 helps address another issue, related to the

fact that our specification assumes that possibilities for labor substitution between

younger and older cohorts can be subsumed into state, census-year, and birth-year fixed

effects. As we expand the size of a birth cohort, we allow for more flexible patterns of

labor substitution, though at the cost of reducing the sample size. Another way to address

the issue of labor substitutability is to include the size of adjacent cohorts in the

estimation directly. In unreported results, we added as regressors the log size of the

previous and following state birth cohorts, each expressed relative to the size of the

cohort pertaining to an observation. This addition leaves our qualitative results on the

impact of relative labor supply on emigration unchanged.

       Another issue has to do with omitted variables that could be related to state

population growth. Because changes in the timing of the demographic transition are not

randomly assigned, we may be concerned that some third factor exists which is driving

both changes in cohort size and the decision to migrate out of Mexico. In this case the

correlations we measure between Mexican cohort size and net migration would be biased.




                                                                                       26
Perhaps the most obvious underlying source of heterogeneity in Mexico during this

period is differences in the timing of industrialization. In 1970, 12% of Mexican GDP

derived from agriculture, but by 2000 this number had fallen to 5%.            While early

industrializing states, such as the Federal District and the state of Mexico, saw little

change in their agricultural share, other states saw a sharp decline. In unreported results,

we examine whether the movement out of agriculture may have mutually driven

population growth and migration during the period of our study by including the share of

state GDP that comes from agriculture to the specification in column (3) of Table 3. Our

results on relative labor supply are unchanged, suggesting they are not being driven by

unobserved heterogeneity in the timing of industrialization across Mexican states.



4.5 The Final Stock of Migration and Possible Future Trends

       All of our results so far have followed the theoretical model in analyzing the flow

of migration over time. We summarize our empirical section by presenting results on the

impact of labor supply and demand shifts on the stock of migrants, meaning the total

share of a cohort that has migrated out at by the time they reach age 50. In order to

measure these long-term effects we must observe the cohort prior to migration age and

then be able to follow them until they reach the end of their migration years. We

therefore restrict this analysis to cohorts aged between 40 and 50 which were first

observed in the data younger than age 15. This group of 843 cohorts gives us the ability

to measure the impact of labor supply shocks on the long-term net stock of migrants. We

include as demand controls the GDP ratio when these cohorts turned 16 as well as the

most recent change in state per capita GDP that they had experienced.




                                                                                         27
       In this regression (shown in Table 6), he coefficient estimate of 0.37 for relative

labor supply indicates that for every three ‘extra’ Mexican nationals (relative to the

number of U.S. natives) born in a given state one of them will eventually migrate to the

U.S. Different from the results on migration flows in Table 5, the effects of labor supply

shocks are somewhat larger for women than for men. The most likely explanation for

this is reverse migration; while men have a higher propensity to migrate at younger ages

they are also more likely to return to Mexico later in life, and hence the use of older

cohorts enhances the apparent sensitivity of women to labor-supply shocks.

       One way of understanding long-term emigration magnitudes is to simulate total

out-migration using the parameter estimates from Table 3. We use the marginal effect

from column 3, which gives a decadal coefficient of 0.144 on the log base cohort size.

From here we can calculate the aggregate base cohort size for each birthyear for the

country as a whole, and multiply the log of this quantity times the marginal effect and the

number of decades over which they are observed. Of the 37.5 million Mexicans born

between 1960 and 1980, this method suggests that just over 2.2 million emigrated as a

result of labor supply growth. Using independent estimates that the stock of Mexican

immigrants in the U.S. increased by 5.2 million during the years 1977-1997 (that is, the

years after these cohorts had turned 16), this implies that 42% of total migration can be

explained by labor supply growth in these 21 cohorts. This figure is likely to be an

under-estimate both because it uses only a subset of cohorts to form the numerator of the

fraction, and because it ignores the subsequent network-driven migration caused by these

individuals. Hence, labor supply growth in Mexico alone can account for one third of the

total migration from that country to the U.S. over the past quarter century.




                                                                                        28
       Going forward in time, growth in Mexico’s labor supply relative to the U.S. is

likely to slow substantially. With Mexican fertility rates having fallen from 7 in 1960 to

2.5 in 2000, labor supply shocks are likely to become a much less significant push factor

in Mexican labor outflows.     Given the substantial role of labor supply in Mexican

emigration to date, this is an important development.

       To examine the implications of Mexico’s slowdown in population growth for

migration, we use the regression results to forecast future emigration rates by birth

cohort. First, we sum the data by Mexican state and gender to arrive at aggregate labor

supply in Mexico (and in the U.S.) for each year, from which we calculate the log labor

supply ratio, with Mexico in the numerator. In order to construct the forecast of this log

labor supply ratio, we ran an Arima model that included a first-order autoregressive and a

first-order moving average component as well as a linear and quadratic time trend. Using

the Arima model, we then projected relative labor supply from 2000 through 2020. The

net migration rates across age for each cohort were then predicted using the parameter

estimates from column (3) of Table 4, which gives us the dynamic effects of cohort size

estimated using the entire Mexican population.          Figure 4 plots the resulting net

emigration rates by decade from 1960-2020, expressed relative to the 1940 cohort (i.e.,

subtracting values for 1940 from each cohort). This exercise is equivalent to forecasting

changes in emigration due to labor supply, holding labor demand, enforcement policies,

and other factors constant. By expressing emigration relative to a base cohort, we isolate

changes in past and future emigration that the empirical results suggest are associated

with changes in relative labor supply.

       In Figure 4, labor-supply-induced emigration falls for cohorts born between1940




                                                                                       29
to 1960, owing to the large increase in U.S. population associated with the baby boom.

From 1960 to 1980, relative labor supply growth in Mexico leads to a dramatic surge in

emigration. But this surge peaks for the 1980 birth cohort, which would have begun to

enter the labor market in the late 1990s. Emigration rates fall for all subsequent cohorts,

as population growth in Mexico begins to decline to U.S. levels. By the time the 2020

birth cohort comes of age, emigration rates would have returned to levels equal to those

of the 1940 birth cohort. Holding labor demand and enforcement policies constant, it

would appear that emigration from Mexico is peaking today and that labor-supply-driven

pressures for labor outflows will weaken in subsequent decades. Of course, shocks to

labor demand or U.S. immigration policy could produce much larger or much smaller

emigration rates, depending on their realizations. Also, while the forecast in Figure 4

controls for intra-generational migration networks, it does not control for dynamic

changes in intergenerational networks, which fall outside our framework.



5. Discussion

       The surge in labor flows from Mexico to the U.S. over the last 25 years has made

international migration the subject of intense policy debate in the two countries. Mexico

accounts for fully one-third of post 1980 U.S. immigration and the U.S. is now the

country of residence for nearly one-fifth of young working-age Mexican males. Despite

the magnitude of these labor movements, there is little academic research that attempts to

account for the scale of Mexican emigration.

       Our approach is to examine the contribution of labor-supply shocks to the labor

exodus from Mexico by exploiting variation across Mexican states in the evolution of




                                                                                        30
population growth. Larger birth cohorts in Mexico have higher rates of emigration,

consistent with positive labor supply shocks contributing to outmigration. Differential

growth in labor supply between Mexico and the U.S. over 1960-1984 can account for one

third of observed Mexican migration to the U.S. over 1977-2000.

       Looking ahead, population growth in Mexico has decreased dramatically. Indeed,

the 1970 to 2000 decline in fertility in Mexico is one of the fastest ever recorded. Will

slowing population growth contribute to slower increases in emigration rates in the

future? Absent network effects (and holding labor demand constant), the answer would

appear to be yes. The direct effects of differential labor supply growth should already be

dwindling. The sharp increase which started in 1960 came to an end in 1980, and so

cohorts coming of migration age today are not experiencing the shocks which those only

a decade ago faced. The mechanical migration pressures caused by population growth

are now pressing on Mexico's southern border, because neighboring Central American

countries have not undergone the rapid demographic transition seen in Mexico

       However, emigration from Mexico shows evidence of network effects.

Emigration is more responsive to Mexico-U.S. differences in labor supply in states that

have stronger historical migration networks, and the response of emigration to initial

labor-supply differences appears to accelerate over time in a manner consistent with early

migrants encouraging later migrants to move abroad. Networks effects could make the

impact of differential Mexico-U.S. labor-supply growth over the 1960-1980 period long

lived, as the current generation of migrants eases migration for later generations. In this

event, emigration from Mexico may continue to accelerate for some time, even as

population growth in the two countries continues to converge.




                                                                                        31
References

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas. 2007. “A Comparative Analysis of the

   Labor Market Impact of International Migration: Canada, Mexico, and the U.S..”

   Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Blanchard, Oliver, and Lawrence Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers

   on Economic Activity, 1-75.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. “Gender and Assimilation among

   Mexican Americans.” In George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration. Chicago:

   University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research.

Borjas, George J. 1996. “The Earnings of Mexican Immigrants in the U.S.” Journal of

   Development Economics 51: 69-98.

Borjas, George J. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of

   Immigration,” Journal of Human Resources 41 (Spring 2006): 221-258.

Borjas, George J., Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2008. “Imperfect Substitution

   between Immigrants and Natives: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper No. 13821.

Borjas, George J., and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “The Evolution of Mexican Immigrants

   in the U.S. Workforce, 1900-2000.” In George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration,

   Chicago: University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bound, John, and Sarah Turner. 2006. “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect

   Collegiate Attainment.” NBER Working Paper No. 12424.

Buck, Steve, Celine Ferre, Nakagawe Hideyuki, Lourdes Rodriguez-Chamussy, and

   Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2007. "Rural Out-migration in Mexico and Brazil." Background

   paper for the World Development Report, 2008.




                                                                                    32
Cardoso, Lawrence.      1980.    Mexican Emigration to the U.S., 1897-1931.   Tucson,

   University of Arizona Press.

Carrington, William J. and Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Viswanath. 1996. “Migration

   with Endogenous Moving Costs.” American Economic Review Sept. 86(4): 909-930.

Chiquiar, Daniel. 2005. “Why Mexico’s Regional Income Convergence Broke Down.”

   Journal of Development Economics.

Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon Hanson. 2005. "International Migration, Self-Selection,

   and the Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the U.S.." Journal of

   Political Economy, April 113(2): 239-281.

Cornelius, Wayne A.           2001.   “Death at the Border: Efficacy and Unintended

   Consequences of U.S. Immigration Control Policy,” Population and Development

   Review, 27(4): 661-85.

Durand, Jorge, Douglas S. Massey, and Rene M. Zenteno. 2001. “Mexican Immigration

   in the U.S..” Latin American Research Review 36(1): 107-127.

Fernandez-Huertas, Jesus. 2006. “New Evidence on Emigration Selection.” Mimeo,

   Columbia University.

Gathmann, Christina. 2004. “The Effects of Enforcement on Illegal Markets: Evidence

   from Migrant Smuggling on the Southwestern Border.” IZA DP No. 1004.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2002. Falling behind or Moving up? The

   Intergenerational Progress of Mexican Americans. San Francisco, CA: Public Policy

   Institute of California.

Hanson, Gordon H. 2006. “Illegal Migration from Mexico to the U.S.” Journal of

   Economic Literature, December.




                                                                                  33
Hanson, Gordon H., and Antonio Spilimbergo.      1999.   "Illegal Immigration, Border

   Enforcement and Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico

   Border," American Economic Review, 89: 1337-57.

Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2003. “Demographic and Economic

   Pressure on Emigration out of Africa.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 105(3):

   465-486.

Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2005. “What Fundamentals Drive World

   Migration?”   In.   George J. Borjas and Jeff Crisp, eds., Poverty, International

   Migration, and Asylum, New York: MacMillam.

Ibarraran, Pablo, and Darren Lubotsky. 2007. “The Socioeconomic Status of Mexican

   Migrant Families: New Evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census.” In George J.

   Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago and National

   Bureau of Economic Research.

Martinez, Jose and Christopher Woodruff. 2007. “Selectivity of Migrants from Mexico:

   What Does Net Migration Tell Us?” Mimeo, UCSD.

Massey, Douglas S. and Kristin E. Espinosa. 1997. “What’s Driving Mexico-U.S.

   Migration? A Theoretical, Empirical, and Policy Analysis.” American Journal of

   Sociology 102(4): 939-999.

Massey, Douglas S. and Rene Zenteno. 1999. “The Dynamics of Mass Migration.”

   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96: 5328-5335.

McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport. 2007. “Network Effects and the Dynamics of

   Migration and Inequality:    Theory and Evidence from Mexico.”         Journal of

   Development Economics, forthcoming.




                                                                                  34
Mishra, Prachi. 2006. “Emigration and Wages in Source Countries: Evidence from

   Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics.

Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the

   US Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (May): 549-97.

Orrenius, Pia M. and Madeline Zavodny. 2005. “Self-Selection among Undocumented

   Immigrants from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics, 78(1): 215-240.

Smith, James P.    2003.   “Assimilation across the Latino Generations.”   American

   Economic Review, 93(2), pp. 315-319

Taylor, J. Edward.    “Undocumented Mexico-U.S. Migration and the Returns to

   Households in Rural Mexico.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 69,

   No. 3, August 1987, pp. 626-638.

Tuiran, R., V. Partida, O. Mojarro, and E. Zuniga. 2002. “Fertility in Mexico: Trends

   and Forecast.”. Report of the United Nations Population Division.

Woodruff, Christopher and Rene Zenteno.          2006.     “Migration Networks and

   Microenterprises in Mexico.” Mimeo, UCSD.




                                                                                  35
                                          Figure 1

5
4
3
2
1
0                              Labor Supply, US vs MX, 1910=1




           1900              1920      1940                1960             1980    2000
                                              Birth year

                                       US native born                 MX



                                          Figure 2

                            Decadal migration rates by gender, 2000
          15
Migration in percent
  5       0     10




                       16      21          26                 31               36      41
                                                  age

                                         Males                    Females




                                                                                            36
                                                                                 Figure 3

   Children ever born to women over 40      Timing of Demographic Transition, by Mexican State
    2          4          6        8




                                         1910              1920               1930           1940              1950         1960
                                                                                 Year of Birth

                                                                       Chiapas                  Distrito Federal
                                                                       Campeche                 Mexican Average
                                                                       Zacatecas                B.C. Sur
                                          Rank of 1960 Fertility: Chiapas=1, Zacatecas=9, Campeche=16, B.C. Sur=24, DF=32




Figure 4: Future Emigration and the Slowdown in Mexican Population Growth

                                               Predicted net migration rates by birth year and age
                                                        Stock of net migration, relative to 1940 birth cohort
                      .3




                                                                                                                            1980
   Additional fraction migrated
                           .2




                                                                                                                            1970
                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                                            2010
       0          .1




                                                                                                                            2020
                      -.1




                                                                                                                            1960
                                          16                             26                         36                      46
                                                                                          Age
                                          Birth cohort sizes for 2000-2020 are forecast




                                                                                                                                   37
                            Table 1: Population and GDP (PPP) in Mexico and the U.S.

                      Mexico                                US                               Ratio, MX/US
                                                                      No. of high                          MX Birth
            GDP per      Size of Birth   GDP per        Size of Birth   school      GDP per Size of Birth Cohort / US
  Year       capita         Cohort        capita           Cohort      dropouts      capita   Cohorts     HS dropouts
  1920                     584,776                       2,281,441 1,115,098                    0.26         0.52
  1930                     753,616                       2,223,977     884,869                  0.34         0.85
  1940        4,498        743,566         8,820         2,097,851     605,711        0.51      0.35         1.23
  1950        5,385       1,002,387       12,009         3,209,845     408,878        0.45      0.31         2.45
  1960        6,138       1,438,300       13,840         4,107,562     381,367        0.44      0.35         3.77
  1970        8,341       1,792,770       18,391         3,221,446     350,870        0.45      0.56         5.11
  1980       11,976       2,153,340       22,666         3,250,323     431,330        0.53      0.66         4.99
  1990       12,594       2,273,444       28,429         4,041,951                    0.44      0.56
  2000       15,279       2,018,483       34,759         3,703,392                    0.44      0.55

GDP in both countries is measured in 2000 US dollars.
                   Table 2: Baseline Results for Net Migration, National Birth Cohorts

                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)
                                                                                Men Only Women Only
Dep. variable: decadal change in net migration rate    OLS            IV          IV        IV

log (MX cohort size/US HS dropouts)                    0.030        0.071         0.147         0.017
                                                      (2.24)*      (4.12)**      (5.09)**       (0.83)

log (MX GDP/US GDP) at age 16                          -0.219       -0.263        -0.359         -0.193
                                                      (3.32)**     (3.94)**      (3.74)**       (2.25)*

10-yr change log(MX GDP/US GDP)                       -0.055        -0.146        -0.054        -0.127
                                                      (0.27)        (0.71)        (0.16)        (0.48)

Time trend                                             0.001        -0.002         -0.005       0.001
                                                       (0.24)       (1.51)        (2.34)*       (0.53)

Female cohort dummy                                    -0.039       -0.045
                                                      (3.62)**     (4.08)**

Observations                                           166           166            83            83
R-squared                                              0.17          0.13                        0.15

Mexican cohort size is fixed at its initial value; the number of native US high school dropouts is
contemporaneous. The analysis is performed using one-year birth cohorts. GDP refers to GDP per capita. In
IV regressions, log (MX birth cohort size/ US birth cohort size) is used as an instrument for log (MX birth
cohort size/US HS dropouts).
T statistics in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.



                                                                                                              1
                                Table 3: Baseline Results for Net Migration, State Birth Cohorts

                                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)      (4)
                                                                            All Cohorts                    Men Only Women Only
Dependent variable: decadal change in net migration rate         OLS            OLS              IV            IV       IV
log (MX State cohort size/US HS dropouts)                       0.0359         0.049           0.1443        0.1876   0.1053
                                                              (12.17)**      (4.49)**        (12.99)**     (11.51)** (7.54)**

log (MX State GDP/US GDP) at age 16                             -0.0788       -0.0307         -0.0217        -0.0261        -0.0168
                                                               (6.23)**       (2.38)*          (1.46)         (1.13)         (1.01)

10-yr change log(MX State GDP/US GDP)                          -0.0148         0.0031         -0.0179        -0.0297        -0.0028
                                                                (0.63)         (0.12)          (0.62)         (0.59)         (0.09)

Observations                                                    2258            2258           2258           1124           1134
R-squared                                                       0.19            0.29           0.23           0.25           0.31
                                                                            State, census State, census State, census State, census
Fixed Effects Used:                                             State       yr, Sex, 10yr yr, Sex, 10yr yr, Sex, 10yr yr, Sex, 10yr
                                                                            birth cohort birth cohort birth cohort birth cohort


Mexican state cohort size is fixed at its initial value; the number of native US high school dropouts is contemporaneous. The analysis
is performed using three-year birth cohorts. GDP refers to GDP per capita. In IV regressions, log (MX state birth cohort size/ US birth
cohort size) is used as an instrument for log (MX state birth cohort size/US HS dropouts).
T statistics in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Regressions in all tables use robust SEs clustered at the cohort level and are weighted by birth cohort size.




                                                                                                                                      2
                                                      Table 4: Migration Dynamics and Network Effects

                                                     Interaction Effects                                         Dynamic Effects
                              Mexican States:        All             All                All                      By Terciles of 1924 migration

Dep. variable:                                                                                        Top Tercile                           Bottom Tercile
decadal change in net migration rate                                                              (highest migration)    Middle Tercile   (lowest migration)
log (MX State cohort size/US HS dropouts)           0.151               0.158           0.205            0.249               0.248               0.270
                                                 (13.85)**          (13.76)**        (11.30)**         (7.55)**            (7.90)**            (7.67)**
log (MX State GDP/US GDP) at age 16                -0.022              -0.033          -0.043           -0.060              -0.009              -0.032
                                                   (1.48)            (2.86)**         (3.06)**         (2.70)**              (0.22)             (1.96)
10-yr change log(MX State GDP/US GDP)              -0.004              -0.050          -0.065           -0.129              -0.110              -0.009
                                                   (0.15)             (2.27)*         (2.63)**         (2.88)**             (2.35)*             (0.33)
log cohort size ratio * 1924 migration rate        18.001
                                                  (3.19)**
log cohort size ratio * Distance to train                            -0.0001
                                                                    (4.85)**
log cohort size ratio * Years since 16                                                 0.001              -0.001              0.003              -0.001
                                                                                       (1.92)            (2.01)*            (5.42)**             (1.17)
log GDP ratio (at 16) * Years since 16                                                 0.004              0.005               0.001               0.004
                                                                                     (5.53)**           (4.48)**             (1.37)            (3.27)**
Years since 16 (demeaned)                                                              0.012               0.014              0.016               0.012
                                                                                     (4.13)**           (3.16)**            (3.07)**            (2.27)*
(Years since 16)^2                                                                    -0.0001            -0.0002            -0.0001            0.00001
                                                                                       (1.24)           (2.89)**             (0.65)              (0.07)
Observations                                        2258              2187             2258               837                 642                 779
R-squared                                           0.21               0.2              0.2               0.09                0.31                0.01

All regressions include Mexico state, census year, gender, and 10-year birth year fixed effects. All regressions are based on instrumental variables, using
three-year birth cohorts; see text for discussion of instruments.
T statistics in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Regressions in all tables use robust standard errors clustered at the cohort level and are weighted by birth cohort size.
                           Table 5: Alternative Specifications and Samples for Net Migration

                                Unit of Aggregation:        1-year cohorts           2+3-year cohorts        5-year cohorts

log (MX State cohort size/US HS dropouts)                        0.069                     0.144                  0.202
                                                               (9.50)**                  (12.99)**              (11.32)**

log (MX State GDP/US GDP) at age 16                             -0.032                     -0.022                 0.007
                                                               (2.88)**                    (1.46)                 (0.38)

10-yr change log(MX State GDP/US GDP)                           -0.011                     -0.018                 -0.042
                                                                (0.55)                     (0.62)                 (1.56)

Observations                                                     5545                      2258                   1173
R-squared                                                        0.18                      0.23                   0.34

All regressions include Mexico state, census year, gender, and 10-year birth year fixed effects, and are based on instrumental
variables, using log (MX state cohort size/ US native total) as an instrument for log (MX state cohort size/US HS dropouts).
T statistics in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Regressions in all tables use robust standard errors clustered at the cohort level and are weighted by birth cohort size.
                           Table 6: The Final Stock of Net Emigrants

                                                          All cohorts        Men          Women
Dependent variable: stock of net migration                aged 40-50      aged 40-50     aged 40-50

log (MX State cohort size/US HS dropouts)                    0.372           0.261          0.451
                                                           (7.54)**        (4.14)**       (6.23)**

log (MX State GDP/US GDP) at age 16                          0.134         0.08568         0.171
                                                            (2.10)*         (1.00)         (1.88)

10-yr change log(MX State GDP/US GDP)                        -0.021         0.014          -0.051
                                                             (0.35)         (0.18)         (0.59)

Observations                                                  840            413            427
R-squared                                                     0.43           0.38           0.44


All regressions are based on one-year birth cohorts, include Mexico state, census year, and 10-year
birth year fixed effects, and are based on instrumental variables, using log (MX state cohort size/
US native total) as an instrument for log (MX state cohort size/US HS dropouts).
T statistics in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Regressions in all tables use robust standard errors clustered at the cohort level and are weighted by
birth cohort size.
