NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSERVATION: FROM VOLUNTARY RESTRAINT TO A VOLUNTARY PRICE
PREMIUM
Matthew Kotchen
Michael Moore
Working Paper 13678
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13678

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

We are grateful for helpful comments from Jim Andreoni, Jon Bakija, Bill Gentry, Joe Herriges, Felix
Oberholzer-Gee, Steve Polasky, Daniel Rondeau, Steve Salant, Lucie Schmidt, Joel Slemrod, Klaas
van 't Veld, two anonymous reviewers, and seminar participants at Minnesota, Tufts, Williams, Yale,
the UC Energy Institute, and the NBER Workshop on Public Policy and the Environment. This research
was supported in part by a grant from the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Matthew Kotchen and Michael Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Conservation: From Voluntary Restraint to a Voluntary Price Premium
Matthew Kotchen and Michael Moore
NBER Working Paper No. 13678
December 2007
JEL No. H23,Q3
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how concern for the environment translates into predictable patterns of consumer
behavior. Two types of behavior are considered. First, individuals who care about environmental quality
may voluntarily restrain their consumption of goods and services that generate a negative externality.
Second, individuals may choose to pay a price premium for goods and services that are more environmentally
benign. A theoretical model identifies a symmetry between such voluntary restraint and a voluntary
price premium that mirrors the symmetry between environmental policies based on either quantities
(quotas) or prices (taxes). We test predictions of the model in an empirical study of household electricity
consumption with introduction of a price-premium, green-electricity program. We find evidence of
voluntary restraint and its relation to a voluntary price premium. The empirical results are consistent
with the theoretical model of voluntary conservation.

Matthew Kotchen
Bren School of Environmental
Science & Management
and Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
4420 Donald Bren Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
kotchen@bren.ucsb.edu
Michael Moore
School of Natural Resources & Environment
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1041
micmoore@umich.edu

1

Introduction

A primary focus of environmental economics is the design of policy instruments that induce agents
to internalize environmental externalities. This paper, in contrast, examines the extent to which
consumers internalize their externalities voluntarily, i.e., through conservation that arises without
policy interventions. With a combination of theoretical and empirical methods, we consider whether
people actually exhibit voluntary conservation, to what extent, and why.
A theoretical model of consumer behavior is used to show the relationship between two potential
types of voluntary conservation. The …rst is that consumers who care about environmental quality
may demand less of a good that causes a negative externality. The second is that consumers may
choose to pay a premium for goods and services that are more “environmentally friendly.”We refer
to these behaviors as voluntary restraint and a voluntary price premium, respectively. The model
generates a series of predictions about the relationship between demand under voluntary restraint
and demand with a voluntary price premium.
We test the model’s predictions in an empirical study of household demand for electricity.
The data come from Traverse City, Michigan, and the study period spans the date when the
local public utility initiated a voluntary, premium-priced, green-electricity program to reduce air
pollution emissions.1 The empirical setting— which includes panel data on monthly household
electricity consumption that we combine with an original household survey— provides a unique
opportunity to investigate conservation as it relates to voluntary restraint of conventional electricity
and a voluntary price premium for green electricity.
Prior research has investigated various empirical aspects of voluntary restraint in the context
of energy consumption.2 A few studies have analyzed whether appeals for conservation following
the energy crisis of 1973 had an e¤ect on household energy use. Peck and Doering (1976) study
household demand for heating fuel and …nd no signi…cant e¤ect of a conservation campaign aimed at
changing residential fuel-use patterns. Walker (1980) reviews several of these studies and provides
1
“Green”electricity is electricity generated from renewable sources of energy, including wind, solar, and geothermal
energy. Most conventional electricity in the United States is generated from coal, which produces several air pollutants
as by-products (e.g., CO, CO2 , NOx , SO2 , particulates, lead, and mercury).
2
A substantial literature investigates utility-sponsored voluntary programs for energy conservation, such as timeof-use rates and home energy audits. The primary reason to enroll in such programs is to reduce energy expenditures.
Here we consider conservation that is motivated only for non-pecuniary reasons.

1

evidence that the energy crisis stimulated conservation beyond that which can be explained by
changes in price or income. Estimates of the conservation e¤ect range from 4 percent for electricity
to 10 percent for natural gas. Lee (1981) …nds a similar result, with estimates ranging from 1 to 4
percent, for conservation of electricity due to a public relations campaign in the mid-1970s. More
recently, Reiss and White (2005) investigate the e¤ect of public appeals for conservation related to
the California energy crisis in 2000-2001. They …nd that, absent any economic incentives to do so,
households reduced their electricity consumption by 6 percent for extended durations following a
conservation campaign.
There is also a recent empirical literature that investigates willingness to pay a voluntary price
premium for green electricity. Many of these studies employ stated- or revealed-preference techniques to derive estimates of willingness to pay for various types of green electricity (e.g., Goett, et
al., 2000; Champ and Bishop, 2001; Roe, et al., 2001). Other studies analyze factors that in‡uence
participation in a particular green-electricity program (e.g., Oberholzer-Gee, 2001; Rose, et al.,
2002; Kotchen and Moore, 2007). In general, this literature …nds that many households state a
willingness to pay a premium for green electricity, yet actual participation depends on the program structure, household characteristics, attitudes related to the environment, and the existence
of “warm-glow” motives.3
This paper makes several contributions to the literature. The theoretical model is the …rst to
examine the relationship between voluntary restraint and a voluntary price premium. The model
generates a series of new predictions that relate conservation based on quantities to conservation
based on prices. Underlying the model is a symmetry between environmental policies based on either
quantities (quotas) or prices (taxes). The empirical analysis is based on revealed preferences rather
than stated preferences, and it takes advantage of a natural experiment in which participants in the
green electricity program are compared with a control group of households on the program’s waiting
list. The paper also goes beyond identifying di¤erences between participants and nonparticipants;
for the …rst time, questions are addressed about di¤erences in electricity consumption before and
3

A “warm-glow” motive captures the idea that households may participate in a green-electricity program because
it makes them feel good about “doing their part” to protect the environment. This motive is a private bene…t that
is distinct from any public bene…t that may arise from reduced pollution (see Andreoni, 1990).

2

after participation.4 We …nd evidence of voluntary restraint and its relation to a voluntary price
premium. The empirical results are consistent with the theoretical model of voluntary conservation.

2

Theoretical Model

An extensive psychology literature on voluntary conservation is based on a model developed by
Schwartz (1970, 1977) concerning the activation of norms for altruistic behavior. According to the
model, activation of these norms depends critically on the presence of two personal beliefs: awareness that harmful consequences may come to others from inaction, and ascription of responsibility
to oneself for those consequences. Individuals who possess these beliefs consider it their duty to
behave altruistically; otherwise they experience a feeling of guilt from shirking their responsibility.
Psychologists have used the Schwartz model to investigate conservation as it relates to electricity
consumption (e.g., Black, Stern and Elworth, 1985). In this context, the necessary beliefs to motivate conservation are interpreted as awareness of pollution that arises from generating conventional
electricity, and ascription of personal responsibility for some of the social costs. Because studies
have repeatedly documented the importance of these beliefs for motivating household energy conservation (see Stern, 1992), the insights of the Schwartz model provide a reasonable starting point
for developing an economic perspective.
Our model is based on the simplest setup capable of illustrating the relevant issues of voluntary conservation in the context of electricity consumption. We consider two types of households:
conservationists and nonconservationists, where only conservationists satisfy the necessary conditions of Schwartz’s norm-activation model. Assume initially that only conventional electricity is
available. Households seek to maximize a utility function of the form

U (xi ; yi ;

i)

= l (xi ) + f (yi )

i h (yi ) ;

where xi is a numeraire consumption good, yi is conventional electricity, and
variable such that

i

= 1 if household i is a conservationist type, and

4

i

i

is an indicator

= 0 if household i is a

This is possible given the unique empirical setting that combines an original household survey, eight years of
monthly panel data on household electricity consumption, and introduction of a green-electricity program.

3

1 , all …rst derivatives are strictly positive, and
nonconservationist type.5 All functions map into R+

the second derivatives satisfy l00

0, f 00 < 0, and h00

0. This setup implies that, relative to

nonconservationists, conservationists care about a negative aspect of their conventional-electricity
consumption. Although there are several possibilities, we assume this is related to a pollution
externality, which causes conservationists to experience guilt from consuming conventional electricity. The functional form of h (yi ) implies that conservationists feel strictly guiltier (at a weakly
increasing rate) when they consume more conventional electricity. To ensure that conservationists
do consume some electricity, we assume that f 0 (yi )

h0 (yi ) > 0 over the feasible range of yi .

Each household is endowed with exogenous income m, which, for simplicity here in the theoretical model, we assume is the same for all households. Conventional electricity is available at a
constant price p.6 Thus, households face the budget constraint xi + pyi

m. Assuming interior

solutions (here and throughout), the …rst-order condition that implicitly de…nes each household’s
demand for conventional electricity y^i can be written as
f 0 (^
yi ) = pl0 (m

p^
yi ) +

ih

0

(^
yi ) .

(1)

For all households, the left hand side is the marginal bene…t of consuming conventional electricity,
and the right hand side is the marginal cost. Note that for conservationists the marginal cost
includes guilt as well foregone consumption of the numeraire.
Letting y^1 and y^0 denote conventional electricity demand for conservationists and nonconservationists, respectively, it follows from (1) that y^1 < y^0 . This illustrates the notion of voluntary
restraint: the guilt from generating pollution causes conservationists to restrain their consumption
of conventional electricity. We thus have the …rst testable hypothesis of the model.
Proposition 1 Conservationist households will consume less conventional electricity than nonconservationist households.
Now assume green electricity becomes available. Assume further that households can participate
in the green-electricity program only if they volunteer to pay a …xed premium of
5

> 0 per unit

Additive separability of xi and yi is only a simplifying assumption and does not a¤ect any of our results.
We …rst develop the model with a constant price per unit of electricity. We then show that the results generalize
to situations with increasing block-rate schedules, which are common for electricity.
6

4

of electricity consumption, for all of their electricity consumption. The price of green electricity
is therefore pg =

+ p. Green electricity and conventional electricity are perfect substitutes in

all respects other than the fact that green electricity does not generate pollution. As a result,
conservationists have no reason to feel guilty if they consume green electricity; that is, h (yig ) = 0
for any level of green electricity yig . It follows that, depending on the magnitude of , conservationist
households may choose to participate in the green-electricity program in order to avoid the guilt of
generating pollution through their consumption of conventional electricity.
Other factors may also prompt a household to participate in the green-electricity program.
Many programs, including the one studied in this paper, o¤er decals for the home and car to signal
participation, along with newsletters about program and participant updates. Social bene…ts that
are unrelated to electricity consumption may therefore motivate participation; the range of possibilities includes social approval, prestige, and signaling about household income.7 Psychological
bene…ts, which are similarly unrelated to electricity consumption, may also play a role, as participation can be associated with the “purchase of moral satisfaction”(Kahneman and Knetsch, 1992)
or a feeling of “warm glow” (Andreoni, 1990).8
To capture the possibility for these social and psychological bene…ts, we assume that, conditional
on participation, a household of either type enjoys a lump-sum bene…t ki

0, which may di¤er

among households. The lump-sum bene…t implies that even nonconservationists may have a reason
to participate.
The decision of whether to participate in the green-electricity program depends on a comparison
of two potential levels of utility. These levels can be written as

V (p; m;

i)

max fl (m

pyi ) + f (yi )

yi

7

i h (yi )g

The importance of social bene…ts of this type has been examined in the literature on private provision of public
goods. For examples see Hollander (1990), Glazer and Konrad (1996), Harbaugh (1998a, 1998b), and Rege and Telle
(2004).
8
In a study of contributions to a green-electricity program in Switzerland, Oberholzer-Gee (2001) …nds empirical
support for such psychological bene…ts. He concludes that “The warm-glow part of the motivation to contribute
appears to be independent of the value of the public good in the sense that individuals participate in the program
even if they do not believe that their use of solar energy will improve the quality of the environment. For these
individuals, it is su¢ cient that they contribute to a cause which they believe to be important” (p. 433).

5

and
V g (pg ; m; ki )

max
fl (m
g
yi

pg yig ) + f (yig ) + ki g :

It follows that a household will choose to participate in the green-electricity program only if
V (p; m;

i)

V g (pg ; m; ki ).9 But what does participation imply about the existence of guilt

from consumption of conventional electricity and the lump-sum bene…t from participation? How
will participation a¤ect the quantity of electricity consumption? And what di¤erences in consumption will occur between participating conservationists and nonconservationists? We now turn to
these questions.
We …rst consider nonconservationists households. Nonconservationists clearly must enjoy a
lump-sum bene…t if they participate in the green-electricity program. Unless ki is positive, nonconservationists have no incentive to pay the price premium for green electricity, as there is no guilt
to alleviate and utility is decreasing in the price of electricity. A further result follows from the
fact that, for nonconservationists, ki a¤ects participation, but not the marginal decision about the
quantity demanded of electricity. A nonconservationist’s demand for green electricity is determined
by the …rst order condition
f 0 (^
yig ) = pg l0 (m

pg y^ig ) ,

(2)

which is the same as (1) except for the di¤erence in price. This implies that a nonconservationist’s
behavioral response to participation in the green-electricity program will be as if there had been
an exogenous increase in the price of conventional electricity equal to the premium .
The following proposition summarizes the results for nonconservationists.
Proposition 2 If a nonconservationist household participates in the green-electricity program,
then: (a) the household must enjoy a lump-sum bene…t from participation; and (b) after participating, the household’s electricity consumption will decline by as much as it would if there had
been an increase in the price of conventional electricity equal to the premium for green electricity.
9
In another paper we motivate participation in such a green-electricity program as private provision of an impure
public good (Kotchen and Moore, 2007). The model developed here can be viewed in this way as well, with green
electricity producing the joint products of electricity consumption and guilt alleviation. The di¤erence is that, with
voluntary conservation, we would expect behavioral evidence of preferences even before the option for green electricity
becomes available. As we will see, investigating such evidence, along with before and after comparisons of electricity
demand, is the primary focus of the present paper.

6

MB, MC
p g l ′(m − p g y ig )
pl ′(m − py i ) + h ′( y i )
~
p g l ′(m − ~
p g y ig )

f ′( yi )

y1g

yˆ1

~y g
1

yi

Figure 1: A conservationist’s electricity consumption can increase or decrease

Now consider conservationist households. It turns out that if the price of green electricity is
su¢ ciently high, the necessary condition for participation is similar to that for nonconservationists.
To see this, assume

is large enough so that the marginal cost curve of consuming green electricity

lies above the marginal cost curve of consuming conventional electricity. Figure 1 provides an
illustration with the price of green electricity pg . In this case, a participating conservationist will
reduce electricity consumption from y^1 to y1g . Yet because there is a loss in surplus equal to the
shaded area, participation requires an o¤setting lump-sum bene…t. Thus, even conservationists may
require a su¢ ciently large lump-sum bene…t in order to participate in the green-electricity program.
In fact, it is straightforward to show that whenever a participating conservationist reduces electricity
consumption, it must be the case that ki > 0.10
More generally, conservationists di¤er from nonconservationists because their electricity consumption need not fall after participating in the green-electricity program, and participation does
not require a lump-sum bene…t. Figure 1 provides an illustration with a lower price of green electricity p~g (such that pg > p~g > p). In this case, electricity consumption increases from y^1 to y~1g ,
and participation occurs even if ki = 0. Note that, in this case, households choose to pay a higher
This follows because the assumption that h00 (yi ) 0 implies that if y^1g < y^1 , there must be a loss in surplus, as
the marginal cost for conventional electricity is lower than for green electricity for all yi < y^1 . Thus, to o¤set the loss
in surplus, participation requires a su¢ ciently large ki > 0.
10

7

price for electricity and then consume more. In order to understand this somewhat counterintuitive possibility of a increase in consumption, the important comparison is between the marginal
guilt from consumption of conventional electricity at y^i and the increased marginal cost from the
price premium of green electricity at y^i . If the former is greater than (less than) the latter, then
electricity consumption will increase (decrease).11
It is interesting to note that this relationship mirrors the symmetry between traditional environmental policies based on quantities and prices. For any good or service associated with an
externality, a quota can be used to implement the e¢ cient (or any other restrictive) quantity, or
a particular Pigouvian tax can be used to accomplish the same objective. Yet, for a given quota,
a su¢ ciently high (low) tax will implement a smaller (greater) equilibrium quantity. The relationship here is similar in that households voluntarily internalize a subjective externality and choose
their quantity of voluntary restraint, which is consistent with a particular green price premium.
But, conditional on participation, if the price premium is su¢ ciently high (low), then electricity
consumption will decrease (increase).
The next proposition summarizes the results for conservationists.
Proposition 3 If a conservationist household participates in the green-electricity program, then:
(a) the household’s electricity consumption can increase, decrease, or remain the same, and (b) if
consumption decreases, the household must enjoy a lump-sum bene…t from participation.
The model generates further predictions about similarities and di¤erences between conservationists and nonconservationists conditional on participation. Because participating conservationists
have no incentive to voluntarily restrain their consumption of green electricity, they should be indistinguishable from participating nonconservationists in terms of their demand for green electricity.
Moreover, because only conservationists were exhibiting voluntary restraint before participating,
the model also predicts that they will reduce their consumption by less (if at all) than nonconservationists. These results are summarized in the …nal proposition.
Proposition 4 If both conservationists and nonconservationists participate in the green-electricity
Considering a special case makes this idea clear. Assume utility is quasilinear in xi (i.e., l0 (xi ) = 1) and marginal
guilt is constant such that h0 (yi ) = . In this case, it is straightforward to show that, electricity consumption will
increase, decrease, or remain the same if < , > , or = , respectively.
11

8

program, then: (a) households of both types will consume the same amount of green electricity, and
(b) conservationists will reduce their electricity consumption by less (if at all) than nonconservationists.
Thus far we have assumed a constant per-unit price of electricity. Yet residential electricity
pricing is often structured with an increasing block-rate schedule. It is, however, straightforward
to verify that the main results hold even with a increasing block-rate. Consider a two-tiered rate
structure, where the price of conventional electricity is

P =

8
>
< p
>
: p

for 0

yi

y

for yi > y ,

where p < p and y is the quantity threshold between rates.12 If we continue to assume a constant
premium

for green electricity, we can modify the preceding analysis to account for the block rate.

The only di¤erence is that all marginal cost curves have a discontinuity at yi = y ; they all shift
up by at least p

p for yi > y . With such a modi…cation to the the …rst order conditions, it is

straightforward to see that only two results change slightly: the voluntary restraint of Proposition
1 holds with a weak (rather than strict) inequality, and the second part of Proposition 4 holds
weakly (rather than strictly) as well. Both of these changes occur because of the possibility that
demand is exactly at the threshold between block rates.

3

Empirical Setting and Data Collection

We test predictions of the theoretical model in an empirical study of demand for electricity, before
and after introduction of a green-electricity program in Traverse City, Michigan. The municipal
utility, Traverse City Light and Power (TCL&P), provides electricity to approximately 7,000 residential households. In 1994, TCL&P began soliciting households to voluntarily …nance a centralized
wind turbine that would generate electricity and replace generation at the local coal-…red power
plant. TCL&P completed construction of the turbine and began operating the “Green Rate” pro12

Although increasing block-rate schedules often include more than two tiers, consideration of a two-tiered schedule
is su¢ cient to demonstrate implications for the model.

9

gram in June 1996.13 To participate in the program, households are required to make a three-year
commitment to purchase all of their electricity at a price premium of 1.58 cents per kilowatt-hour.
This translates into an average residential premium of $8.50 per month, or a 25-percent increase
in the average household’s electricity bill. We now describe the data along with the empirical
strategy of using membership in an environmental organization to classify households as either
conservationists or nonconservationists.

3.1

Survey Data

We developed and administered a mail survey of TCL&P residential customers. The survey was
designed to collect data on socioeconomic characteristics, physical attributes of each residence, and
household behaviors related to conservation.14 The survey was conducted in 2001 using the Dillman
(1978) Total Design Method. A sample of 1,000 households included those that were (at the time of
the survey) participants in the Green Rate program, on the waitlist, or nonparticipants. Speci…cally,
the sample was strati…ed to include all 122 households that were participants, all 32 households on
the waitlist, and a random sample of 846 households that were nonparticipants with utility records
dating back to 1994. After accounting for undeliverable addresses, the overall response rate for the
survey was 70 percent (106 participants, 27 waitlisters, and 544 nonparticipants), which is relatively
high.15
The existence of a waitlist for the Green Rate program is an important feature of the data
because it creates a natural experiment in which to analyze the e¤ect of participation. Households
choose whether to participate in the program, but from the very beginning the program was oversubscribed relative to the wind turbine’s capacity. While households were admitted to the program
on a …rst-come …rst-serve basis, the waitlist was created immediately at the outset. Subsequently,
a small number of households have been removed from the waitlist to become participants only
when another household withdrew from the program. With respect to participants and waitlisters,
13

At the time of construction, the wind turbine was the largest operating in the United States. It produces about
800,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity per year, which can meet the needs of approximately 125 households.
14
Copies of the survey instrument are available from the authors upon request.
15
We use data from this survey in another study to compare participation decisions in di¤erent green-electricity
programs (Kotchen and Moore, 2007). Here the analysis di¤ers because we combine the survey data with panel data
on household electricity demand. As we will show, this enables the empirical investigation of electricity consumption
between di¤erent types of households, before and after participation in the green-electricity program.

10

it is reasonable to treat actual participation as e¤ectively random, and we take advantage of this
exogeneity in the empirical analysis.
Table 1 compares descriptive statistics for the key survey variables among participants, waitlisters, and nonparticipants. As one might expect, given the discussion above, there are no signi…cant
di¤erences between participants and waitlisters. Nonparticipants, however, di¤er from participants
and waitlisters with respect to several variables. On average, nonparticipants have an annual household income that is about $10,000 lower, are four years older, have two fewer years of education, and
are 30 percent less likely to be a self-reported member of an environmental organization.16 In addition to the t-test results reported in Table 1, we conducted Mann-Whitney U tests to assess whether
the di¤erent groups of observations come from the same distribution. These non-parametric tests
produce very similar results, with the exception of statistically insigni…cant di¤erences in kWhDay
in column (5) and Age in column (6).

3.2

Utility Data

TCL&P began keeping electronic records of household billing cycles in 1994. Data on electricity
consumption for each billing cycle were obtained from January 1994 through May 2002, for a total
of 101 months. From these data, we calculated average daily electricity consumption by month for
each household in the survey sample.17 The last row of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for
this variable (kW hDay) for participants, waitlisters, and nonparticipants. While the means for all
three groups fall between 16 and 18 kilowatt-hours per day (kWh/day), nonparticipants consume
signi…cantly more electricity than participants.
The TCL&P data also includes monthly information on residential rate schedules for each
household. The basic residential rate is an increasing block-rate schedule.18 Four adjustments to
this basic rate are then possible. The senior citizen rate (Senior ) charges block rates that start lower
16
Surveys were addressed speci…cally to the household member whose name appeared on monthly billing statements
for electricity. The fact that Traverse City is somewhat of a retirement community is re‡ected in the relatively high
mean age.
17
Characterizing electricity consumption in this way accounts for the di¤erent number of billing days within billing
cycles.
18
This rate charges 6.33c//kWh for the …rst 16 kWh/day, 7.31c//kWh for the next 17 kWh/day, and 8.2c//kWh for
all consumption over 33 kWh/day.

11

Table 1: Summary statistics for participants, nonparticipants, and waitlisters

Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

Particip.

Waitlist

Nonparticip.

t stat.

t stat.

t stat.

N =106

N =27

N =544

(1) vs (2)

(1) vs (3)

(2) vs (3)

Income

66.064

68.462

56.949

(37.163)

(29.488)

(34.611)

2.340

2.154

2.233

FamSize

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.303

2.302

1.663

0.749

0.766

0.305

(1.193)

(0.834)

(1.310)

Own (1=yes)

0.961

1.000

0.915

1.017

1.606

1.552

House (1=yes)

0.876

0.923

0.867

0.668

0.243

0.823

AptCondo (1=yes)

0.105

0.077

0.104

0.422

0.018

0.446

MobHome (1=yes)

0.019

0.000

0.028

0.705

0.541

0.870

Age

56.324

55.462

60.504

0.287

2.618

1.698

(13.976)

(12.465)

(14.874)

Gender (1=male)

0.500

0.577

0.525

0.697

0.462

0.517

Education

16.349

16.444

14.528

0.149

6.028

3.467

(3.01)

(2.778)

(2.802)

Conserv (1=yes)

0.471

0.444

0.158

0.240

7.367

2.883

kWhDay

16.105

16.439

17.950

0.214

1.806

0.572

(6.847)

(8.258)

(10.070)

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses and reported for continuous variables only. The
number of observations for each statistic varies somewhat due to item nonresponse. Income is
household pre-tax income in year 2000 measured in 1000s of dollars. FamSize indicates the number
of family members living in the household. Own indicates ownership. House, AptCondo, and
MobHome indicate house, apartment/condominium, or mobile home. Age, Gender, and years
of Education correspond to the respondent. Conserv indicates self-reported membership in an
environmental organization. kWhDay is average daily electricity consumption by month, measured
in kilowatt-hours. One, two, or three asterisks indicate signi…cance at the levels p<0.10, p<0.05,
or p<0.01, respectively.

12

and end higher.19 The electric water heating service (WtrHeat) allots households an additional 13
kWh/day at the lowest rate of their rate class. Electric space heating service (SpcHeat) charges
households only the lowest rate of their rate class on all electricity consumption for the billing
months of November through May.20 Finally, as described previously, the Green Rate (GrnRate)
charges an additional 1.58c//kWh for all electricity consumption. The Green Rate became available
starting in June 1996. All other rate schedules remained constant throughout the study period.

3.3

Classifying Conservationists and Nonconservationists

Testing predictions of the theoretical model requires classifying households as either conservationists or nonconservationists. While identifying underlying preferences poses an inherent empirical
challenge, we use self-reported membership in an environmental organization to classify conservationists. In particular, we use the variable Conserv, which is a dummy variable based on belonging
to an environmental organization other than participation in the Green Rate program.21 One
advantage of this strategy is its consistency with the psychological basis of the model. Recall
the underlying distinction between conservationists and nonconservationists: only conservationists
are aware of environmental problems that arise through generation of conventional electricity and
are willing to take personal responsibility for addressing the problems. While membership in an
environmental organization is likely to apply to environmental concerns more generally, it is a
reasonable indicator of knowledge about environmental problems and willingness to take personal
responsibility.
But how is membership in an environmental organization related to speci…c preferences about
conservation of electricity? This question is important for our analysis, and part of the survey
was designed to provide an answer. Table 2 compares descriptive statistics for responses split
by Conserv, and the results suggest that the variable is a reasonable indicator for classifying
conservationists and nonconservationists with respect to electricity demand.
19

This option charges increasing block rates of 5.3c/, 8.3c/, and 9.3c/.
The sample percentages to which these rate adjustments apply are as follows: 23.7 percent for Senior, 7.3 percent
for WtrHeat, and 1.6 percent for SpcHeat.
21
The variable Conserv was created from a survey question that asked respondents to indicate the types of organizations to which they belonged. Response categories include community service organizations, church or religious
groups, labor or trade unions, environmental organizations, and professional organizations.
20

13

Table 2: Comparison of responses between conservationists and nonconservationists

Survey Question

Conservationists

Nonconservationists

(Conserv = 1)

(Conserv = 0)

N =141

N =502

Mean

Std. Err.

Mean

Std. Err.

t stat.

Electricity rates

0.940

0.024

0.922

0.013

0.677

Reliability of electric service

0.918

0.029

0.865

0.016

1.587

Environmental impacts of electricity production

0.951

0.024

0.563

0.024

11.516

Customer service

0.790

0.044

0.717

0.022

1.488

Community involvement of company

0.449

0.053

0.313

0.022

2.344

3.304

0.079

3.138

0.035

1.931

0.937

0.025

0.962

0.009

0.929

If you could choose among electric companies,
which of the following characteristics of a company
would be important to your decision?a

When considering the purchase of a major appliance,
how important to you is energy e¢ ciency compared
to price?b
Which of the following energy-saving activities does
your household engage in?a
Regularly turn o¤ lights in unused rooms
Keep thermostat at a low temperature in winter

0.792

0.043

0.702

0.022

1.876

Conserve on air conditioning in summer

0.456

0.052

0.381

0.023

1.311

Reduce temperature setting on water heater

0.580

0.052

0.387

0.023

3.395

Add insulation in home

0.666

0.049

0.521

0.024

2.635

Install energy-saving lights

0.461

0.052

0.247

0.021

3.806

2.474

0.090

2.674

0.038

-2.042

How much electricity do you think your household
uses compared to other households of similar size
and characteristics?b

Notes: Statistics are based on weighted responses to correct for strati…ed sampling. Number of observations
for each statistic varies somewhat due to item nonresponse. a Responses for each item are coded as 1=yes and
0=no. b Responses are based on a Likert scale ranging from 1=much less to 5=much more. One, two, or three
asterisks indicate signi…cance at the levels p<0.10, p<0.05, or p<0.01, respectively.

14

The …rst set of questions listed in the table asks about what company characteristics would
be important to consider if given the opportunity to choose between di¤erent electric companies.
While the responses do not di¤er signi…cantly with respect to electricity rates, reliability, and
customer service, the responses do di¤er signi…cantly with respect to the environmental impacts and
community involvement, with conservationists caring more about both. Responses to the second
question indicate that conservationists place signi…cantly more importance on energy e¢ ciency
compared to price when purchasing a major appliance. Responses to the third set of questions
indicate that conservationists engage in more energy-saving activities. Finally, responses to the
last question indicate that conservationists perceive their own household to use less electricity than
other households of similar size and characteristics. Note that this last result corresponds directly
with the notion of voluntary restraint, which we test formally in the next section. Here again we
conducted Mann-Whitney U tests to assess whether the di¤erent groups of observations come from
the same distribution, and the results for statistically signi…cant di¤erences were the same as those
reported in Table 2 for t-tests.
We also compared responses to these same questions within the subsamples of only participants
or nonparticipants in the Green Rate program. This approach controls for program participation
and allows us to isolate di¤erences that are due only to Conserv. The results for both participants
and nonparticipants follow the same pattern as those in Table 2, so we do not report them separately.
These results provide evidence that the classi…cation as either conservationist or nonconservationist
is distinct from participant or nonparticipant. In other words, “participating nonconservationists”
are not misclassi…ed conservationists, and “nonparticipating conservationists”are not misclassi…ed
nonconservationists.
In sum, the di¤erences in responses summarized in Table 2 provide support for using membership
in an environmental organization as a proxy variable to classify households as conservationists
or nonconservationists with respect to electricity consumption. Interestingly, part of the analysis
evaluates whether the stated preferences related to electricity consumption correspond with revealed
preferences that actually a¤ect electricity consumption.

15

4

Econometric Speci…cation and Estimation

The predictions of the theoretical model relate to di¤erences in electricity consumption along two
dimensions: between conservationists and nonconservationists, and before and after participation
in the Green Rate program. In this section we describe our empirical strategies for testing these
predictions.
We employ a di¤erence-in-di¤erences methodology and estimate regression models of the general
form

kW hDayit = 'Conservi + GrnRateit + Conservi GrnRateit
+ Xit

+

t

+

i

+ "it ,

(3)

where i indexes households, t indexes time periods, GrnRateit is a dummy variable that equals
1 when the household is participating in the Green Rate program and 0 otherwise, and Xit is a
row vector of other explanatory variables (income, the other rate-class schedules, and household
characteristics).
The key parameters for testing the theoretical propositions are ', , and , which are interpreted
as follows: ' estimates the average di¤erence in conventional -electricity consumption between conservationists and nonconservationists;

estimates nonconservationists’average change in electricity

consumption after participating in the green-electricity program; and

estimates the average dif-

ference between conservationists’and nonconservationists’change in electricity consumption after
participating in the green-electricity program. Two linear combinations of these parameters are
also of interest:

+

estimates conservationists’ average change in electricity consumption af-

ter participating in the green-electricity program; and ' +

estimates the average di¤erence in

green-electricity consumption between participating conservationists and participating nonconservationists.
The coe¢ cients in equation (3) are estimated several ways. We …rst use a random e¤ects model
that includes all of the observations (participants, waitlisters, and nonparticipants). The primary
advantage of the random e¤ects model is that it enables identi…cation of the coe¢ cient on Conservi ,
which is a time-invariant. Yet, to ensure consistency of the random e¤ects estimator, we need to
16

assume that the unobserved e¤ect vi is uncorrelated with the observed explanatory variables (see
Wooldridge, 2002). To test whether this assumption is reasonable, we also estimate a …xed e¤ects
model for purposes of comparison.
The random e¤ects estimates are reported as the Full Sample model in Table 3. Beyond the
variables explicitly speci…ed in (3), the model includes the following: household income; dummy
variables for the additional rate-class schedules (Seniorit , W trHeatit , SpcHeatit ); the variables
listed in Table 1 that relate to sociodemographic characteristics and the physical attributes of each
residence; and dummy variables to control for di¤erent months and years (not reported).22 The
corresponding …xed e¤ects estimates are reported in the Appendix. The similarity of the estimated
parameters between models— especially ^ and ^— suggest that the random e¤ects model is not
restrictive. Moreover, a Hausman test comparing both sets of estimates fails to reject the null
hypothesis that the coe¢ cients are the same in both models. The

2

test statistic is reported at

the bottom of Table 3 and is not statistically signi…cant at any reasonable level of con…dence.
We report two sets of standard errors. Bertrand, Du‡o, and Mullainathan (2004) demonstrate
how failure to account for potential serial correlation in di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimation results
in underestimates of the true standard errors. Here we follow their recommended solution by
estimating standard errors based on block bootstraps, where we draw 200 bootstrap samples. To
see the e¤ect of this correction, we report both the conventional and block bootstrap standard
errors. As expected, accounting for serial correlation generally increases the standard errors, yet
the e¤ect is not large enough to change the main results.
The inclusion of GrnRateit in equation (3) is consistent with a general class of models that
seek to estimate average treatment e¤ects. In such models, potential endogeneity of the treatment
must be addressed.23 The fact that we have panel data is useful in this regard; for equation
(3) will produce consistent estimates provided that GrnRateit is uncorrelated with time-varying
unobservables that a¤ect electricity consumption (see Wooldridge, 2002). While we believe this
22

Despite the strati…ed sample, we estimate unweighted regression models. In cases such as ours, when strati…cation
is based on an explanatory variable (i.e., GrnRate), the weighting of regression models is unnecessary (see Wooldridge,
2002).
23
Endogeneity of Conservi is not a concern because it is reasonable to assume that membership in an environmental
organization (excluding participation in the Green Rate program) is exogenous to a household’s choices pertaining
to electricity consumption.

17

assumption is reasonable, we further address potential endogeneity concerns. A plausible, though
perhaps unlikely, scenario is that households foresee future reductions in their electricity demand
and, therefore, are more likely to participate is the Green Rate program, as participation will be
less costly.24
To address this concern, we estimate models using subsets of the observations and compare the
results with those for the Full Sample models. One speci…cation that we use is identical to equation
(3), but includes only the participants and waitlisters; that is, nonparticipants are excluded from the
estimation. As described previously, participants and waitlisters provide a natural experiment in
which to test the e¤ect of GrnRateit , because actual participation was e¤ectively exogenous. With
this subset of observations, we can identify all of the parameters with the exception of SpcHeatit ,
which does not apply to any household in the subset. The results of the random e¤ects estimator are
reported as the Natural Experiment model in Table 3, and the results of the …xed e¤ects estimator
are reported in the Appendix. As with the Full Sample models, the Hausman test fails to reject
the null hypothesis of equal coe¢ cients at any reasonable level of con…dence, and the estimated
coe¢ cients are very similar between the two models.
Another model that we estimate considers only time periods prior to the Green Rate program.
This includes all observations between January 1994 and July 1996 for all three groups (participants,
waitlisters, and nonparticipants). With this subset of data, we can ignore the program entirely and
focus on estimating the extent of voluntary restraint, albeit over a shorter duration of time. The
general form of the speci…cation is

kW hDayit = 'Conservi + Xit

which di¤ers from equation (3) because

=

+

t

+

i

+ "it ,

(4)

= 0. The random e¤ects and …xed e¤ects esti-

mates of equation (4) are reported as the Before Program models, in Table 3 and the Appendix,
respectively.25
24

One approach for dealing with such endogeneity is to use instrumental variable techniques in a dummy endogenous
variable model (Heckman, 1978), but this approach requires a good instrument for GrnRateit , which we do not have
in this case.
25
In this case, comparisons between the random and …xed e¤ects estimators are limited because so few parameters
can be identi…ed with …xed e¤ects. We nevertheless report both sets of results in the interest of completeness.

18

Table 3: Random e¤ects models of household electricity consumption
(FS)

(NE)

Full Sample

Natural Experiment

(BP)
Before Program

Variable

Coef.

Std. Err.

Coef.

Std. Err.

Coef.

Std. Err.

Conserv ('
^ )y

-1.591

(0.852)

-0.236

(1.162)

-1.739

(0.971)

GrnRate ( ^ )y

-0.701

(0.208)

Conserv GrnRate (^)y

0.560

(0.293)

Senior

-0.336

(0.337)

[0.715]

[1.101]
-1.541

(0.192)

0.623

(0.217)

[0.518]

6.497

(0.567)

5.288
–

[4.394]
0.051

(0.012)

FamSize

1.181

(0.173)

-4.302

2.037

(0.217)

0.496

Age

-0.019

(0.026)

Gender

1.332

(0.709)

-5.908
5.132

(3.612)
(2.148)
(4.532)
(0.043)

5.510

[0.564]

(1.255)

0.042

(0.014)

1.711

(0.310)

[0.016]
[0.513]
2.584

0.186

[0.117]

(0.233)

(1.864)
[1.358]

-3.846

(1.569)
[1.064]

-0.588

(2.611)
[2.421]

0.022

(0.036)

1.521

(0.808)

[0.024]

[1.214]

(0.143)

(0.916)
[6.744]

[0.083]
-1.743

(1.528)
[0.953]

[39.16]
0.062

[0.032]

0.154

0.197

[1.479]

[1.720]

Education

[0.701]

[3.268]

[0.957]
(2.299)

–

[0.842]

(1.342)

-1.909

(1.168)

[0.020]

(1.541)

MobHome

–
(0.020)

[1.122]
AptCondo

(3.307)

0.034

[0.564]
2.418

(0.563)

–

[0.014]

Own

-0.771

–

[2.340]

(0.429)

Income

–

[0.963]

[2.201]
SpcHeat

–

[0.698]
-0.427

[0.504]
-0.764

–

[0.549]

[0.787]

WtrHeat

[0.713]
–

[0.641]
0.148

(0.163)

[0.212]

[0.114]
Yes

Month dummies

Yes

Yes

Year dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

59,731

11,875

16,072

Households

637

127

596

R-squared (overall)

0.16

0.22

0.15

4.26

4.76

3.93

17.755

16.257

17.996

Hausman test

2

Predicted kWhDay it

Notes: The dependent variable is average daily electricity consumption by month, kWhDay it .
Conventional standard errors are in parentheses; block bootstrap standard errors are in brackets.
House is the omitted category with respect to AptCondo and MobHome. Missing data for all survey
variables other than Conserv were …lled with the means corresponding to the household’s status as
a participant, waitlister, or nonparticipant. The

y indicates signi…cance level based on a one-tailed

test. One, two, or three asterisks indicate signi…cance at the levels p<0.10, p<0.05, or p<0.01,
respectively.

19

5

Empirical Results

Our discussion of the results focuses on the random e¤ects models because they allow identi…cation
of all parameters of interest, and they generate results that are very similar to those for the …xed
e¤ects models. The Full Sample, Natural Experiment, and Before Program models are referred to
hereafter as the FS, NE, and BP models, respectively.
Voluntary Restraint. Proposition 1 predicts that conservationists will consume less conventional
electricity than nonconservationists. The estimate of ' in the FS model supports this prediction; it
is negative and statistically signi…cant, indicating that conservationists consume less conventional
electricity. The magnitude of this di¤erence is -1.591 kWh/day on average, which is a 9-percent
reduction from the predicted level of average household consumption. With the FS model, therefore, we …nd evidence of substantial voluntary restraint: controlling for observed and unobserved
heterogeneity, conservationists consume an average of 9 percent less conventional electricity.
The same result does not emerge in the NE model. While the estimate of ' is negative, it is
not statistically di¤erent from zero. One reason for the di¤erence may be the fact that electricity
demand for participants and waitlisters is very close to the threshold (of 16 kWh/day) between
the …rst and second block rates, whereas this is not the case for nonparticipants (see Table 1).26
In such cases— where demand is exactly at the threshold between block rates— we have shown
previously that the theory does not predict di¤erences in consumption between conservationists
and nonconservationists. Other possible reasons for the insigni…cance of voluntary restraint in the
NE model include the facts that the number of observations is substantially lower, and that there
is less variation in Conservi when nonparticipants are excluded. For all of these reasons, we argue
that the NE model does not generate the most reliable estimate of voluntary restraint.
The BP model provides a better alternative to compare with the FS model. While the panels
in the BP model are limited to observations prior to July 1996, there is greater cross-sectional
variation, as participants, waitlisters, and nonparticipants are all included. The estimate of ' in
the BP model is -1.739, and it is statistically di¤erent from zero, suggesting again that conservationists consume less conventional electricity. The di¤erence is an average of 1.739 kWh/day,
26

This reduces the predicted level of average household consumption from approximately 17.8 kWh/day in the FS
model to approximately 16.3 kWh/day in the NE model.

20

which translates into a 9.6-percent reduction from the model’s predicted level of average household
consumption. This result is very similar to that for the FS model and thereby provides further
evidence of substantial voluntary restraint.
It is always possible that the results for voluntary restraint are subject to omitted variable
bias, whereby we are missing time-invariant variables that are correlated with both Conservi and
electricty consumption. Possibilities may include spending time outdoors or watching less television.
But many other possibilities, such as living in a smaller house or having more energy e¢ cient
appliances, would not a pose a problem for the analysis, as they may only re‡ect the mechanism
by which conservationists a¤ect their electricity consumption.27
Nonconservationists. The …rst part of Proposition 2 shows that nonconservationists will participate in the Green Rate program only if they derive a su¢ ciently large lump-sum bene…t. The
fact that many households without membership in an environmental organization actually participated is suggestive of this bene…t. The second part of Proposition 2 enables a more sophisticated
test, however. The prediction is that participating nonconservationists will reduce their electricity
consumption, and the magnitude of their reduction will be as if there had been an increase in the
price of conventional electricity equal to the green-electricity premium. The estimates of

test this

prediction. In both the FS and NE models, the estimated coe¢ cient is negative and statistically
signi…cant, indicating that participating nonconservationists do in fact reduce their electricity consumption. The average magnitude of this reduction is 0.701 and 1.541 kWh/day, or 3.9 and 9.5
percent from the predicted means, for the FS and NE models, respectively.28
But how do these estimates for reduced electricity consumption compare to what would have
occurred with only an increase in the price of conventional electricity equal to the premium of
1.58c//kWh? To answer this question, we derive price elasticities based on the voluntary premium
and compare them to previously published estimates of the price elasticity for conventional electric27

We did ask a survey question about square footage of the residence, but we …nd no statistically signi…cant
di¤erence between conservationists and nonconservationists. When we include the variable in the regression models,
it only strengthens the results, both in magnitude and statistical signi…cance. We do not include the variable in the
reported models because of a relatively high degree of nonresponse (22 percent).
28
Recall the potential endogeneity issue regarding GrnRateit in the FS model. If this were indeed a problem, we
would expect ^ to overestimate the true e¤ect. The fact that ^ in the NE model is even larger lends support to the
argument that endogeneity in the FS model is not a concern.

21

ity. We calculate the elasticities using the percentage change in the average price.29 Our estimates
of the voluntary-price elasticity are -0.16 for the FS model and -0.38 for the NE model.
It turns out that both estimates of the voluntary-price elasticity are well within the range of the
price elasticities for conventional electricity that are reported in the literature, which generally fall
between -0.1 and -0.7 (see Bohi and Zimmerman, 1984, and Berndt, 1991). We therefore cannot
reject the hypothesis that participating nonconservationists respond as if there had only been an
increase in the price of conventional electricity. Recall that, in the context of the theoretical model,
this result implies that participation is motivated by a lump-sum bene…t, due possibly to the social
and psychological bene…ts described earlier.
Conservationists. What happens to the electricity consumption of participating conservationists? The …rst part of Proposition 3 identi…es the possibility for an increase, a decrease, or no
change in electricity consumption. Here the econometric results provide evidence of no change in
consumption. The average change in consumption for a participating conservationist is given by the
linear combination of

+ in speci…cation (3). Estimates of this linear combination are -0.141 and

-0.918 kWh/day for the FS and NE models, respectively. While both estimates of the linear combination are negative, neither is statistically di¤erent from zero.30 Thus, conservationists— who were
already exhibiting voluntary restraint— exhibit no statistically signi…cant change in consumption
after participating in the Green Rate program. In the context of the theoretical model, this implies
that the price premium for green electricity is approximately equal to the subjective externality that
conservationists were voluntarily internalizing with conventional electricity. It is possible, however,
that the result also re‡ects greater inelasticity of demand for conservationists, as they are already
exhibiting voluntary restraint.
Conservationists versus nonconservationists. Proposition 4 makes two predictions about the
relationship between conservationists and nonconservationists. The …rst prediction is that participating conservationists will reduce their electricity consumption by (weakly) less than participating
nonconservationists. This prediction is consistent with a positive coe¢ cient
29

on the interaction

This approach provides a straightforward way to account for the block-rate pricing and is consistent with much
of the literature on estimating electricity demand. See Bohi and Zimmerman (1984) for a discussion and literature
review.
30
Wald tests, using either set of standard errors, fail to reject the null hypothesis that + = 0.

22

term Conserv GrnRate. In both the FS and NE models, the coe¢ cient is positive and approximately equal to 0.6. While both estimates are statistically signi…cant with the conventional standard
errors, accounting for potential serial correlation renders them both statistically insigni…cant.
The second prediction of Proposition 4 is that, after controlling for other factors, conservationists
and nonconservationists who participate in the Green Rate program will consume the same amount
of green electricity. We test this prediction with the hypothesis that ' +

= 0. Estimates of this

linear combination are -1.031 and 0.387 kWh/day for the FS and NE models, yet Wald tests
reveal that neither estimate is statistically di¤erent from zero. Thus, the two types of households
are indistinguishable with respect to green-electricity consumption. According to the theoretical
model, this similarity occurs because conservationists have no reason to voluntarily restrain their
consumption of green electricity, as it generates no pollution.
Other determinants of electricity consumption. The remaining coe¢ cients in Table 3 provide
information about other factors that in‡uence electricity consumption. There is evidence that
electric heating a¤ects consumption in the expected way. Based on the FS and BP models, the
coe¢ cient on SpcHeat is positive, indicating that, in the months when heating is required, the
households with electric heat use more electricity than households without it. This e¤ect is not
statistically signi…cant, however, after accounting for serial correlation. Households with higher
income consume signi…cantly more electricity, and the implied income elasticities are 0.16, 0.13,
and 0.13 in the FS, NE, and BP models.31 The number of family members living in the household has a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on electricity consumption. Electricity consumption is
signi…cantly lower in apartments and condominiums compared to houses; whereas, mobile homes
are not signi…cantly di¤erent from houses. Home ownership does not have a signi…cant e¤ect on
electricity consumption, nor do the sociodemographic characteristics of age and education. Gender
does have a signi…cant e¤ect in the FS and BP models, and the positive coe¢ cient indicates that
a female name on billing statements is associated with lower electricity consumption. Although
not reported, the year dummies exhibit no general trend, while the month dummies indicate more
electricity consumption during the winter months. This latter result is to be expected in places
31

These elasticity estimates are within the range of income elasticities reported in the literature for electricity
demand (see Bohi and Zimmerman, 1984, and Berndt, 1991).

23

like Traverse City, where the number of daylight hours is substantially lower in the winter, and air
conditioning is not common in the summer.

6

Summary and Conclusion

This paper investigates how concern for the environment translates into predictable patterns of
behavior. Three questions provide the focus of analysis: Do preferences for environmental quality
result in the voluntary restraint of consumption? What explains willingness to pay a premium
for environmentally friendly goods and services? And what is the relationship between voluntary
restraint and voluntary price premiums?
The theoretical model starts with the distinction between conservationists and nonconservationists. Only conservationists care about environmental quality in a way that promotes concern about
the e¤ects of their consumption decisions on the environment. This concern— motivated perhaps
by guilt alone— translates into the voluntary restraint of consumption. While voluntary restraint
is conservation based on the choice of quantities, the model also considers conservation based on
the choice of prices. When the opportunities are available, the desire to avoid generating pollution
may translate into payment of a voluntary premium for substitute goods and services that are
more environmentally friendly. These di¤erent mechanisms for voluntary conservation mirror the
relationship between traditional environmental policies based on quantities or prices.
An additional feature of the model is that willingness to pay a voluntary price premium is
motivated by more than just the desire to reduce pollution. Social and psychological bene…ts play
a role. These bene…ts may be related to social approval, prestige, and warm glow— the same motives
that have been shown to motivate private provision of public goods. For both conservationists and
nonconservationists, these motives are captured with a potential lump-sum bene…t. According
to the model, therefore, both conservationists and nonconservationists may be willing to pay a
voluntary price premium, whereas only conservationists exhibit voluntary restraint.
The empirical portion of the paper analyzes household electricity demand before and after
introduction of a green-electricity program. The analysis takes advantage of original survey data
and utility data to estimate di¤erences in electricity consumption between conservationists and

24

nonconservationists, before and after participation in the green-electricity program. The empirical
setting provides a unique natural experiment in which program participants are compared to a
control group of households on the program’s waiting list.
The empirical results are consistent with the theoretical predictions. There is evidence of
substantial voluntary restraint, as conservationists consume almost 10 percent less conventional
electricity than nonconservationists. Conservationists are also more likely to participate in the
green-electricity program. Other results are based on changes in electricity consumption after
paying the voluntary price premium for green electricity. Nonconservationists are found to reduce
their consumption after participating in the program. In particular, they reduce consumption
as if there had been an increase in the price of conventional electricity equal to the premium
for green electricity. In the context of the model, this result is consistent with the existence of
social and psychological bene…ts of the green-electricity program that are unrelated to electricity
consumption. In contrast, conservationists, who were already exhibiting voluntary restraint, do not
reduce their electricity consumption after paying the price premium for green electricity. This result
is consistent with the price premium for green electricity being approximately equal to the subjective
externality that conservationists were voluntarily internalizing with conventional electricity. Finally,
there is evidence that conservationists and nonconservationists are indistinguishable with respect
to consumption of green electricity. The theory underlying this result is that voluntary restraint
does not apply to environmentally friendly goods and services.
To conclude, the theoretical analysis provides new insight into the economics of voluntary conservation. Understanding behavior of this type is important, as it opens the door to consideration
of the potential ways in which voluntary conservation can serve as a complement or substitute
for more centralized forms of energy and environmental policy. The theoretical model generates a
series of novel predictions about the relationship between voluntary restraint and voluntary price
premiums. We …nd empirical support for all of the theoretical predictions. It is worth noting that
the preceding analysis has been entirely positive rather than normative. While the focus has been
on explaining and predicting behavior, we have not addressed the question of whether the green
electricity program is socially bene…cial. Bene…ts certainly accrue to participants, and the public also bene…ts from any emission reductions. But green electricity programs, including the one

25

studied here, are often subsidized. Whether the social bene…ts exceed the costs in green electricity
programs is a question for future research. Moreover, future research should investigate whether
the behavioral …ndings here are robust to consumption of di¤erent goods and services. Opportunities for such research are increasingly available, as markets for environmentally friendly goods and
services continue to expand.

26

Appendix Table: Fixed e¤ects models of household electricity consumption

Variable
Conserv ('
^ )y

(FS)

(NE)

(BP)

Full Sample

Natural Experiment

Before Program

Coef.

Std. Err.

–

–

Coef.

Std. Err.

Coef.

–

–

–

–
GrnRate ( ^ )y

-0.610

–

(0.210)

-1.519

[0.518]
Conserv GrnRate (^)y

0.494

(0.296)

0.609

-0.286

-0.693

[0.515]
-1.024

(0.620)

SpcHeat

6.369

(0.430)

Income

–

(0.587)

–

–
–

[4.530]
–

–

1.947

[0.659]
Own

–

(0.233)

–

–

–

–

MobHome

–

–

–

–

0.057

–

(0.120)

–

–

0.045

–

–

(0.138)

–

–
[7.048]
–

–

–

–

–
–

Yes

Yes

–
–

1.781

(0.623)
[1.356]

–

–
–

–

–
–

–

–
–

-0.174

(0.678)
[0.530]

–

–

–
Month dummies

(0.927)

[0.517]

–
Education

5.264

–

[0.293]
Gender

–

–

–
–

Age

–

–

–

–
–

[0.963]

–
AptCondo

–

–

(0.207)

–
–

–

–
–

0.768

–

–
–

–
–

[0.927]

[2.814]

FamSize

–

[0.785]

(0.356)

WtrHeat

(0.218)

–
–

[0.615]

[0.750]
Senior

(0.193)

Std. Err.

–
–

–

–
–
Yes

Year dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

59,731

11,875

16,072

R-squared (overall)

0.06

0.15

0.07

Households

637

127

596

Notes: The dependent variable is average daily electricity consumption by month, kWhDay it .
Conventional standard errors are in parentheses; block bootstrap standard errors are in brackets.
House is the omitted category with respect to AptCondo and MobHome. Missing data for all survey
variables other than Conserv were …lled with the means corresponding to the household’s status as
a participant, waitlister, or nonparticipant. The

y indicates signi…cance level based on a one-tailed

test. One, two, or three asterisks indicate signi…cance at the levels p<0.10, p<0.05, or p<0.01,
respectively.

27

References
Andreoni, James, “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow
Giving,” Economic Journal, 100, June 1990, pp. 464-77.
Berndt, Ernst R., The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1991.
Bertrand, Marianne, Ester Du‡o, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust
Di¤erences-In-Di¤erences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, February
2004, pp. 249-75.
Black, J. Stanley, Paul C. Stern, and Julie T. Elworth, “Personal and Contextual In‡uences on
Household Energy Adoptions,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 1985, pp. 2-21.
Bohi, Douglas R. and Mary Beth Zimmerman, “An Update on Econometric Studies of Energy
Demand,” Annual Review of Energy, 9, 1984, pp. 105-54.
Champ, Patricia A. and Richard C. Bishop, “Donation Payment Mechanisms and Contingent
Valuation: An Empirical Study of Hypothetical Bias,”Environmental and Resource Economics,
19, 2001, pp. 338-402.
Dillman, Donald, Mail and Telephone Surveys. New York: Wiley and Sons, 1978.
Glazer, Amihai and Kai A. Konrad, “A Signalling Explanation for Charity,” American Economic
Review, 86, September 1986, pp. 1019-28.
Goett, Andrew A., Kathleen Hudson and Kenneth E. Train, “Customers’ Choice among Retail
Energy Suppliers: The Willingness-to-Pay for Service Attribute,”Energy Journal, 21, 2000, pp.
1-28.
Harbaugh, William T., “The Prestige Motive For Making Charitable Transfers,” American Economic Review, 88, May 1998a, pp. 277-82.
Harbaugh, William T., “What Do Donations Buy? A Model of Philanthropy Based on Prestige
and Warm Glow,” Journal of Public Economics, 67, February 1998b, pp. 269-84.
Heckman, James J., “Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equations System,”Econometrica, 46, July 1978, pp. 931-960.
Hollander, Heinz, “A Social Exchange Approach to Voluntary Cooperation,”American Economic
Review, 80, December 1990, pp. 1157-67.
Kahneman, Daniel and Jack L. Knetsch, ”Valuing Public Goods: The Purchase of Moral Satisfaction,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 22, January 1992, pp. 57-70.
Kotchen, Matthew J. and Michael R. Moore, “Private Provision of Environmental Public Goods:
Household Participation in Green-Electricity Programs,”Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management, 23, January 2007, pp. 1-16.
Lee, Albert Yin-Po, “Voluntary Conservation and Electricity Peak Demand: A Case Study of the
Modesto Irrigation District,” Land Economics, 57, August 1981, pp. 436-47.

28

Oberholzer-Gee, Felix, “Your Contribution Counts! An Empirical Analysis of the Decision to
Support Solar Energy,” in Environmental Voluntary Contracts: Comparative Approaches to
Regulation Innovation in the United States and Europe, Eric W. Orts and Kurt Deketelaere
(Eds.), London: Kluwer Law International, 2001, pp. 425-34.
Peck, Anne. E. and O. C. Doering III, “Voluntarism and Price Response: Consumer Reaction to
the Energy Shortage,” Bell Journal of Economics, 7, Spring 1976, pp. 287-92.
Rege, Mari and Kjetil Telle, “The Impact of Social Approval and Framing On Cooperation in
Public Good Situations,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2004, pp. 1625-1644.
Reiss, Peter C. and Matthew W. White, “What Changes Energy Consumption Habits? Prices
versus Public Pressures,” Working Paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
November 2005.
Roe, Brian, Mario F. Teisl, Alan Levy and Matthew Russell, “US Consumers’Willingness to Pay
for Green Electricity,” Energy Policy, 29, September 2001, pp. 917-25.
Rose, Steven K., Jeremy Clark, Gregory L. Poe, Daniel Rondeau, and William D. Schulze, “The
Private Provision of Public Goods: Tests of a Provision Point Mechanism for Funding Green
Power Programs,” Resource and Energy Economics, 24, February 2002, pp. 131-55.
Schwartz, Shalom H., “Elicitation of Moral Obligation and Self-Sacri…cing Behavior,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 15, 1970, pp. 283-93.
Schwartz, Shalom H., “Normative In‡uences on Altruism,” in Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, Volume 10, Leonard Berkowitz (Ed.), New York: Academic Press, 1977, pp. 22179.
Stern, Paul C., “What Psychology Knows About Energy Conservation,” American Psychologist,
47, October 1992, pp. 1224-32.
Walker, James M., “Voluntary Response to Energy Conservation Appeals,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 7, June 1980, pp. 88-92.
Wooldridge, Je¤rey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 2002.

29

