                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  FRICTIONAL WAGE DISPERSION IN SEARCH MODELS:
                           A QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT

                                         Andreas Hornstein
                                            Per Krusell
                                        Giovanni L. Violante

                                        Working Paper 13674
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13674


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




We are grateful for comments from Gadi Barlevy, Bjoern Bruegemann, Zvi Eckstein, Chris Flinn,
Rasmus Lentz, Dale Mortensen, Giuseppe Moscarini, Fabien Postel-Vinay, Richard Rogerson, Robert
Shimer, Philippe Weil, and from many seminar participants. Greg Kaplan and Matthias Kredler provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Andreas Hornstein, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Frictional Wage Dispersion in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment
Andreas Hornstein, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 13674
December 2007
JEL No. E24,J24,J31,J6,J64

                                              ABSTRACT

Standard search and matching models of equilibrium unemployment, once properly calibrated, can
generate only a small amount of frictional wage dispersion, i.e., wage differentials among ex-ante
similar workers induced purely by search frictions. We derive this result for a specific measure of
wage dispersion -- the ratio between the average wage and the lowest (reservation) wage paid. We
show that in a large class of search and matching models this statistic (the "mean-min ratio") can be
obtained in closed form as a function of observable variables (i.e., the interest rate, the value of leisure,
and statistics of labor market turnover). Various independent data sources suggest that actual residual
wage dispersion (i.e., inequality among observationally similar workers) exceeds the model's prediction
by a factor of 20. We discuss three extensions of the model (risk aversion, volatile wages during employment,
and on-the-job search) and find that, in their simplest versions, they can improve its performance,
but only modestly. We conclude that either frictions account for a tiny fraction of residual wage dispersion,
or the standard model needs to be augmented to confront the data. In particular, the last generation
of models with on-the-job search appears promising.


Andreas Hornstein                                     Giovanni L. Violante
Research Department                                   Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond                      New York University
POB 27622                                             19 W. 4th Street
Richmond, VA 23261-7622                               New York, NY 10012-1119
Andreas.Hornstein@rich.frb.org                        and NBER
                                                      glv2@nyu.edu
Per Krusell
Department of Economics
Princeton University
111 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
pkrusell@princeton.edu
1         Introduction
The economic success of individuals is largely determined by their labor market expe-
rience. For centuries, economists have been interested in studying the determinants of
earnings dispersion among workers. The standard theories of wage differentials in com-
petitive environments are three. Human capital theory suggests that a set of individ-
ual characteristics (e.g., individual ability, education, labor market experience, and job
tenure) are related to wages because they correlate with productive skills, either innate
or cumulated in schools or on the job. The theory of compensating differentials posits
that wage dispersion arises because wages compensate for non-pecuniary characteristics
of jobs and occupations such as fringe benefits, amenities, location, and risk. Models
of discrimination assume that certain demographic groups are discriminated against by
employers and, as such, they earn less for similar skill levels.
        Mincerian wage regressions based on cross-sectional individual data proxy all these
factors through a large range of observable variables, but typically they can explain at
most 1/3 of the total wage variation. A vast amount of residual wage variation is left
unexplained. In practice, measurement error is large, and the available covariates capture
only imperfectly what the theory suggests as determinants of wage differentials. However,
even if we could perfectly measure what these competitive theories require, we should not
expect to account for all observed wage dispersion.
        Theories of frictional labor markets building on the seminal work of McCall (1970),
Mortensen (1970), Lucas and Prescott (1974), Burdett (1978), Pissarides (1985), Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994), and Burdett and Mortensen (1998) predict that wages can diverge
among ex-ante similar workers looking for jobs in the same labor market (e.g., the market
for janitors in Philadelphia) because of informational frictions and luck in the search and
matching process. We call this type of wage inequality inherently associated to frictions
frictional wage dispersion.1
        The canonical search model (risk neutrality, no on-the-job search) provides a natural
starting point for thinking about frictional wage dispersion. We begin by asking how much
frictional wage dispersion this model can generate. We arrive at a surprising answer. This
    1
    Mortensen (2005), which reviews the theoretical and empirical investigations on the subject, calls it
pure wage dispersion.


                                                   2
answer is based on a particular measure of frictional wage dispersion: the ratio between
the average wage and the lowest (reservation) wage paid in the economy, which we label
the “mean-min (M m) ratio”. The surprise is that optimal search implies a relation
between the M m ratio and a small set of statistics, none of which includes the wage-offer
distribution the searching worker is drawing from. Moreover, since there are natural ways
of calibrating these statistics—the job finding and separation rates, the interest rate, and
the “value of non-market time”—we obtain an equation that predicts a value for our
measure of wage dispersion, without having to specify the wage-offer distribution. Thus,
with data on frictional wage dispersion that would allow us to measure the M m ratio,
this equation offers a simple and powerful test of the basic theory.
   It also turns out that our key equation will hold in all of the three standard versions
of the search model (the sequential search model, the island model, and the random
matching model). This reflects the important insight that the test we propose here does
not rely on a view on how wages are determined in equilibrium, because it only concerns
the cornerstone of search theories, namely rational worker search. Indeed, our findings are
relevant no matter where the wage offer distribution comes from, be it wage determination
mechanisms based on wage posting, bargaining, or efficiency wages.
   Our second main finding is quantitative and quite surprising as well: a calibration of
the standard search model predicts M m = 1.036. I.e., the model only generates a 3.6%
differential between the average wage and the lowest wage paid. The reason is that in the
search model workers remain unemployed if the option value of search is high. The latter,
in turn, is determined by the dispersion of wage opportunities. The data on unemployment
duration show that workers do not wait for very long. Thus, unless they have implausibly
high discounting (exceeding 25% per month), or experience an implausibly strong aversion
to leisure (exceeding, in dollar terms, five times the average earnings), the observed search
behavior of workers can only rationalize a very small dispersion in the wage distribution.
   The natural follow-up question is: how large is frictional wage dispersion in actual
labor markets? Ideally, one would like to access individual wage observations for ex-ante
similar workers searching in the same labor market. These requirements pose several
challenges that we can only partially address, given data availability. We exploit three
alternative data sources: the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) sample


                                             3
of the 1990 U.S. Census, the November 2000 Occupational Employment Survey (OES),
the 1967-1996 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Overall, from the
empirical work we gauge that the observed M m ratios are at least twenty times larger
than what the model predicts.
   How do we reconcile the large discrepancy between the plausibly calibrated search
model and the data? On the one hand, one can accept the canonical search model’s
prediction that frictional wage dispersion is indeed small. One would then attribute
most of the residual wage dispersion as measured in the data to measurement error or
unobservable, time-varying, heterogeneity that cannot be fully controlled for, given data
constraints. This essentially eliminates frictional wage dispersion as an important source
of wage inequality, and it implies that a model entirely without frictions in the labor
markets suffices to explain almost all of the wage data. On the other hand, one can
accept that frictional dispersion as measured is truly large. In this case the canonical
search model fails to explain it, and more elaborate search models need to be explored in
order to account for our recorded M m ratios. Thus, in the second part of the paper, we
study a number of more elaborate search models through the lens of our instrument of
analysis, the M m ratio.
   The first extension introduces risk aversion: risk-averse workers particularly dislike
the low-income state (unemployment) and set a low reservation wage, which allows the
model to generate a larger M m ratio. We find that even when we exclude agents from
using any form of insurance, a very high risk-aversion coefficient (around eight) is needed
to generate an M m ratio that is comparable to what we see in the data. Moreover, we
know that the availability of self-insurance (say, with precautionary saving) would help
consumers a lot, thus requiring much higher risk aversion still.
   The second extension allows for stochastic wage fluctuations during employment, with
endogenous separations. If wages vary over the employment spell, then the wage offer
drawn during unemployment is not very informative about the value of a job, so a large
dispersion of wages could coexist with a small dispersion of job values which is what
drives unemployment duration. This modification is quantitatively not successful since
it generates high M m ratios only if wages are virtually i.i.d. during the employment
relationship. Empirically, however, wages are best described by a random walk.


                                            4
       The third set of extensions allows for on-the-job search. The ability to search on the
job for new employment opportunities makes unemployed workers less demanding, which
reduces their reservation wage and allows the model to generate a higher M m ratio. This
latter modification, in its simplest form, i.e., the basic job-ladder model of Burdett (1978),
still falls quite short of explaining the data.2 To generate dispersion, this model needs a
high arrival rate of offers on the job. However, the high arrival rate implies separations
at a frequency that is almost twice that observed. More sophisticated environments with
on-the-job search and endogenous search effort (Christensen et al., 2005), ability for the
employer to make counteroffers (Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002), or to offer wage-tenure
contracts (Stevens, 1999; Burdett and Coles, 2000) are the ones that show most promise.
       In conclusion, we find that for plausible parameterizations a remarkably large class of
search models has trouble generating the observed amount of residual wage dispersion,
and we explain why. Our analysis is helpful for understanding why the existing empirical
structural search literature (see Eckstein and Van den Berg, 2005, for a recent survey)
systematically finds very low (negative and large) estimates of the value of non-market
time, extremely high estimates of the interest rate, substantial estimates of unobserved
worker heterogeneity, or very large estimates of measurement error. Interestingly, the
relevance of the value of non-market time also points to tight link between the present
analysis and the recently discussed difficulty of replicating the time series of unemployment
and vacancies using search theory (see, e.g., Hall, 2005; Shimer, 2005b; Hagedorn and
Manovskii, 2006): parameter values that help resolve the former problem make it harder
to resolve the latter, and vice versa.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 derives the common expression
for the M m ratio in three canonical search models and quantifies their implications.
Section 3 contains the empirical analysis. Section 4 makes a number of first attempts
at rescuing the canonical model. Sections 5, 6, and 7 then outline the three significant
extensions of the model mentioned above and evaluate them quantitatively. Section 8
discusses the empirical search literature from our perspective. Section 9 concludes the
paper. Finally, several of the theoretical propositions in the present paper are proved in
   2
    Since none of our derivations depend on the shape of the wage offer distribution, our results hold
in the wage-posting equilibrium versions of the job-ladder model (e.g., Burdett and Mortensen, 1998) as
well.


                                                  5
a separate Technical Appendix: Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante (2007).


2     Frictional wage dispersion in canonical models of
      equilibrium unemployment
The three canonical models of frictional labor markets are the sequential search model
developed by McCall (1970) and Mortensen (1970), the island model of Lucas and Prescott
(1974), and the random matching model proposed by Pissarides (1985).
    In what follows, we show that all three models lead to the same analytical expression
for a particular measure of frictional wage dispersion: the mean-min ratio, i.e., the ratio
between the average wage and the lowest wage paid in the labor market to an employed
worker. Then, we explore the quantitative implications of this class of models for this
particular statistic of frictional wage dispersion.

2.1    The basic search model
We begin with the basic sequential search model formulated in continuous time. Consider
an economy populated by ex-ante equal, risk-neutral, infinitely lived individuals who dis-
count the future at rate r. Unemployed agents receive job offers at the instantaneous rate
λu . Conditionally on receiving an offer, the wage is drawn from a well-behaved distribution
function F (w) with upper support wmax . Draws are i.i.d. over time and across agents.
If a job offer w is accepted, the worker is paid a wage w until the job is exogenously
destroyed. Separations occur at rate σ. While unemployed, the worker receives a utility
flow b which includes unemployment benefits and a value of leisure and home production,
net of search costs. Thus, we have the Bellman equations

                      rW (w) = w − σ [W (w) − U ]                                       (1)
                                      Z wmax
                          rU = b + λu        [W (w) − U ] dF (w) ,                      (2)
                                            w∗
where rW (w) is the flow (per period) value of employment at wage w, and rU is the flow
value of unemployment. In writing the latter, we have used the fact that the optimal
search behavior of the worker is a reservation-wage strategy: the unemployed worker
accepts all wage offers w above w∗ = rU , at a capital gain W (w) − U . Solving equation
(1) for W (w) and substituting in (2) yields the reservation-wage equation

                                              6
                                                 wmax
                                    λu
                                             Z
                              ∗
                             w =b+                      [w − w∗ ] dF (w) .
                                   r+σ        w∗

   Without loss of generality, let b = ρw̄, where w̄ = E [w|w ≥ w∗ ] . Then,
                                                   Z max
                     ∗           λu [1 − F (w∗ )] w                  dF (w)
                 w       = ρw̄ +                         [w − w∗ ]
                                      r+σ           w∗             1 − F (w∗ )
                                  λ∗u
                         = ρw̄ +       [w̄ − w∗ ] ,                                      (3)
                                 r+σ
where λ∗u ≡ λu [1 − F (w∗ )] is the job-finding rate. Equation (3) relates the lowest wage
paid (the reservation wage) to the average wage paid in the economy through a small set
of model parameters.
   If we now define the mean-min wage ratio as M m ≡ w̄/w∗ and rearrange terms in (3),
we arrive at
                                                    λ∗u
                                                   r+σ
                                                          +1
                                        Mm =        λ∗u
                                                               .                         (4)
                                                   r+σ
                                                          +ρ
The mean-min ratio M m is our new measure of frictional wage dispersion, i.e., wage differ-
entials entirely determined by luck in the random meeting process. This measure has one
important property: it does not depend directly on the shape of the wage distribution F .
Put differently, the theory allows predictions on M m without requiring any information
on F. The reason is that all that is relevant to know about F , i.e., its probability mass
below w∗ , is already contained in the job finding rate λ∗u , which we can measure directly
through labor market flows from unemployment to employment and treat as a parameter.
   The model’s mean-min ratio can thus be written as a function of a four-parameter
vector, (r, σ, ρ, λ∗u ), which we can try to measure independently. Thus, looking at this re-
lation, if we measure the discount rate r to be high (high impatience), for given estimates
of σ, ρ, and λ∗u , an increased M m must follow. Similarly, a higher measure of the separa-
tion rate σ increases M m (because it reduces job durations and thus decreases the value
of waiting for a better job opportunity). A lower estimate of the value of non-market time
ρ would also increase M m (agents are then induced to accept worse matches). Finally, a
lower measure of the contact rate λ∗u pushes M m up, too (because it makes the option
value of search less attractive).



                                                   7
2.2       The search island model
We outline a simple version of the island model as in Rogerson, Shimer, and Wright
(2006). Consider an economy with a continuum of islands. Each island is indexed by its
productivity level p, distributed as F (p) . On each island there is a large number of firms
operating a linear technology in labor y = pn, where n is the number of workers employed.
In every period, there is a perfectly competitive spot market for labor on every island.
An employed worker is subject to exogenous separations at rate σ. Upon separation, she
enters the unemployment pool. Unemployed workers search for employment and at rate
λu they run into an island drawn randomly from F (p) .
       It is immediate that one can obtain exactly the same set of equations (1)-(2) for the
worker, while for the firm in each island, we can write its flow value of producing as

                                          rJ (p) = pn − wn.

Competition among firms drives profits to zero, and thus in equilibrium w = p. At this
point the mapping between the island model and the search model is complete.3 The
search island model yields the same expression for M m as in (4) .

2.3       The basic random matching model
There are three key differences between the search setup described above and the matching
model (e.g., Pissarides, 1985). First, there is free entry of vacant firms (or jobs). Second,
the flow of contacts m between vacant jobs and unemployed workers is governed by an
aggregate matching technology m (u, v). Let the workers’ contact rate be λu = m/u and
the firm’s contact rate be λf = m/v. Third, workers and firms are ex-ante equal, but upon
meeting they jointly draw a value p, distributed according to F (p) with upper support
pmax , which determines flow output of their potential match. Once p is realized, they
bargain over the match surplus in a Nash fashion and determine the wage w (p). Let β
be the bargaining power of the worker; then the Nash rule for the wage establishes that

                                      w (p) = βp + (1 − β) rU,                                         (5)
   3
    One can also allow firms to operate a constant returns to scale technology in capital and labor, i.e.,
y = pk α n1−α . If capital is perfectly mobile across islands at the exogenous interest rate r, then firms’
optimal choice of capital allows us to rewrite the production technology in a linear fashion, and the
equivalence across the two models goes through.


                                                    8
where rU is the flow value of unemployment.4 This equation uses the free-entry condition
of firms that drives the value of a vacant job to zero.
      From the worker’s point of view, it is easy to see that equations (1)-(2) hold with a
slight modification:

                            rW (p) = w (p) − σ [W (p) − U ]
                                            Z pmax
                               rU = b + λu         [W (p) − U ] dF (p) ,
                                                    p∗

i.e., the value of employment is expressed in terms of the value p of the match drawn;
similarly, the optimal search strategy is expressed in terms of a reservation productiv-
ity p∗ . Rearranging these two expressions, we arrive at an equation for the reservation
productivity                               Z pmax
                                  ∗  λu β
                          p =b+                    [p − p∗ ] dF (p) ,                 (6)
                                    r + σ p∗
where we have used the fact that p∗ = rU. Substituting (5) into (6) , we obtain
                                              Z max
                  ∗          λu [1 − F (p∗ )] p                       dF (p)
                w = b+                                [w (p) − w∗ ]
                                  r+σ           p∗                  1 − F (p∗ )
                              λ∗u
                     = b+          [w̄ − w∗ ] .
                             r+σ
Using the definition b = ρw̄ in the last equation, we again obtain the formula in (4) for
the mean-min ratio. Note that nothing in this derivation depends on the shape of the
matching function.
      One can view the island model or the matching model as providing alternative explana-
tions of the wage offer distribution. The analyses of these models then simply underscore
the fact that our key finding—the relation between the M m ratio and a small set of
parameters of the model—merely is an implication of optimal search behavior. In partic-
ular, this behavior is independent of the particular equilibrium model used to generate the
wage offer distribution F . For example, suppose alternatively that efficiency-wage theory
lies behind F : identical workers may be offered different wages because different employ-
ers have different assessments of what wage is most appropriate in their firm. From the
worker’s perspective, then, the end result is still a wage distribution F from which they
must sample. Thus, the equation based on the M m ratio appears to be of remarkably
general use in order to understand frictional wage dispersion.
  4
      See, for example, Pissarides (2000), Section 1.4, for a step-by-step derivation of this wage equation.


                                                      9
2.4     Quantitative implications for the mean-min ratio
How much frictional wage dispersion can these models generate when plausibly calibrated?
We set the period to one month.5 An interest rate of 5% per year implies r = 0.0041.
Shimer (2005a) reports, for the period 1967-2004, an average monthly separation rate σ
(EU flow) of 2% and a monthly job finding probability (UE flow) of 39%. These two num-
bers imply a mean unemployment duration of 2.56 months, and an average unemployment
rate of 4.88%.
   The OECD (2004) reports that the net replacement rate of a single unemployed worker
in the U.S. in 2002 was 56%. The fraction of labor force eligible to collect unemployment
insurance is close to 90% (Blank and Card, 1991) which implies a mean replacement rate
of roughly 50%. Of course, unemployment benefit are only one component of b. Others
are the value of leisure, the value of home production (both positive), and the search costs
(negative). Shimer (2005b), weighting all these factors, sets ρ to 41%. As discussed by
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2006), this is likely to be a lower bound. For example, taxes
increase the value of ρ since leisure and home production activities are not taxed. Given
that higher values for b will strengthen our argument, we proceed conservatively and set
ρ = 0.4. In Section 4 we perform a sensitivity analysis.
   This choice of parameters implies M m = 1.036: the model can only generate a 3.6%
differential between the average wage and the lowest wage paid in the labor market. This
number appears very small. What explains the inability of the search/matching model
to generate quantitatively significant frictional wage dispersion? We answer in two ways.
First, just mechanically, note that
                              λ∗u               0.39
                             r+σ
                                    +1        0.0241
                                                     +1           16.18 + 1
                      Mm =    λ∗u
                                         =    0.39           =               = 1.036.            (7)
                                    +ρ       0.0241
                                                     + 0.4       16.18 + 0.4
                             r+σ

This “unpleasant search arithmetic” illustrates that what accounts quantitatively for our
finding is that the job finding rate λ∗u is an order of magnitude larger than the separation
rate σ; hence, the term λ∗u / (σ + r) dominates both 1 and ρ, the other two terms of the
expression in (7) .
   5
     The M m ratio has the desirable property of being invariant to the length of the time interval.
A change in the length of the period affects the numerator and denominator of the ratio λ∗u / (r + σ)
proportionately, leaving the ratio unchanged. The parameter ρ is unaffected by the period length.


                                                    10
    The second, more intuitive, interpretation of our finding is that in the search model,
workers remain unemployed if the option value of search is high. The latter, in turn, is
determined by the dispersion of wage opportunities. The short unemployment durations,
as in the U.S. data, thus reveal that agents do not find it worthwhile to wait because
frictional wage inequality is tiny. The message of search theory is that “good things come
to those who wait,” so if the wait is short, it must be that good things are not likely to
happen.
    We now turn to the obvious next question: how large is frictional wage dispersion in
actual labor markets?


3     An attempt to measure frictional wage dispersion
The aim of our analysis is to quantify the empirical counterpart of the model’s mean-
min ratio M m. Ideally, one would like to access individual wage observations for ex-ante
similar workers searching in the same labor market. This requirement poses three major
challenges that we address by exploiting three alternative data sources: the 5% IPUMS
sample of the 1990 U.S. Census, the November 2000 survey of the OES, and the 1967-1996
waves of the PSID.
    The first challenge is to define a “labor market”. The most natural boundaries across
labor markets are, arguably, geographical, sectoral, and occupational, and possibly com-
binations of all these dimensions. The PSID sample is too small for a construction of
detailed labor markets. OES and Census data, however, allow us to look at the wage
distribution in thousands of separate labor markets in the U.S. economy.
    Second, differences in annual earnings may reflect differences in hours worked. To
avoid this problem, one should focus on hourly wages. However, it is well known that
measurement error in hours worked plagues household surveys, and large measurement
error will generate an upward bias in estimates of wage dispersion. The OES is an es-
tablishment survey where measurement error should be negligible. PSID and Census
information on hourly wages, though, may suffer from measurement error bias. In partic-
ular, estimates of the reservation wage through the lowest wage observation are especially
vulnerable to reporting or imputing errors. For this reason, we estimate the reservation
wage from the 1st, 5th, and 10th percentile of the wage distribution. These percentiles

                                            11
are less volatile, though upward biased, estimators of the reservation wage in the empiri-
cal wage distribution. We denote the corresponding mean-min ratios by M p1 , M p5 , and
M p10 , respectively.
       Third, we would like to eliminate all wage variation due to ex-ante differences across
individuals in observable characteristics (e.g., experience, education, race, gender, etc.), as
well as all wage variation due to heterogeneity in unobservables (e.g., innate ability, value
of leisure, etc.). The OES does not provide any demographic information on workers. In
the Census data, we can control for a wide set of observable characteristics. In the PSID,
we can exploit the panel dimension to also purge fixed individual heterogeneity from the
wage data.6
       Overall, none of the three data sets is ideal, but each of them is informative in its
own way. At the end of this section, we also quickly review the evidence based on linked
employer-employee data.

3.1       Census Data
Our first data source is the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) sample
of the 1990 United States Census. In Appendix A, we outline our sample selection. We
run an OLS regression on the log of individual hourly wage to control for the variation in
wages due to observable characteristics which are rewarded in the labor market. Among
the covariates, we include gender dummies, 3 race dummies, 5 education dummies, and a
cubic in potential experience. We weight each observation by its Census sample weight.
The regression explains 31% of the total variation in log hourly wages.
       Next, we group the (exponent of the) regression residuals by labor markets. Our
first definition of labor market is the individual occupation. The Census allows us to
distinguish between 487 distinct occupations (variable OCC). Our second definition is the
combination of occupation and place of work (for the main job). Our indicator for place
of work is constructed as follows. Whenever possible, we use the 329 metropolitan areas
(PWMETRO). For rural areas we use a variable (PWPUMA) which defines a geographical
area by following the boundaries of groups of counties, or census-defined “places” which
   6
     Note also that, say, the M p5 estimator of the M m ratio is robust to the existence of a small group
of workers in the population with particularly low labor productivities or values of leisure that would
artificially drive up many other measures of wage inequality; see Section 4.5.


                                                   12
contain up to 200,000 residents. Overall, we end up with 799 different geographical areas.
For each cell identified as a labor market, we calculate the mean-min ratio and we report
the median mean-min ratio across U.S. labor markets.
       In the top panel of Figure 1, we show one example of the wage distribution for Jani-
tors and Cleaners, excluding Maids and House Cleaners (code 453), in the Philadelphia
metropolitan area (code 616). These are the wage residuals of a regression that controls
for the demographics listed above, restricted to those working full time (35-45 hours per
week) and full year (48-52 weeks per year) in order to reduce the impact of measurement
error. Overall, we have 572 observations. As reported in the figure, the ratio between
the mean and the first percentile is 2.24. In the bottom panel of Figure 1 we extend the
analysis to the entire U.S. economy. We find that there are local labor markets displaying
more and markets displaying less residual dispersion than in Philadelphia, but the bottom
line seems to be that, even within a very unskilled occupation such as janitors, and even
after selecting the sample to minimize the role of measurement error, wage differentials
remain large: the median M p1 ratio for janitors across the U.S. is 2.20.
       Table 1 reports our results in a number of formats. We use various estimators of the
mean-min ratio: M m, M p1 , M p5 , and M p10 . We condition on cells with at least 50 or
200 observations. Larger cells usually display higher M m ratios both because of higher
unobserved heterogeneity that we did not capture in the first-stage regression, and because
they permit a less biased estimate of the low percentiles of the wage distribution.
       To get at the measurement error issue, we condition our analysis on full-time, full-year
workers who report weekly hours between 35 and 45 and annual weeks worked between
48 and 52. Going from row (2) to row (3) in Table 1, wage dispersion falls with respect
to the full sample, but it remains very high.7
       To eliminate the importance of individual-specific differences in cumulated skills not
perfectly correlated with experience (accounted for in the first-stage regression), we con-
dition on workers with less than 10 years of experience, Table 1 row (4), and on a set
   7
    The coefficient of variation falls by 16%. For comparison, Bound and Krueger (Table 6, 1991) compare
matched Current Population Survey data to administrative Social Security payroll tax records and find
that the measurement error explains between 7% and 19% of the total standard deviation of log earnings.
Recall that the standard deviation of the logs has the same scale as the coefficient of variation.




                                                  13
                 Table 1: Dispersion measures for hourly wage from the 1990 Census
                                   (Median across labor markets)
     Labor mkt           Min. obs.     Number of                    Ratio of mean wage to                      CV
     definition           per cell     labor mkts         min.     1st pct.    5th pct.        10th pct.

(1) Occupation                             487            4.54      2.83          2.13           1.83          0.47

(2) Occ./Geog. Area       (N≥50)         13,246           2.94      2.66          2.04           1.76          0.41
                         (N≥200)          2,321           3.85      2.88          2.13           1.82          0.44

(3) Occ./Geog. Area       (N≥50)          7,195           2.74      2.49          1.92           1.66          0.35
Full time/Full year      (N≥200)          1,117           3.58      2.68          1.98           1.71          0.37

(4) Occ./Geog. Area       (N≥50)          2,810           2.64      2.46          1.92           1.68          0.40
Experience ≤ 10          (N≥200)           406            3.33      2.57          1.97           1.73          0.44

(5) Occ./Geog. Area       (N≥50)          1,152           2.51      2.37          1.98           1.77          0.45
Unskilled Occ.           (N≥200)           191            2.95      2.57          2.08           1.83          0.49

(6) Occ./Geog. Area       (N≥50)         13,246           2.61      2.39          1.88           1.64          0.39
Within cell regression   (N≥200)          2,321           3.33      2.66          2.02           1.75          0.42




  of very low-skilled occupations, Table 1 row (5), where occupation and firm-specific skills
 are arguably not very important.8 Once again, going from row (2) to either row (4) or
 row (5) barely affects the findings, that is, residual wage dispersion remains very high.9
 Moreover, in models of on-the-job search where employers make counteroffers in case
     8
       This list of occupations includes, inter alia, launderers and ironers; crossing guards; waiters and
 waitresses; food counter, fountain and related occupations; janitors and cleaners; elevator operators; pest
 control occupations; and baggage porters and bellhops.
     9
       This conclusion is consistent with the most up-to-date estimates of the returns to firm tenure. Re-
 cently, Altonji and Williams (2004) have reassessed the existing evidence (e.g., Topel, 1991; Altonji and
 Shakotko, 1987), concluding that returns to tenure over 10 years are around 11%, most of which occur in
 the first 5 to 7 years of the employment spell. If we assume that average tenure is roughly 3.5 years (see
 Section 7), this factor would account for less than 10% of the wage difference between the average worker
 (with average tenure) and the lowest paid worker (with zero tenure) in a given occupation/geographical
 area.
    Hagedorn and Manovskii (2005) argue that the bulk of returns to specific human capital is occupation-
 specific. They find that once occupation is taken into account, returns to human capital specific to
 industry and employer become virtually zero. Hence, their findings would change the source of wage
 differentials due to unobserved heterogeneity in specific skills, but not their magnitude.


                                                     14
an employee is contacted by an outside firm, wage growth on the job is observationally
equivalent to the accumulation of job-specific skills.10 Thus at least part of the returns
to tenure may be attributable to “luck” and should not be removed from out empirical
measure of frictional inequality.
       Finally, we also run the first-stage regressions within each occupation/area cell to
account for the fact that the role of demographic characteristics in wage determination
may be different across occupations. Going from row (2) to row (6), the estimates of
dispersion fall by less than 10%.
       We conclude that, except for estimates of M m based on the lowest observed wage that
are quite volatile, all the other statistics in Table 1 remain very robust to all these controls
and strongly support the view that residual wage dispersion is large. In the top panel
of Figure 2, we report the empirical distribution of the M p5 across U.S. labor markets
corresponding to the sample selection with N ≥ 50 in row (2) of Table 1.

3.2       OES Data
The second data source we use is the November 2000 survey from the Occupational Em-
ployment Statistic (OES). Appendix B contains a description of the survey and of the
sample selection criteria we adopt. OES data are collected at the level of the establish-
ment. Each establishment reports the average hourly wage paid within each occupation.
To the extent that there are within-establishment differences in wages due to luck or
frictions among similar workers, these data underestimate frictional wage dispersion.
       We use three different levels of aggregation: nation-wide data by occupation (3-digit),
occupation × metropolitan area data, and occupation (3-digit) × industry (2-digit) data.
The publicly available survey reports the average, the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th
percentiles of the hourly wage distribution.
       The best possible estimate (which clearly is downward-biased) of the mean-min ratio
is the ratio between the average wage and the 10th percentile (M p10 ). We exclude all
those cells where hourly wage data are not available, and those where the 90th percentile
is top coded (at $70 per hour)—a sign that wages are heavily censored in that cell.11
  10
    See Section 7.3 for details.
  11
    The first restriction mainly excludes workers in the education sector (25-000), while the second mainly
excludes healthcare practitioners (29-000).


                                                    15
                    Table 2: Dispersion measures from the 2000 OES
                             (Median across labor markets)
                        Labor mkt      Number of      Ratio of mean wage
                         definition    labor mkts      to 10th percentile
                        Occupation         637                1.68

                     Occ./Industry        6,293              1.60

                    Occ./Geog Area       106,278             1.48


   In each cell (i.e., a labor market) we compute the M p10 , and then we calculate the
median M p10 ratio across labor markets. The median is preferable to the mean because
we consistently found that the empirical distributions of mean-min ratios are very skewed
to the right, and we are interested in the mean-min ratio of the wage distribution in a
typical labor market.
   The median M p10 ratio across occupations in the U.S. economy is 1.68. For the
classification of labor markets based on 2-digit industry (58 industries) and occupation,
the median M p10 ratio is 1.60. Finally, when we define labor markets by metropolitan
area (337 areas) and occupation, the median M p10 ratio is estimated to be 1.48. Table 2
summarizes the results.
   As the definition of labor market becomes more refined, wage dispersion falls for
two reasons. First, there is less worker heterogeneity within a specific occupation in a
given industry, or in a given geographical area than at the country level. Second, as we
keep disaggregating, the number of establishments sampled within each cell falls. For
example, for cells defined by occupation and metropolitan area, we have on average only
11 establishments per cell. With such a low number of observations, the estimate of
the 10th percentile could be severely upward biased, and in turn the mean-min ratio
underestimated.

3.3    PSID Data
Our third data source is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). In Appendix C, we
describe our sample selection in detail. With our final sample in hand, for every year in the
period 1967-1996, we run an OLS regression on the cross-section of individual log hourly

                                             16
wages where we control for gender, 3 race dummies (white, non-white, and Hispanic), 5
education dummies (high-school dropout, high-school degree, some college, college degree,
and post-graduate degree), a cubic in potential experience (age minus years of education
minus five), a dummy for marital status, 6 regional dummies, 25 two-digit occupation
dummies, and an interaction between occupation and experience to capture occupation-
specific tenure profiles. We face a trade-off in the choice of covariates between (1) the
appropriate filtering out of the variation in hourly wages due to observable individual
characteristics which are rewarded in the labor market, and (2) the risk of overfitting the
data. On average, these year-by-year regressions yield an R2 between 0.42 and 0.45.12
       Next, we use the panel dimension of the data and identify individual-specific effects in
wages. Let εit be the residual of the first stage for individual i = 1, ...I in year t = 1, ..., T .
We limit the sample to those whose number of wage observations in the panel (Ni ) is at
least ten and estimate ε̄i = N                                                  I
                            P i
                             t=1 εit /Ni for every individual. The vector {ε̄i }i=1 captures

the variation in fixed unobserved individual factors (e.g., innate ability or preference for
leisure) which affect wages. Let w̃it = exp (εit − ε̄i ) . For each year t, we then calculate
our indexes of residual inequality across workers on w̃it .13
       We report our results for the PSID in Figure 3. For comparison with the other data
sources, we comment on the values for the last part of the sample (the 1990-1996). The
ratio between the mean wage and the lowest wage residual from the basic Mincer regres-
sions is M m = 4.47, but the estimate is clearly very noisy. When the reservation wage is
estimated from the 1st and the 5th percentile of the wage distribution, the noise is much
reduced and we obtain, respectively, M p1 = 2.73 and M p5 = 2.08. The coefficient of
variation of the regression residuals is 0.50.
       Controlling for individual effects drastically cuts the estimate of the mean-min ratios
by more than half. For the period 1990-1996, we estimate M m = 3.11, M p1 = 1.90, and
M p5 = 1.46. The coefficient of variation of the residuals net of individual effects falls
  12
     This R2 is sizeably higher than the one obtained for the Census regression. The reason is that in
the PSID regression we include occupational dummies and occupation-specific experience profiles, which
have strong explanatory power. Moreover, the PSID sample is smaller by a factor of 1,500 compared to
the Census sample. See Appendices A and C.
  13
     In an unreported set of regressions on PSID data, we also allowed fixed differences in (linear and
quadratic) time trends across workers—possibly capturing heterogeneity in learning ability—and this did
not significantly change our findings either.




                                                  17
to 0.25.14 One should be cautious in interpreting these results, however. The estimated
fixed effects confound worker-specific characteristics with match- (or firm-) specific effects.
This is especially true for long-lived matches. Removing the estimated fixed effects may
therefore eliminate some of the variation in the data that we want to explain.
       To facilitate the comparison with the OES data, we also report ratios between the
mean and the 10th percentile. The M p10 for the residuals of the first-stage regression
equals 1.77, and the M p10 for the residuals net of individual-specific means is 1.32. The
corresponding statistics for the OES data all lie somewhere in between (see Table 2).
       An alternative way to control for fixed individual heterogeneity is to compute mean-
min ratios within each individual wage history, i.e., on the I samples {exp (εit )}Tt=1
                                                                                     i
                                                                                        , where
Ti denotes the maximum number of wage observations available for individual i in PSID.
Next one can plot the distribution of individual mean-min ratios across the population—
we do it in the bottom panel of Figure 2—and calculate the median of this distribution.
We obtain M m = 1.57. The short length of the individual samples, which are limited
by the time coverage of PSID (30 years) implies that the estimator of the individual
reservation wage is greatly upward biased. Nevertheless, we still estimate a large amount
of residual wage dispersion.15

3.4       Evidence from employer-employee matched data
Data sets linking firm-level records and individual worker demographics can help effec-
tively control for worker heterogeneity and isolate the variation in the quality of jobs in
a given labor market. Abowd and Kramarz (2000) survey the empirical work based on
employer-employee linked databases and conclude that, for the U.S., firm effects represent
around one third of the total wage variation and, perhaps surprisingly, the estimated cor-
relation between firm and worker effects is close to zero. This evidence is reassuring for
two reasons. First, in our PSID exercise, individual effects capture around three quarters
of the total variance. Second, if indeed firm and worker effects are orthogonal, a consis-
tent estimate of the firm effect can be obtained by averaging all wages (say, for a certain
  14
      In passing, we note that Figure 3 is consistent with the views that residual wage dispersion has risen
significantly over the period, and that the rise in prices for unobserved innate characteristics is a key
component of this phenomenon.
   15
      We report M m because, given the short length of individual samples, p5 is identical to the minimum
in almost every individual history, and thus M p5 = M m.


                                                    18
occupation) within a firm.
    In this context our analysis of wage dispersion in the OES survey data (Table 2)
provides estimates of the typical (median) variation in firm-level effects within a labor
market defined by occupation and geographical area. Mortensen (2007) performs a similar
analysis for a Danish set of matched employer-employee data (IDA). He reports M p5 ratios
of firm-level effects that vary between 1.32 and 1.65 depending on the occupation. These
estimates are slightly below our estimates for the U.S., which is not surprising given that
the regulations in Danish labor markets likely imply more wage compression.

3.5    Summary and interpretation
Our three independent data sources offer a fairly consistent view of the size of residual
wage dispersion within narrowly defined labor markets. If we focus our attention on the
M p5 estimate of the mean-min ratio, a review of our findings yields M p5 = 1.46 from
PSID. The PSID estimate could be upward-biased because of measurement error, but at
the same time the individual wage demeaning could filter out too much variation, including
variation due to “persistent luck” components that should be included in measures of
frictional dispersion. From the Census sample restricted to full-time, full-year workers
(where measurement error in hours should be negligible) we have estimated M p5 = 1.98.
Given the OES estimate of the M p10 , and the fact that the other two data sets suggest
that M p5 are roughly 10%-15% larger, we conjecture that the M p5 in the OES data may
be around 1.67. An average across the three data sets yields 1.70, which we use as a
target in the rest of our analysis.
    This appraisal of residual wage dispersion—based not on the minimum wage observed,
but on the 5th percentile, and hence quite conservative—is about 20 times larger than
what implied by the textbook models of Section 2.


4     Several attempts to rescue the baseline model
4.1    Unemployment vs. wage dispersion
In defense of the baseline search model, one might argue that it is designed to explain
unemployment, not wage dispersion. This argument is flawed: in the environments of


                                            19
Section 2, there is a tight link between the existence of unemployment and the existence
of wage dispersion. Unemployment is in large part due to the option value of searching for
better wage opportunities. Let us reverse our logic and suppose that, given the amount
of frictional wage dispersion observed empirically, we want to predict unemployment du-
ration, i.e., use equation (4) and the empirical value of M m = 1.7 to compute the implied
value for λ∗u . We would obtain λ∗u = 0.011. In other words, a search model consistent with
the amount of wage dispersion in the data predicts an expected unemployment duration
of 91 months, 35 times the average duration in U.S. data.16

4.2     Targeting European data
In Section 2.4 we have indicated that the short duration of unemployment in the U.S.
reveals that frictional wage dispersion must be small. It is well known that in Europe
unemployment spells last much longer, on average. For example, Machin and Manning
(1999, Table 1) document that in 1995 the proportion of workers unemployed for more
than 12 months was less than 10% in the U.S., but over 40% in France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Does this observation mean that the
model could be successful in explaining European wage dispersion? To answer this ques-
tion, recall that in a stationary equilibrium, unemployment is u = σ/ (σ + λ∗u ) . Using this
formula in expression (4) allows one to rewrite the M m ratio as
                                            σ 1−u            1−u
                                           r+σ u
                                                    +1        u
                                                                   +1
                                  Mm =      σ 1−u        ≈   1−u      ,
                                           r+σ u
                                                    +ρ        u
                                                                   +ρ

where the “approximately equal” sign is obtained by setting r = 0, a step justified by
the fact that r is of second order compared to the other parameters in that expression.
Setting the unemployment rate to 10%, with ρ = 0.4, one obtains M m = 1.076. The
reason for the small improvement is that in European data both unemployment duration
and employment spells are much longer than in the U.S. labor market. While the first fact
is consistent with larger equilibrium wage dispersion, the second implies that unemployed
  16
    In one of the most commonly used search setups, Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), unemployment
duration is not connected to wage dispersion, because in that model, unemployed workers always receive
the maximum wage upon employment: they never consider turning down a job offer. There, however,
since there are wage shocks on the job, the separation rate is determined by a reservation-wage strategy.
Thus, that model instead links wage dispersion to the observed separation rate. We explore this link in
Section 6 below.


                                                   20
workers are more selective and set their reservation wage high, which reduces frictional
wage dispersion.
       For the argument to be fully convincing, one would need to document the extent of
residual wage dispersion, as well as the magnitude of the value of non market time, in
European countries. A systematic investigation goes beyond the scope of this paper,
but conventional wisdom would suggest that while inequality is lower in Europe, social
benefits for the unemployed are much more generous.17

4.3       Alternative parameterizations
To calibrate the pair (λ∗u , σ), we used the UE and EU flow data. One could argue that
we should also incorporate flows in and out of the labor force. Taking this into account,
Shimer (2005a) reports the monthly separation rate to be 3.5% and the monthly job
finding rate to be 61%. For the same values of r and ρ used in the baseline calibration,
we obtain M m = 1.038.18
       With respect to the interest rate r, we have used a standard value, but it is possible
that unemployed workers, especially the long-term unemployed, face a higher effective
interest rate if they wanted to borrow. Much less is known about ρ. To assess the
robustness of our conclusions to the choice of values for these two parameters, in Figure
4, we plot the pairs (r, ρ) which are consistent with an M m ratio of 1.7, together with the
region of “plausible pairs” based on our prior. This region covers the area where ρ ∈ (0, 1)
and r is at most 27% per year.
       The results are striking and suggest the baseline model cannot be rescued. Positive
net values of non-market time are consistent with the observed wage dispersion only for
interest rates beyond 1, 350% per year.19 Even for annual interest rates around 40%
per year, one would need agents to value one month of time away from the market the
  17
      For example, Hansen (1998) calculates benefits replacement ratios with respect to the average wage
up to 75% in some European countries.
   18
      Since, under the new parameterization, both the job finding rate and the separation rate increase,
the effect on the M m ratio is negligible.
   19
      A number of authors in the health and social behavioral sciences have argued that unemployment can
lead to stress-related illnesses due, e.g., to financial insecurity or to a loss of self-esteem. This psychological
cost would imply an additional negative component in b. Economists have argued that this empirical
literature has not convincingly solved the serious endogeneity problem underlying the relationship between
employment and health status and even have, at times, reached the opposite conclusion, i.e., that there
is a positive association between time spent in non-market activity and health status (e.g., Ruhm 2003).


                                                        21
equivalent of minus three times the average monthly wage. To be concrete, consider
that, for a worker earning $500 per week, this means the following: in order to avoid
unemployment, she would be willing to work for free for a week, pay $1, 500, and at the
end of the week draw a job offer from the same distribution she would face if she had
remained unemployed. This appears economically implausible.

4.4    Endogenous search effort
The typical calibration of the value of non-market time as a fraction of the mean wage,
ρ = 0.4 (e.g., Shimer, 2005b), is mainly based on average UI replacement rates. Therefore,
it does not take into account search costs directly. Here we explore the possibility that
large search costs improve the model’s performance.
   Consider an extension of the baseline model where search effort is endogenous. Let
cu (λu ) , with c′u > 0 and c′′u > 0, be the effort cost as a function of the offer arrival
rate λu , the endogenous variable chosen by the unemployed worker. The flow value of
employment remains as in equation (1), while the flow value of unemployment in equation
(2) now contains the extra term −cu (λu ) on the right-hand side. The same derivations
as in Section 2 lead to the reservation-wage equation
                                                             λ∗u
                                  w∗ = b − cu (λou ) +           (w̄ − w∗ ) ,             (8)
                                                            r+σ
where λou denotes the optimal individual choice, and λ∗u ≡ λou [1 − F (w∗ )] . The FOC for
optimal search effort is
                                                       wmax
                                              1
                                                   Z
                            c′u   (λou )   =                  (w − w∗ ) dF (z) .          (9)
                                             r+δ   w∗

We follow Christensen et al. (2005) and choose the isoelastic functional form cu (λu ) =
κu λ1+1/γ
    u     for the effort cost, with γ > 0 denoting the elasticity of the optimal search effort
with respect to the expected return from search. Using the relationship between marginal
and average search cost which follows from this specification, we arrive at the net return
from search relative to the average wage
                           b − cu (λou )      λ∗u
                                                                   µ            ¶
                                                  γ                        1
                                         =ρ−                           1−           .    (10)
                                w̄           r+σ1+γ                       Mm



                                                       22
       Combining (8) and (10), and rearranging, we obtain
                                                λ∗u 1
                                               r+σ 1+γ
                                                         +1
                                      Mm =      λ∗u 1
                                                              ,
                                               r+σ 1+γ
                                                         +ρ

which highlights the role of search costs. If γ = 0, then optimal effort (and the associated
search cost) is zero and the model collapses to the baseline. The larger is γ, the less
sensitive are search costs to the chosen offer arrival rate, and optimal search effort λou
rises. As a result, the search cost increases, lowering the net-of-search-cost value of non-
market time b − cu (λou ) and raising the M m ratio.
       The new parameter needed to quantitatively evaluate this extension is the elasticity
γ. For a quadratic search cost, γ = 1, the wage dispersion, M m = 1.071, remains small
relative to its data counterpart.20 To match the observed wage dispersion, M m = 1.7,
one would need γ = 34.5. From equation (10), it then follows that the search cost of
spending one month unemployed is almost equal to average annual earnings. Thus the
net-of-search-cost value of non-market time relative to average wages, which is −6.1, does
not change relative to the model without endogenous search; see Figure 4.

4.5       Ability differences
Wage inequality can, of course, naturally arise from ability differences. A very simple
illustration, extending the above search setting, goes as follows: there are two worker
types, and type 1 is more productive than type 2 by µ percent in the following sense:
F2 (w) ≡ F (w) and F1 (w) = F (w/(1 + µ)) for all w. Suppose also that the workers have
the same values for ρ, r, σ, and λu . Then
                                         λu [1 − Fi (wi∗ )]
                             wi∗ = ρw̄i +                   (w̄i − wi∗ )                   (11)
                                               r+σ
                                                            R
for each type i. It is easy to show that if w2∗ and w̄2 = w∗ wF (dw)/ [1 − F (w2∗ )] solve (11)
                                                                  2

for i = 2, then, using the assumed symmetry, w1∗ = (1 + µ)w2∗ implies F1 (w1∗ ) = F2 (w2∗ )
            R
and w̄1 = w∗ wF1 (dw)/ [1 − F (w1∗ )] = (1 + µ)w̄2 , and therefore solves (11) for i = 1.
                1

Thus, in this model the observed wage distribution for the type-1 worker is a µ-percent
  20
    Christensen et al. (2005) estimate γ = 1.19 for Danish data. We are not aware of estimates for γ
from U.S. data.



                                                23
scaling up of that of type-2 workers, and w̄1 /w1∗ = w̄2 /w2∗ , which will be a small number
given the above analysis.
       However, for the population, w̄ = αw̄1 + (1 − α)w̄2 , where α is the share in population
of type 1. So the population-wide mean-min ratio, which the econometrician observes,
will equal
                                                µ           ¶
                     αw̄1 + (1 − α)w̄2             w̄1        w̄2           w̄2
                Mm =                   =         α     +1−α       = (1 + αµ) ∗ .
                            w2∗                    w̄2        w2∗
                                                                            w2
Thus, if µ is large and α is not too small, we can obtain large population mean-min
values, even though mean-min values within groups are small. In particular, large enough
ability difference will generate any desired mean-min ratio for the overall population. The
model just described, however, is not one of frictional wage inequality, but rather one of
ability-driven wage differences.
       A related model could also be constructed assuming that the types are random; per-
haps they follow a Markov chain, depicting the evolution of human capital on (and also
off) the job. Similar settings have been used by Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) and Kam-
bourov and Manovskii (2004). One can use arguments along the lines of those above to
demonstrate that such settings also allow large overall wage dispersion, but only because
of the skill differences between types being large: within a given type, frictional wage
inequality—as we view it and define it—is still tiny.

4.6       Relation between M m and other dispersion measures
Although the mean-min ratio is not a commonly used index of dispersion, it has desirable
features. The axiomatic approach to “ideal” inequality indexes is discussed in depth
by Cowell (2000), who lists five standard axioms: anonymity, the population principle,
scale invariance, the principle of transfers, and decomposability.21 The M m ratio always
satisfies the first three axioms and weak versions of the last two. In addition, it should
  21
    Anonymity requires that the inequality measure be independent of any characteristic of individuals
other than income. According to the population principle, measured inequality should be invariant to
replications of the population. Scale invariance requires the inequality measure to be constant when each
individual’s income changes by the same proportion. According to the principle of transfers, an income
transfer from a poorer person to a richer person should imply a rise (in its strict version) or at least no
change (in its weak version) in inequality. Decomposability requires that if the same distribution, say F ,
is mixed with G and G′ , then ordering of the resulting mixture distribution is determined solely by the
ordering of G and G′ . See Cowell (2000) for details.


                                                    24
be pointed out that our statistical index of dispersion has the same properties as quantile
ratios (e.g., the 90th − 10th percentile ratio), a class of indexes that is commonly used in
the empirical inequality literature.
       Could it be that even though the model fares poorly in terms of our M m ratio statis-
tic, its implications for more common measures of dispersion, such as the coefficient of
variation (cv), is satisfactory? To answer this question, we need to make further assump-
tions about the equilibrium wage distribution. Given a parametric specification for this
distribution, we can map predicted mean-min ratios into cv’s, i.e., we can determine the
value of the cv corresponding to a certain value for the mean-min ratio.
       The Gamma distribution (see Mood et al., 1974, for a standard reference) is a conve-
nient choice because it is a flexible parametric family and has certain properties that are
useful in our application. Let wages w be distributed according to the density
                                           ¡ w−w∗ ¢γ−1     ¡ w−w∗ ¢
                                              α
                                                       exp  − α
                        g (w; w∗ , α, γ) =                          ,                                (12)
                                                    αΓ (γ)
with α, γ > 0, and with Γ (γ) denoting the Gamma function. The value for w∗ is the
location parameter and determines the lowest wage observation, α is the scale parameter
determining how spread out the density is on its domain, whereas γ is the parameter that
determines the shape of the function (e.g., exponentially declining, bell-shaped, etc.).22
    The mean and standard deviation of a random variable distributed with g (w; w∗ , α, γ)
                                                   √
are given by, respectively, m̄ = w∗ + αγ and sd = α γ. Recalling that M m = m̄/w∗ , it is
easy to obtain a relation between the coefficient of variation cv and the mean-min ratio,
and this relation only depends on the shape parameter γ:
                                           ·       ¸
                                        1 Mm − 1
                                 cv = √              .                                               (13)
                                         γ   Mm
       The empirical analysis of section (3) suggest that cv = 0.30 and M m = 1.7 are
reasonably conservative estimates for the coefficient of variation and the mean-min ratio
of the wage distribution within labor markets.23 From equation (13), this implies γ = 1.88.
       A search model generating a mean-min ratio of 1.036, under the Gamma wage dis-
tribution assumption, would generate a coefficient of variation for hourly wages of 0.025,
  22
     The Gamma family is very flexible: it includes the Weibull (and, hence, the exponential) distribution
for γ = 1 and, as γ → ∞, the lognormal distribution.
  23
     This value for cv is an average between the PSID estimate (0.25) and the estimate on Census sample
of full-time, full-year workers (0.35).


                                                   25
i.e., 1/12th of the coefficient of variation in the wage data. We conclude that the failure
of the model generalizes to more common measures of dispersion.

4.7       Non-pecuniary job attributes
In many jobs, wages are only one component of total compensation. In a search model
where a job offer is a bundle of a monetary component and a non-pecuniary component,
short unemployment duration can coexist with large wage dispersion, as long as non-
pecuniary job attributes are negatively correlated with wages so that the dispersion of
total job values is indeed small.
       This hypothesis, which combines the theory of compensating differentials with search
theory, does not show too much promise. First, it is well known that certain key non-
monetary benefits such as health insurance tend to be positively correlated with the
wage, e.g., through firm size.24 Second, illness or injury risks are very occupation-specific
and our measures of frictional wage dispersion apply within-occupation indexes. Third,
differences in work shifts and part-time penalties are quantitatively small. Kostiuk (1990)
shows that genuine compensating differentials between day and night shifts can explain at
most 9% of wage gaps. Manning and Petrongolo (2005) calculate that part time penalties
for observationally similar workers are around 3%.

4.8       Taking stock
How can we resolve this striking discrepancy between the size of measured residual wage
dispersion and the model-implied frictional wage dispersion? We discuss three possible
reactions to our finding.
       One reaction is that the actual wage data hide large differentials due to unobservable
skills that we cannot fully control for, given data constraints. This is possible, though
one has to bear in mind that despite controlling for unobserved heterogeneity that is fixed
over time, measured residual inequality remains large. Thus, for worker heterogeneity
to explain large M m ratios, one would need to invoke time-varying, unobserved skills,
or preferences, which influence remuneration in the labor market. Such heterogeneity
  24
    For example, the mean wage in jobs offering health insurance coverage is 15%-20% higher than in
those not offering it; see Dey and Flinn (2006).



                                                26
cannot be ruled out a priori; when better data sources become available, they may shed
more light on its quantitative importance. If it is indeed found that our measurement of
residual wage dispersion is accurate, it would conversely also imply that the bulk of the
observed differences in individual wage outcomes could be accounted for by a model with
time-varying human capital priced within a frictionless labor market.25
       A different reaction is to argue that there is nothing wrong with the baseline model
but that our estimates of ρ, perhaps due to psychological and other hard-to-measure costs
of unemployment, are not accurate: frictional wage dispersion is large, and with a large
enough disutility of being unemployed, the model can account for it. Such a conclusion,
of course, would also have far-fetching implications for the rest of macroeconomics. First,
we would have to “add unemployment as an argument of utility functions”, thus radically
altering available analyses of aggregate labor supply. Second, a large value of ρ would
damage the matching model as a model of unemployment fluctuations. In particular, Hall
(2005), Shimer (2005b), and Hagedorn and Manovskii (2006) point to the inability of the
matching model to generate enough time-series fluctuations in aggregate unemployment
and vacancies. They show that, even with the incorporation of real-wage rigidity, the
model requires a high ρ in order to produce realistic movements in vacancy and unem-
ployment rates; without real-wage rigidity, the value needs to be very close to one. Thus,
in addition to the arguments we put forth above, available analyses of aggregate data also
suggest that large negative values of ρ are implausible.
       A third reaction is to conclude that the data reveal a sizeable amount of frictional
wage dispersion, and that the baseline model, plausibly calibrated, cannot account for
it. Then, alternative specifications of search theory would need to be explored. We do
so here by looking at the quantitative implications of three elements that are missing in
the baseline search model above: risk aversion, stochastic wages during the employment
relationship, and on-the-job search. In particular, the analysis of on-the-job-search allows
us to inspect some of the most recent, and promising, contributions to the literature.
  25
     Incidentally, a large class of quantitative macroeconomic models of the Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari style
implicitly takes this view, presuming idiosyncratic risks which are modeled as a stochastic process for
efficiency units of labor, priced in a frictionless labor market. An example of this approach in the search
literature is Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998).




                                                    27
5     Risk aversion
Risk-averse workers particularly dislike states with low consumption, like unemployment.
Compared to risk-neutral workers, ceteris paribus, they lower their reservation wage in
order to exit unemployment rapidly, thus allowing M m to increase.
    Let u (c) be the utility of consumption, with u′ > 0, and u′′ < 0. To make progress
analytically, we assume that workers have no access to storage, i.e., c = w when employed,
and c = b when unemployed. It is clear that this model will give an upper bound for the
role of risk aversion: with any access to storage, self-insurance or borrowing, agents can
better smooth consumption, thus becoming effectively less risk-averse.
    To obtain the reservation-wage equation with risk aversion, observe that in the Bell-
man equations for the value of employment and unemployment, the monetary flow val-
ues of work and leisure are simply replaced by their corresponding utility values. The
reservation-wage equation (3) then becomes
                                                 λ∗u
                         u (w∗ ) = u (ρw̄) +         [Ew∗ [u (w)] − u (w∗ )] ,          (14)
                                                r+σ
with Ew∗ [u (w)] = E [u (w) |w ≥ w∗ ]. A second-order Taylor expansion of u (w) around
the conditional mean w̄ yields
                                                      1
                   u (w) ≃ u (w̄) + u′ (w̄) (w − w̄) + u′′ (w̄) (w − w̄)2 .
                                                      2
Take the conditional expectation of both sides of the above equation and arrive at
                                                   1
                             Ew∗ [u (w)] ≃ u (w̄) + u′′ (w̄) var (w) .                  (15)
                                                   2
Let u (w) belong to the CRRA family, with θ representing the coefficient of relative risk
aversion. Then, using (15) in (14) , and rearranging, we obtain
                                  "    λ∗u
                                                                             # 1
                                              1 + 12 (θ − 1) θcv 2 (w) + ρ1−θ θ−1
                                             ¡                        ¢
                      w̄              r+σ
                 Mm ≡ ∗ ≃                                 λ∗u
                                                                                    .   (16)
                     w                                          +1
                                                         r+σ

It is immediate to see that, for θ = 0, the risk-neutrality case, the expression above equals
that in equation (4) .
    To assess the quantitative role of risk aversion, we start with the parameterization of
the risk-neutral case, and based on the evidence provided in section 3, we set cv (w) = 0.30.

                                                    28
Figure 5 plots the pairs of (ρ, θ) consistent with M m = 1.70. For θ = 8.3, the model can
match the data.26
       Recall, however, the upper-bound nature of our experiment: in fact, plausibly cali-
brated models of risk-averse individuals who have access to a risk-free bond for saving and
borrowing are much closer to full insurance than to autarky (see, e.g., Aiyagari, 1994).
For example, it is well known that as r → 0, the bond economy converges to complete
markets (Levine and Zame, 2002). In the Technical Appendix we study a search environ-
ment where preferences display constant absolute risk aversion and workers can borrow
and save through a riskless asset. We show that relative risk aversion around 100 is needed
in order to match the observed mean-min ratio with positive replacement rates.


6        Wage shocks during employment
We now extend the basic search model by allowing wages to fluctuate stochastically along
the employment spell.27 Unemployed workers draw wage offers from the distribution F (w)
at rate λu , but now these wage offers are not permanent. At rate δ, the wage changes,
and the worker draws again from F (w). Draws are i.i.d. over time. Separations are now
endogenous and will occur at rate σ ∗ ≡ δF (w∗ ) , where w∗ is the reservation wage.
       The reason why this generalization can potentially generate a larger M m ratio is that
the particular value drawn from F (w) by an unemployed worker is not a good predictor
of the continuation value of employment, if the wage is very volatile. Unemployed workers
will therefore be more willing to accept initially low wage offers, which reduces w∗ and
increases dispersion.
       The Bellman equations for employment and unemployment are, respectively,
                             Z wmax
           rW (w) = w + δ            [W (z) − W (w)] dF (z) − δF (w∗ ) [W (w) − U ]
                               w ∗
                              Z wmax
               rU = b + λu            [W (z) − U ] dF (z) .
                                   w∗
  26
     It is easy to derive third- and fourth-order approximations of the reservation-wage equation involving
the coefficients of skewness and kurtosis. At the values for these coefficients estimated in the data, our
conclusions are extremely robust. For example, with the third- and fourth-order approximation one
needs, respectively, θ = 8.4 and θ = 7.8 to replicate the observed M m ratio.
  27
     The Technical Appendix contains the details of all the derivations in this and the next sections.



                                                    29
In comparison with equation (1) , the value of employment is modified in two ways. First,
the endogenous separation rate is now δF (w∗ ) . Second, there is a surplus value from
accepting a job at wage w which is given by the second term on the right-hand side.
Exploiting the definition of reservation wage W (w∗ ) = U , integrating by parts, and using
W ′ (w) = 1/ (r + δ), we arrive at
                                                         wmax
                                       λu − δ
                                                     Z
                                   ∗
                                 w =b+                          [1 − F (z)] dz.
                                       r+δ             w∗

Now, using the definition of the conditional mean wage w̄, we obtain
                                           (λu − δ) [1 − F (w∗ )]
                               w∗ = b +                           (w̄ − w∗ ) .
                                                  r+δ
Therefore, imposing b = ρw̄, and rearranging, we can write the M m ratio in this model
as
                                                         λ∗u −δ+σ ∗
                                            w̄               r+δ
                                                                      +1
                                       Mm = ∗ =          λ∗u −δ+σ ∗
                                                                           .                          (17)
                                           w                          +ρ
                                                             r+δ

As δ → 0, the M m ratio converges to equation (4) with σ ∗ = 0, since without any shock
during employment every job lasts forever. As δ → λu , unemployed workers accept every
offer above b since being on the job has an option value equal to being unemployed.
      The parameter δ maps into the degree of persistence of the wage process during em-
ployment. In particular, in a discrete time model where δ ∈ (0, 1) the autocorrelation
coefficient of the wage process is 1 − δ.28 Individual panel data suggest that residual
wages are very persistent, indeed near a random walk, so plausible values of δ are close
to zero.
      We repeat the exercise in Section 4 on the (r, ρ) pair. Given values for (λ∗u , σ ∗ , r) one
can search for the values of (δ, ρ) that generate M m ratios of the observed magnitude.
Figure 6 reports the results. Once again, the model is very far from the data for plausible
values of ρ and of the degree of wage persistence of wage shocks. For example, for δ = 0.1
(corresponding to an annual autocorrelation coefficient of 0.9) the model requires ρ = −13.
Only for virtually i.i.d. wage shocks (δ ≈ 1) would the model succeed.
      The setup of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) is similar to that described here, with
one difference: upon employment, all workers start with the highest wage, wmax , and
 28
      It is easily seen that a discrete time version of this model leads exactly to equation (17) .


                                                      30
thus they only sample from F (w) while employed. This model, however, does not offer
higher mean-min ratios: in the Technical Appendix we show that the resulting M m ratio
is strictly bounded above by that in equation (17).


7     On-the-job search
Allowing on-the-job search goes, qualitatively, in the right direction for reasons similar
to those applying in the model with stochastic wages. If the arrival rate of offers on
the job is high, workers are willing to leave unemployment quickly since they do not
entirely forego the option value of search. This property breaks the link between duration
of unemployment and wage dispersion that dooms the baseline model. However, for a
proper test, we now need to explore the implied labor-market flows, which unlike before
include employment-to-employment transitions.
    We generalize the model of Section 2 and turn it into the canonical job ladder model
outlined by Burdett (1978). A worker employed with wage ŵ encounters new job oppor-
tunities w at rate λe . These opportunities are drawn from the wage offer distribution
F (w) and they are accepted if w > ŵ.
    A large class of equilibrium wage posting models, starting from the seminal work by
Burdett and Mortensen (1998), derives the optimal wage policy of the firms and the
implied equilibrium wage offer distribution as a function of structural parameters. It is
not necessary, at any point in our derivations, to specify what F (w) looks like. Our
expression for M m will hold in any equilibrium wage posting model that satisfies the
following two assumptions. First, employed workers accept any wage offer above their
current wage; second, every worker (employed or unemployed) faces the same wage offer
distribution. Moreover, without loss of generality, to simplify the algebra, we posit that
no firm would offer a wage below the reservation wage w∗ ; thus, F (w∗ ) = 0.
    The flow values of employment and unemployment are:
                              Z wmax
           rW (w) = w + λe            [W (z) − W (w)] dF (z) − σ [W (w) − U ]
                                w
                              Z wmax
               rU = b + λu           [W (z) − U ] dF (z) ,
                                w∗




                                           31
and the reservation-wage equation becomes
                                      Z wmax
                    ∗                                         1 − F (z)
                   w = b + (λu − λe )                                          dz.                   (18)
                                                w∗      r + σ + λe [1 − F (z)]
It is easy to see that, in steady state, the cross-sectional wage distribution among employed
workers is
                                                     σF (w)
                                      G (w) =                      .                                 (19)
                                                σ + λe [1 − F (w)]
Using this relation between G (w) and F (w) in the reservation-wage equation (18), and
exploiting the fact that the average wage is
                                       Z wmax
                                    ∗
                              w̄ = w +        [1 − G(z)] dz,                                         (20)
                                                 w∗

we arrive at the new expression for the M m ratio,
                                                       λu −λe
                                                      r+σ+λe
                                                                +1
                                          Mm ≈         λu −λe
                                                                     ,                               (21)
                                                      r+σ+λe
                                                                +ρ

in the model with on-the-job search.29
       Note that, if the search technology is the same in both employment states and λe =
λu , the reservation wage will be equal to b, since searching when unemployed gives no
advantage in terms of arrival rate of new job offers. Indeed, for λe > λu , unemployed
workers optimally accept jobs below the flow value of non-market time b in order to
access the better search technology available during employment.
       The crucial new parameter of this model is the arrival rate of offers on the job λe . To
pin down λe , note that average job tenure in the model is given by
                     Z wmax                                    µ      ¶
                                  dG (w)          σ + λe /2       1 1
                τ=                             =             ∈     ,    .                            (22)
                      w∗    σ + λe [1 − F (w)]   σ (σ + λe )     2σ σ
Since we set the monthly separation rate σ to 0.02, the model can only generate average
tenures between 25 and 50 months. Based on the CPS Tenure Supplement, the BLS
  29
       The “approximately equal” sign originates from one step of the derivation where we have set
                                        r+σ                      σ
                                                       ≈                    ,
                                r + σ + λw [1 − F (z)]   σ + λw [1 − F (z)]

a valid approximation since, for plausible calibrations, r is negligible compared to σ.




                                                      32
(2006, Table 1) reports that median job tenure (with current employer) for workers 16
years old and over, from 1983-2004, was 3.64 years, or 43.7 months.30
       An alternative way to restrict the choice of λe is to compute the average separation
rate χ implied by the model, which is given by
                                                    σ (λe + σ) log σ+λ
                          Z                                       ¡ e¢
                                                                    σ
               χ = σ + λe      [1 − F (w)] dG (w) =                    ,                              (23)
                           w ∗                               λ e

where the first equality states that the separation rate equals the EU flow rate (σ) plus
the EE flow rate (the integral). Recent evidence from CPS data post 1994 (Fallick and
Fleischman, 2004; Nagypal, 2005) puts the data counterpart of χ to be just below 4%
per month.31 It should be noted here that Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey
(JOLTS) data for the period 2000-2007 indicate that the total separation rate, which
includes workers who exit the labor force, is less than 4%. Ongoing research is addressing
the sources of downward bias in the JOLTS estimate.
       In what follows, we ask whether the on-the-job search model can generate the observed
M m ratio while, at the same time, being consistent with tenure lengths higher than 43.7
months or, alternatively, a monthly average separation rate of 4%. Since the M m ratio is
increasing in λe , it should be clear that the model will have a good chance to generate a
large M m ratio for low job tenures/high separation rates (which imply high values of λe ).
       Figure 7 illustrates that, once λe is chosen so that the model can generate transitions
as in the U.S. data, the model will produce high M m ratios only for negative values of
ρ. Although the model is still far from a success, it is clear that the introduction of
on-the-job search represents a significant quantitative improvement. Compare Figure 4
with Figure 7. In the former graph, one needs ρ = −5 to reproduce M m = 1.70, whereas
in the latter setting ρ = −0.5 allows the model to roughly match both the separation and
the wage dispersion facts.32 However, the independent evidence on average job tenure
seems to put more strain on the model: wage dispersion and average tenure are jointly
replicated only for values of ρ around −4.
  30
     For two reasons, this number is a lower bound as the empirical counterpart of τ . First, the implied
average job tenure would be longer, since tenure distributions are notoriously skewed to the right. Second,
the BLS data refer to the truncated tenure distribution. A higher estimate for average tenure strengthens
our argument.
  31
     There is no inconsistency between average tenure of 43.7 months and an average separation rate of
4%, since the employment hazard is not constant.
  32
     For ρ = 0.4, the model calibrated to match the aggregate separation rate gives rise to M m = 1.10.


                                                    33
      This result contains an important lesson. One may be tempted to think that, given
the relationship between F (w) and G (w) in equation (19), it suffices to assume enough
dispersion in firms’ productivities, and hence in the wage offer distribution F (w), to
generate large wage differentials among employed workers. Equation (18), instead, tells
us that a high variation in F (w) is consistent with a low reservation wage, and thus a
high M m ratio, only for negative values of b, or high values of r.
      Arguably, models with on-the-job search today represent the most vibrant research
area within search theory. Next, we analyze three of the most recent theoretical devel-
opments of this class of models and evaluate their potential to generate frictional wage
dispersion.

7.1       Reallocation shocks
Micro data indicate that a non-negligible fraction of job-to-job movers receive a wage
cut. In line with this observation, some recent contributions (e.g., Jolivet et al., 2006)
advocate that on-the-job search models, to be successful, must introduce “reallocation
shocks”, i.e., a situation where employed workers receive a job offer with an associated
wage drawn from F (w) that cannot be rejected. In other words, under the scenario of
a reallocation shock the outside option of a worker is not keeping the current job (and
the current wage), but becoming unemployed which is always dominated by accepting
any new job offered. This category of employment to employment (EE) transitions may
include, for example, search activity during a notice period, or a geographical move for
non-pecuniary motives.
      If we let φ be the arrival rate of such an event, it is easy to see that the mean-min
ratio in the model becomes
                                                   λu −λe −φ
                                                  r+σ+λe +φ
                                                               +1
                                         Mm ≈      λu −λe −φ
                                                                    ,                     (24)
                                                  r+σ+λe +φ
                                                               +ρ
a magnitude that is increasing in φ.33 Ceteris paribus, the reallocation shock shortens
the life of a job and makes unemployed workers less picky, and thus they reduce their
reservation wage, which helps raising frictional wage dispersion. Moreover, it is straight-
forward to derive that the average separation rate in this model is exactly as in (23) with
σ replaced by σ + φ.
 33
      The approximately equal sign holds here for the same reason as in equation (21) .


                                                    34
       Even though this extension goes in the right direction, quantitatively it falls short of
succeeding because, as in the standard on-the-job search model, the model with forced
job-to-job mobility cannot reconcile the observed wage dispersion with labor turnover
data. To replicate M m = 1.70 with positive values of ρ, the separation rate would have
to be implausibly high.

       A variant of the reallocation shock story which shows more promise is suggested by
Nagypal (2006). In her model, employed workers move within the wage distribution in
two ways: through job-to-job movements following on-the-job search with contact rate
λe , and through shocks occurring at rate φ that change the wage during an employment
relationship without inducing a separation: at rate φ, workers make another wage draw
from F (w) that is uncorrelated to their current wage and that has to be accepted, or else
separation takes place. Effectively, this model is a combination of the canonical on-the-job
search model and the model with stochastic wages we presented in Section 6.
       The mean-min ratio in this model has exactly the same form as in (24) , but now
raising φ does translate into a wage change without increasing the separation rate. To
gauge the quantitative implications of this version of the on-the-job search model, we
perform the following exercise: keeping the values for (σ, ρ) unchanged relative to our
previous analysis, we set the pair (λe , φ) to match the aggregate separation rate (4%) and
M m = 1.70. Then, we calculate the average arrival rate ζ of a wage cut among employed
workers in the model. It is given by the formula
                                                                        ³        ´
                                                                           σ+φ+λe
            Z
                                      σ+φ      (σ + φ) (λe + σ +  φ) log    σ+φ
     ζ = φ F (w) dG (w) = φ 1 +             −                  2
                                                                                   .
                                        λe                     λe

The model implies that 9.5% of the workforce is subject to a wage cut every month, i.e.,
70% of the stock of employees experience at least one salary cut from month to month,
in any given year.34 This extreme implication is similar to our finding of Section 6, where
we concluded that the model with wage shocks (but without on-the-job search) generates
individual wage profiles that are too volatile.
  34
     The calibration yields a value for the Poisson arrival rate ζ of 10% which implies a monthly probability
of receiving a wage cut of 1 − exp(−ζ)=9.5%.




                                                     35
7.2        On-the-job search with endogenous search effort
Recently, Christensen et al. (2005, CLMNW hereafter) have extended Burdett’s on-the-
job search model allowing for the optimal choice of the wage offer arrival rates, both off
and on the job.35
                           1+1/γ
       Let ci (λi ) = κi λi        be the search effort cost, as a function of the chosen arrival
rate, in employment state i ∈ {u, e} . During unemployment, the optimal effort choice
is a scalar λou . During employment, the search cost is independent of current earnings
w, whereas the return to search is declining in these earnings. Thus, the optimal effort
choice, λoe (w), is decreasing in w. Therefore the contact rate at the reservation wage is
higher than the average contact rate in the economy, and the latter, in turn, is higher than
λoe (wmax ) where wmax is the upper bound of the earnings distribution. Indeed, optimality
requires λoe (wmax ) = 0.
       In the Technical Appendix we use these inequalities to derive bounds on the M m ratio
implied by the model.36 In particular, if we let λu ≡ λou and λw∗ ≡ λoe (w∗ ) for notational
simplicity, we have
                                λu −λw∗                        λu −λw∗
                              (1+γ)(r+σ)
                                           +1              (1+γ)(r+σ+λw∗ )
                                                                             +1
                                λu −λw∗
                                                ≤ Mm ≤         λu −λw∗
                                                                                  .         (25)
                              (1+γ)(r+σ)
                                           +ρ              (1+γ)(r+σ+λw∗ )
                                                                             +ρ

       CLMNW estimate this model for Danish data under the assumption that the search
cost functions are the same in the two employment states. In this case λu = λw∗ , and
M m = 1/ρ. For ρ = 0.4 this yields substantial wage dispersion: M m = 2.5. The assump-
tion of identical search cost functions, however, appears to be inconsistent with other
aspects of the Danish labor market. In particular, CLMNW obtain a tight estimate for
the job finding rate of workers with the reservation wage, λw∗ = 0.07, that is substantially
lower than the job finding rate for the unemployed, λu = 0.11, reported by Rosholm and
Svarer (1999).
       Suppose that in the U.S. labor market λw∗ is also roughly 64% of λu . Then, given
λu = 0.39, a plausible estimate for the U.S. would set λw∗ at 0.25. Using this value for
λw∗ in (25), together with the values for the other parameters already discussed in the
  35
       In Section 4.4 we studied the version of this model without on-the-job search.
  36
       We thank Dale Mortensen for providing us with these derivations.



                                                     36
paper, we obtain a lower bound of 1.20 and an upper bound of 1.95 for M m. Therefore,
it appears that the model can match the data.
   Given that CLMNW estimate their search cost function, i.e., select it in order to
match the wage data, one might want to independently assess the implied magnitude of
the costs actually incurred by searching workers; recall from Section 4.4 that search costs,
which make unemployment unattractive relative to employment, can be thought of as a
low ρ. The bounds on the M m ratio, together with the first-order condition for optimal
search effort during unemployment, allow us to construct bounds for the search cost as a
fraction of the average wage. In the Technical Appendix, we show that
                              µ        ¶                        µ        ¶
                λu        γ         1       cu (λu )    λu  γ          1
                                1−       ≤           ≤            1−       .           (26)
           r + σ + λw ∗ 1 + γ      Mm          w̄      r+σ1+γ         Mm
Assuming that the model does match an M m ratio of 1.7, the inequalities in (26) yield
a lower bound of 0.32 and an upper bound of 3.62 for the normalized search cost when
unemployed. With ρ = 0.4, the net-of-search-cost value of non-market time necessary to
produce the observed frictional dispersion is then close to zero or, most likely, negative.
This calculation echoes one of the central observations of our paper: to generate sizeable
wage dispersion the search model needs a very large disutility of non-market time during
unemployment.

7.3    Counteroffers and wage-tenure contracts
We end this section by analyzing two very recent developments in the search literature.
By focusing on the M m ratio, we show that both models hold much promise for the task
of generating sizeable frictional wage dispersion.
   In Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), firms are allowed to make counteroffers when one
of their employees is contacted by an outside firm. The two employers then engage in a
Bertrand bidding game which may result either in a separation or in a salary increase on
the current job, depending on the productivity gap between the two competing firms. It is
immediate that, through this mechanism, the model has a much weaker link between wage
dispersion and job-to-job flows, which is the central problem of the standard on-the-job
search environment.
   Consider a simple version of the counteroffer model where all firms have equal pro-
ductivity p. The wage determination mechanism implies that firms extract all the surplus

                                            37
from the unemployed worker, but an employed worker who is contacted by an outside
firm extracts all the surplus from the current employer and receives wage w = p. It is easy
to see that the reservation-wage equation (derived in the Technical Appendix) is
                                                   λe
                                      w∗ = b −        (p − b) ,                                     (27)
                                                  r+σ
which implies that w∗ < b. The worker expects to earn a higher wage after she has
been hired, and thus she is willing to accept a low entry-wage. As a result, M m > 1/ρ.
Note that two features are key for generating wage dispersion here. First, the bargaining
position of the worker is extremely volatile: when she faces one firm, her surplus is zero,
and when she faces two firms she captures all of the surplus. Second, the firm is able to
commit to pay w = p forever, following the first contact, even after the outside firm is
gone.37
       Although the counteroffer model is undoubtedly a good representation for certain high-
skill occupations (e.g., academic jobs), it does not appear to be a widespread mechanism
for wage setting in the labor market at large.38 An additional limit of this model is that,
for high values of λe , the entry wage w∗ may be negative. Entry fees into jobs are not
commonly observed.
       Stevens (1999) generalizes the wage-posting model of Burdett and Mortensen (1998) in
order to allow employers to offer long-term wage-tenure contracts on a take-it-or-leave-it
basis.39 Consider the same simple economy with homogenous firms, and restrict attention
to a family of contracts (w∗ , w1 , λ) such that the entrant worker is paid w∗ (optimally
determined by the firm in equilibrium) and then, at rate λ, i.e., after an expected tenure
length of 1/λ, her wage jumps up to w1 . Clearly, an optimal contract that minimizes
costly turnover for the firm sets w1 = p.
       The long-term wage tenure contract is observationally equivalent to the counteroffer
model if λ = λe . This equivalence means that in search environments with wage-tenure
  37
     Kiyotaki and Lagos (2006) develop an equilibrium model of two-sided, on-the-job search with no
commitment (i.e., with continuous renegotiation) where the worker, even when facing only one employer,
always has the chance of making a take-it-or-leave-it offer with a fixed probability.
  38
     On reason is that in many labor markets asymmetric information may prevent the firm from being
able to verify the outside offer. See Mortensen (2005) for a discussion of why counteroffers are uncommon
in actual labor markets.
  39
     Burdett and Coles (2001) extend it further to allow for risk-averse workers who are unable to save
and borrow.


                                                   38
contracts, frictional wage dispersion can be large, even allowing M m > 1/ρ. An advantage
of this class of models is that it avoids the problem of a negative entry wage. Contracts
can be restricted so that w∗ = ω ∈ (0, b) and equation (27) determines the expected
tenure 1/λ at which the worker sees his salary increasing to p. A possible drawback of
this class of models is the rather heavy reliance on the assumption that firms can commit
to long-term contracts; in practice, it appears that renegotiation is frequent.


8     Structural estimation of search models
Since the pioneering effort of Flinn and Heckman (1983), a rather vast literature on
structural estimation of search models has developed (see Eckstein and van den Berg,
2005, for a recent survey). We view these contributions as having generated many valuable
insights. From our perspective here, it is important to comment on how the literature has
dealt with the baseline model’s apparent inability to generate frictional wage dispersion.
We summarize our reading of the literature as follows: it has either (1) simply “accepted”
implausible parameter estimates for the value of non-market time and the interest rate,
or (2) introduced unobserved skill heterogeneity and measurement error that soak up the
large wage residuals in the data. We now proceed to discussing a number of selected
papers in more detail.
    In one of the first attempts at a full structural estimation, Eckstein and Wolpin (1990)
estimate the Albrecht and Axell (1984) search model with worker heterogeneity in the
value of non-market productivity and conclude that their model cannot generate any sig-
nificant wage dispersion, and that almost all of the observed wage dispersion is explained
through measurement error. Eckstein and Wolpin (1995) reach a far better match between
model and data, by introducing a five-point distribution of unobserved worker heterogene-
ity within each race/education group (8 groups in total). In spite of such heterogeneity,
however, for many of the groups the estimates of b remain extremely small or negative
(see their Table 7, page 284). In this work, thus, wage dispersion is for the most part
accounted for by heterogeneity in observable and unobservable characteristics. In our
view, this procedure, which is quite frequent in this literature, can perhaps be categorized
more as part of the human-capital theory of wages: it delivers wage inequality, but this



                                             39
inequality is not frictional in nature.40
       Negative estimates of the net value of non market time are quite common. The survey
paper by Bunzel et al. (2001) estimates several models with on-the-job search on Danish
data. When firms are assumed to be homogeneous, the point estimate for ρ is −2. With
heterogeneity in firms’ productivity it increases to just about 0. Only the model with
measurement error produces a large and positive estimate of ρ.41 Flinn (2006) estimates
a Pissarides-style matching model of the labor market, without on-the-job search, to
evaluate the impact of the minimum wage on employment and welfare. In his model, as
is typical in estimation exercises, the pair (ρ, r) is not separately identified. Setting r to
5% annually in his model implies roughly ρ = −4.42
       Another example of extreme parameter estimates that can be found in Postel-Vinay
and Robin (2002). Under risk neutrality, their estimates of the discount rate r always
exceed 30% per year in every occupational group, reaching 55% for unskilled workers,
where they find no role for unobserved heterogeneity. Risk aversion (in the form of log
utility, without storage) does not help: the estimates of r decline by just 3 percentage
points on average. Recall, from Figure 4, that a negative value for ρ and a high value for
r are two sides of the same coin.
       Whenever authors have restricted (r, ρ) to plausible values ex-ante, not surprisingly
given the results in the present paper, they end up finding that frictions play a minor
role. For example, Van den Berg and Ridder (1998) estimate the Burdett-Mortensen
model on Dutch data allowing for measurement error and observed worker heterogeneity
(58 groups defined by education, age and occupation). They set r to zero and b to equal
the average unemployment benefit for each group, i.e., roughly 60% of the average wage.
They conclude that observed heterogeneity and measurement error account for over 80%
of the empirical wage variation. Moscarini (2003) develops an equilibrium search model
where workers learn about their match values, based on Jovanovic (1979). When the
  40
     A theoretical argument has also been raised against this kind of model of frictional wage dispersion.
Gaumont et al. (2006) demonstrate that wage dispersion in an Albrecht and Axell (1984) model with
worker heterogeneity in the value of leisure is fragile. As soon as an arbitrarily small search cost is
introduced, the equilibrium unravels and we are back to the “Diamond paradox”, i.e., to an equilibrium
with a unique wage.
  41
     These values for ρ are obtained from Bunzel et al. (2001) by dividing the estimates of b for the entire
sample, in Tables II and V, by the average wage from Table I.
  42
     Calculations are available upon request.


                                                    40
model is calibrated, r is set to 5% annually and ρ to 0.6. His model generates a M m ratio
of just 1.16 (Moscarini, 2005, Table 2).
   One may note that a number of papers in the literature do claim that the (on-the-
job search) model is successful in simultaneously matching the wage distribution and
labor market transition data (see, e.g., Bontemps et al., 2000, and Jolivet et al., 2005).
These claims of success, clearly, need to be properly reinterpreted in light of our findings.
The typical strategy in these papers is, first, to estimate the wage distribution G(w)
non-parametrically without using the search model. Next, the model is used to predict
the wage-offer distribution F (w) through a steady-state relationship like (19), where the
structural parameters of the relationship (σ, λu , λe ) are estimated by matching transition
data. Success is then expressed as a good fit (in some specific metric). However, the
exercise cannot be considered entirely a success because it neglects the implications of the
joint estimates of F (w) and of the transition parameters for the relative value of leisure
ρ (or, similarly, for the interest rate r). The key additional “test” that we are advocating
would thus entail using the estimated F (w) in the reservation-wage equation (18) and,
given an estimate of w∗ (for example, the bottom-percentile wage observed), backing out
the implied value for ρ. In light of our results, we maintain that ρ would be negative or
close to zero.
   In conclusion, while we definitely recognize substantial progress in this empirical liter-
ature, the success is really only partial: the literature has not yet fully managed to match
the data with plausible parameter values. In short, important parameters such as b and
r (the value of leisure and the discount rate, respectively), are considered free parame-
ters, and values that are far from what we view as plausible are routinely “accepted” in
the estimation. Alternatively, unobserved heterogeneity or measurement error must be
introduced, also with amounts that are free parameters, in order to match the data. Our
contribution in this context is to provide a new tool of analysis, the mean-min ratio, that
makes quantitative analysis more transparent: one can easily calibrate the model and
thereby shed light on and explain a range of seemingly puzzling findings in the literature
on structural estimation of search models.




                                             41
9     Conclusions
Search theory maintains that similar workers looking for jobs in the same labor market
may end up earning different wages according to their luck in the matching process.
This paper has proposed a simple, but widely applicable, strategy for evaluating the
quantitative ability of search models to generate frictional wage dispersion. The strategy
is based on a particular measure of wage differentials, the mean-min ratio, that arises very
naturally, in closed form, from the reservation-wage equation, the cornerstone of a vast
class of search models.
    We have demonstrated that, when plausibly calibrated, the textbook search and
matching model (risk neutrality, no on the job search) implies that frictions play vir-
tually no role in the labor market: the mean-min ratio is less than 4%.
    The data we have analyzed tell a striking story: residual wage dispersion among
observationally similar workers in narrowly defined labor markets (by occupation and
geographical area) is twenty times larger than what predicted by the model. This leaves
two possible, but radically different, conclusions on the table.
    First, residual wage inequality in the data is attributable to unobserved (and time-
varying) skills that are remunerated in a near frictionless labor market; put differently,
the role of frictions is actually small in the data as well. This conclusion is viewed as
plausible by many, but it does call for more careful testing. In particular, one must
look for more individual-specific information (like significant events altering the value of
leisure, e.g., need for child or health care in individuals’ lives or the value of skills, e.g.,
occupational human capital becoming obsolete) in order to reduce the current residual
dispersion. One may also be able to look more deeply at implications for on-the-job
wage variability, which should be quite large if indeed individual-specific and time-varying
skill heterogeneity accounts for the wage dispersion. Alternatively, the second possible
conclusion which puts more faith in the measures of frictional wage dispersion reported
here, is that our basic search theory needs further development. Distinguishing between
these two conclusions should be a central task in macroeconomics and labor economics:
the relative roles of skills and luck in the labor market lie at the heart of policy design.
    The mean-min ratio also proved very useful in assessing a set of extensions to the basic
search setting. Risk aversion can be successful only if one believes that self insurance is

                                              42
unimportant, but a decade of quantitative investigations of Bewley-type models speaks
against this possibility. Volatility in wages during employment can be successful only
if one believes that wages are as volatile during an employment spell as in the cross-
section. The simplest version of the on-the-job-search model also fails to produce large
wage dispersion while, at the same time, being consistent with the observed labor market
transition data. There is much current work on developing theories of unemployment and
wage setting, however. Among them, the very recent theory of “rest unemployment” in
Alvarez and Shimer (2007) also seems to generate too little wage dispersion, consistently
with our findings for the benchmark theory of worker search. However, the most recent
developments of on-the-job-search models, including those with endogenous search effort,
matching of outside offers, or firm posting of wage-tenure contracts, seem to have more
potential in terms of generating wage dispersion.43
       An implicit but interesting implication of the present work is closely connected to
the recent debate, fueled by Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005b), on the inability of the
matching model to generate enough time-series fluctuations in aggregate unemployment
and vacancies. There, it is pointed out that the matching model, at least if one is to
avoid the incorporation of significant real-wage rigidity, requires a very high benefit of
non-market time (denoted ρ above, expressing this benefit as a fraction of the average
wage) in order to produce sharp movements in vacancy and unemployment rates. But,
as we showed here, the higher is the value of ρ, the more difficult it is to explain wages
cross-sectionally. More specifically, the time-series facts necessitate a value of ρ close to
one to explain the data, and our cross-sectional facts demand a value significantly below
zero. We believe that it is important in future work to keep both “puzzles” in mind while
developing and using search-matching theories of the labor market.




  43
    Using Austrian data on unemployment durations and worker asset holdings, Card, Chetty, and
Weber (2007) recently argue that models with endogenous search intensity improve significantly on pure
reservation-wage models of unemployment. Interestingly, they also find the mean-min wage ratio to be a
key statistic in their analysis.


                                                 43
10        Appendix
A: the 5% ipums sample of the 1990 census
    The 1990 Census of the U.S. population uses a single long-form questionnaire for sample
questions completed by one half of persons in locations with a population under 2,500, one sixth
of persons in other tracts and block numbering areas with fewer than 2,000 housing units, and
one eighth of persons in all other areas. Overall, about one sixth of all housing units complete a
long form. Within each state, the Bureau divides the sample questionnaires into an appropriate
number of 1-percent samples. For example, if 20 percent of the population of a state completed
long forms, the sample questionnaires for that state are divided into twenty subsamples of equal
size. The 5-percent files are then selected at random from the 1-percent subsamples for each
state. Weights are attached to each case representing the number of individuals in the general
population represented by any particular case in the sample.
    The original data set contains over 12,500,000 person-level observations. To create our
sample, first we exclude every person below 20 and above 60 years old, as well as every individual
currently in school, self-employed, or disabled, which leaves 4,636,759 individual records in the
sample. Next, we exclude all individuals who report zero wage income or zero weeks worked
over the year, and individuals whose annual earnings are top-coded, i.e. higher than $140,000
(19,890 cases). We also remove altogether occupational groups where more than 3% of all
workers are top coded. Eleven occupations are excluded based on this criterion, e.g., Airplane
pilots, Athletes, Dentists, Physicians, Podiatrists, and Judges. Finally, we eliminate individuals
for whom estimated hourly wages are below the federal minimum wage ($3.35 in 1989), i.e.,
roughly 400,000 observations.44 We are then left with 3,923,744 individual records in our final
sample.
    We construct hourly wage as annual wage and salary income (variable INCWAGE) divided
by the product between the number of weeks worked last year (WKSWRK1) and usual weekly
hours worked (UHRSWORK).45

       B: the occupational employment survey
    The Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program collects data on employees in ap-
proximately 200,000 non-farm establishments to produce employment and wage estimates for
821 occupations classified based on the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC).
    Since November 2003, the program samples 200,000 establishments semi-annually. Before
then, it sampled 400,000 once a year. The OES survey is designed to produce occupational
wage and employment estimates using six panels (3 years) of data. The BLS Employment Cost
Index is used to adjust survey data from prior panels before combining them with the current
panel’s data. The full six-panel sample of 1.2 million establishments allows the construction
of occupational estimates at detailed levels of geography and industry. Estimates based on
geographic areas are available at the National, State, and Metropolitan Area levels. Industry
  44
     Through validation with CPS data, Baum-Snow and Neal (2006) find that a significant fraction of
workers report usually working 8 hours per week on the census’ long form when they actually usually
worked 40 hours per week; thus, they respond as if the question meant to report “usual hours per day”.
However, this type of measurement error which plagues the 1980 Census is much less frequent in the 1990
census. Moreover, these respondents are excluded from our selection criteria on annual hours.
  45
     See Ruggles et al. (2000) for a detailed explanation of the IPUMS Census data.


                                                  44
classifications correspond to 3, 4, and 5-digit North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS) industry groups.
    The OES survey form sent to establishments defines wages as straight-time, gross pay, ex-
clusive of premium pay. Base rate, cost-of-living allowances, guaranteed pay, hazardous-duty
pay, incentive pay including commissions and production bonuses, tips, and on-call pay are in-
cluded. Excluded are back pay, jury duty pay, overtime pay, severance pay, shift differentials,
non-production bonuses, employer cost for supplementary benefits, and tuition reimbursements.
    The OES survey groups wages in 12 discrete intervals. In November 2004, the lowest interval
was “Under $6.75” and the highest was “$70 and over”. Mean hourly wage rate for an occupation
equals total wages that all workers in the occupation earn in an hour divided by the total
employment of the occupation. The same concept applies to more disaggregated levels such as
occupations within metropolitan areas or industries. The mean and percentiles for an occupation
are calculated by uniformly distributing the workers inside each wage interval, ranking the
workers from lowest paid to highest paid.

       C: the panel study of income dynamics
    The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) began collecting information on a sample
of approximately 5,000 households in 1968. Of these, about 3,000 are representative of the
U.S. population as a whole (core sample), while the rest are low-income families (SEO sample).
Since then, both the original households and their split-offs (members of the original household
forming a family of their own) have been followed over time. Questions on labor income and
hours are retrospective: information collected in the year t wave refers to the calendar year t − 1.
    Our initial sample comprises every head and spouse between 20-60 years old in the 1968-1997
waves of the PSID core sample. We then exclude individuals currently in school, self-employed,
or disabled, and those with annual hours below 520 and above 5096 to reduce the role for
measurement error in hours, which leaves 80,979 individual/year records in the sample.46 Next,
we exclude all individuals whose earnings are top-coded or whose hourly wage (computed as
annual earnings divided by annual hours) is below the federal minimum wage, which eliminates
around 4,141 individual/years observations. At the end of this selection, we are left with 76,848
individual/year observations in our final sample, i.e., roughly 2,500 per year.
    The estimation of the individual fixed effect described in the main text is based on workers
with at least ten reported wage observations which reduces the sample size to 49,010 individ-
ual/year observations, i.e., 1,633 per year on average.




  46
   French (2005) uses the PSID Validation Study to assess the size of measurement error in hourly
wages. He concludes that it accounts for 24% of the standard deviation of log wages. By trimming the
hours distribution below 520 and above 5096, we eliminate many outliers that are due to reporting errors.


                                                   45
References
 [1] Abowd J., and F. Kramarz (1999). “The Analysis of Labor Markets Using Matched
     Employer-Employee Data,” Handbook of Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card
     eds., North-Holland, pages 2629-2710.

 [2] Aiyagari, R. (1994). “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics, vol. 109(3), pages 659-684.

 [3] Albrecht J., and B. Axell (1984). “An Equilibrium Model of Search Unemployment,” Jour-
     nal of Political Economy, vol. 92, pages 824-840.

 [4] Altonji, J., and R. Shakotko (1987). “Do Wages Rise With Job Seniority?” Review of
     Economic Studies, vol. 65(3), pages 437-460.

 [5] Altonji, J., and N. Williams (2004). “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A Reassessment,”
     forthcoming in the Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

 [6] Baum-Snow, N., and D. Neal (2006). “Data Problems and the Measurement of Racial and
     Gender Wage Gaps Over Time,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

 [7] Blank, R., and D. Card (1991). “Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment:
     Is There an Explanation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 106(4), pages 1157-1189.

 [8] Bontemps, C., J.-M. Robin, and G. J. Van den Berg (2000). “Equilibrium Search with
     Continuous Productivity Dispersion Theory and Non Parametric Estimation,” International
     Economic Review, vol. 41(2), pages 305-358.

 [9] Bound, J., and A. Krueger (1991). “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
     Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 9(1),
     pages 1-24.

[10] Burdett, K. (1978). “A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates,” American Eco-
     nomic Review, vol. 68, pages 212-220.

[11] Burdett, K. and M. Coles (2000). “Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts,” Econometrica,
     vol. 71, pages 1377-1404.

[12] Burdett, K., and D. T. Mortensen (1998). “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Unem-
     ployment,” International Economic Review, vol. 39(2), pages 257-273.

[13] Bureau of Labor Statistics (2006). “Employee Tenure Summary,” http://www.bls.gov.

[14] Bunzel, H., B. J. Christensen, P. Jensen, N. M. Kiefer, L. Korsholm, L. Muus, G. R.
     Neumann, and M. Rosholm (2001). “Specification and Estimation of Equilibrium Search
     Models,” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 4, pages 90-126.

[15] Christensen, B. J., R. Lentz, D. T. Mortensen, G. R. Neumann, and A. Wervatz (2005).
     “On the Job Search and the Wage Distribution,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 23(1),
     pages 31-58.



                                             46
[16] Cowell, F. (2000). “Measurement of Inequality,” Handbook of Income Distribution, A.
     Atkinson and F. Bourgignon eds., North Holland, pages 87-166.

[17] Dey, M. and C. Flinn (2006). “Household Search and Health Insurance Coverage,” mimeo,
     NYU.

[18] Eckstein, Z., and G. Van den Berg (2005). “Empirical Labor Search: A Survey,” IZA
     Discussion paper.

[19] Eckstein, Z., and K. Wolpin (1990). “Estimating a Market Equilibrium Search Model from
     Panel Data on Individuals,” Econometrica, vol. 4, pages 783-808.

[20] Eckstein, Z., and K. Wolpin (1995). “Duration to First Job and the Return to Schooling:
     Estimates from a Search-Matching Model,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 62, pages
     263-286.

[21] Fallick, B. and C. A. Fleischman (2004). “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the U.S. Labor
     Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows” Finance and Economics Discussion
     Series 2004-34. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[22] Flinn, C. (2006). “Minimum Wage Effects on Labor Market Outcomes Under Search, Bar-
     gaining, and Endogenous Contact Rates,” Econometrica, vol. 74, pages 1013-1062.

[23] Flinn, C. and J. Heckman (1983). “Are Unemployment and Out of the Labor Force Behav-
     iorally Distinct Labor Force States?” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 1(1), pages 28-42.

[24] French, E. (2005). “The Labor Supply Response to Mismeasured (but Predictable) Wage
     Changes,” forthcoming in the Review of Economics and Statistics.

[25] Gaumont, D., M. Schindler, and R. Wright (2006). “Alternative Theories of Wage Disper-
     sion,” European Economic Review, vol. 50(4), pages 831-848.

[26] Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii (2006). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemploy-
     ment and Vacancies Revisited,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

[27] Hall, R. E. (2005). “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” Ameri-
     can Economic Review, vol. 95(1), pages 50-65.

[28] Hansen, H. (1998). “Transition from Unemployment Benefits to Social Assistance in Seven
     European OECD Countries,” Empirical Economics, vol. 23(1), pages 5-30.

[29] Hornstein, A., P. Krusell and G.L. Violante (2006). “Technical Appendix for Fric-
     tional Wage Dispersion in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” available at
     http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/violante/research.htm

[30] Kambourov, G. and I. Manovskii (2004). “Occupational Mobility and Wage Inequality,”
     mimeo.

[31] Jolivet, G., F. Postel-Vinay and J.-M. Robin (2006). “The Empirical Content of the Job
     Search Model: Labor Mobility and Wage Dispersion in Europe and the U.S.,”European
     Economic Review, vol. 50(4), pages 877-907


                                             47
[32] Jovanovic, B. (1979). “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political
     Economy, vol. 87(5), pages 972-990.

[33] Kostiuk, P. (1990). “Compensating Differentials for Shift Work,” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, vol. 98, pages 1054-1075.

[34] Lagos, R. and N. Kiyotaki (2006). “A Model of Job and Worker Flows,” mimeo, NYU.

[35] Levine, D. and W. Zame (2002). “Does Market Incompleteness Matter?” Econometrica,
     vol. 70(5), pages 1805-1839.

[36] Lise, J. (2006). “On-the-Job Search and Precautionary Savings: Theory and Empirics of
     Earnings and Wealth Inequality,” mimeo, Queens University.

[37] Ljungqvist, L. and T.J. Sargent (1998). “The European Unemployment Dilemma,” Journal
     of Political Economy, vol. 106, pages 514-550.

[38] Lucas, R. E., and E. Prescott (1974). “Equilibrium Search and Unemployment,” Journal
     of Economic Theory, vol. 7(2), pages 188-209.

[39] Machin, S., and A. Manning (1999). “The Causes and Consequences of Long-Term Unem-
     ployment in Europe,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, (edited by Ashenfelter, O., and
     D. Card), North-Holland.

[40] Manning, A., and B. Petrongolo (2005). “The Part-Time Pay Penalty,” CEP Discussion
     Paper No. 679.

[41] McCall, J. (1970). “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, vol. 84(1), pages 113-126.

[42] Mood, A., F. Graybill, and D. Boes (1974). Introduction to the Theory of Statistics,
     McGraw-Hill

[43] Mortensen, D. T. (1970). “Job Search, the Duration of Unemployment, and the Phillips
     Curve,” American Economic Review, vol. 60(5), pages 847-62.

[44] Mortensen, D. T. (2005). Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Differently?,
     MIT Press.

[45] Mortensen, D. T. (2007). Discussion of “Frictional Wage Dispersion in Search Models: A
     Quantitative Assessment,” by A. Hornstein, P. Krusell, and G.L. Violante. EFG Meetings,
     San Franscisco, February.

[46] Mortensen, D. T., and C. Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 61(3), pages 397-415.

[47] Moscarini, G. (2003). “Skill and Luck in the Theory of Turnover,” mimeo, Yale University.

[48] Nagypal, E. (2005). “Worker Reallocation Over the Business Cycle: The Importance of
     Job-to-Job Transitions,” mimeo, Northwestern University.



                                              48
[49] Nagypal, E. (2006). “On the Extent of Job to Job Transitions,” mimeo, Northwestern
     University.

[50] OECD (2004). Taxes and Benefits in the United States, OECD.

[51] Pissarides, C. (1985). “Short-run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment Vacancies, and
     Real Wages,” American Economic Review, vol. 75(4), pages 676-90.

[52] Pissarides, C. (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, MIT Press.

[53] Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002). “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
     Employer Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, vol. 70(6), pages 2295-2350.

[54] Rogerson, R., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2006). “Search Theoretic Models of the Labor
     Market,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 43 (4), pages 959-988.

[55] Rosholm, M. and M. Svarer (2005). “Endogenous Wage Dispersion in a Search-Matching
     Model,” Labor Economics, vol. 11(5), pages 623-645.

[56] Ruggles, S., M. Sobek, A. Trent, C. A. Fitch, R. Goeken, P. K. Hall, M. King, and C.
     Ronnander (2004). “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0,” Minneapolis,
     MN: Minnesota Population Center. http://www.ipums.org.

[57] Ruhm, C. (2003). “Good Times Makes You Sick,” Journal of Health Economics, vol. 22(4),
     pages 637-658.

[58] Shimer, R. (2005a). “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment”, mimeo, University
     of Chicago.

[59] Shimer, R. (2005b). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
     American Economic Review, vol. 95(1), pages 25-49.

[60] Stevens, M. (1999). “Wage-Tenure Contracts in a Frictional Labour Market: Firms’ Strate-
     gies for Recruitment and Retention,” Reviw of Economic Studies, vol. 71, pages 535-551.

[61] Topel, R. (1991). “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,”
     Journal of Political Economy, vol. 99(1), pages 145-76.

[62] Van den Berg, G., and G. Ridder (1998). “An Empirical Equilibrium Search Model of the
     Labor Market,” Econometrica, vol. 66(5), pages 1183-1221.




                                             49
                     1.5
                     1
           Density


                                           Mean / first percentile = 2.24
                     .5
                     0




                             .5   1        1.5         2                2.5         3
                                             Wage residual
                     1.5
                     1
           Density




                                                                    Median = 2.20
                     .5
                     0




                           1.5        2             2.5                  3              3.5
                                          Mean / first percentile




Figure 1: Top panel: Residual wage distribution for full-time, full-year janitors and clean-
ers in the Philadelphia area. Bottom panel: Distribution of mean-min ratios for full-time,
full-year janitors and cleaners across U.S. geographical areas. Source: authors’ computa-
tion on 1990 Census.


                                               50
                     1.5
                     1
           Density


                                                          13,246 cells
                                                        Median Mm=2.04
                     .5
                     0




                           1   2             3                 4                5
                                       Mean / 5th percentile
                     1.5
                     1
           Density




                                                          14,572 observations
                                                           Median Mm=1.57
                     .5
                     0




                           1       2           3                   4                5
                                           Mean / min




Figure 2: Top panel: Distribution of M p5 ratios across labor markets in the U.S. economy.
Source: authors’ computation on 1990 Census. Bottom panel: Distribution of M m ratios
for individual labor market histories. Source: authors’ computation on PSID.



                                           51
                   PSID: mean to minimum                                      PSID: mean to first percentile ratio
 6.5                                                              3

  6              1st stage residuals                                           1st stage residuals
                                                                 2.8
                 2nd stage residuals                                           2nd stage residuals
 5.5
                                                                 2.6
  5
                                                                 2.4
 4.5

  4                                                              2.2

 3.5
                                                                  2
  3
                                                                 1.8
 2.5
                                                                 1.6
  2

 1.5                                                             1.4
       1970      1975      1980        1985   1990   1995              1970       1975     1980        1985   1990   1995
                             Year                                                            Year




              PSID: mean to fifth percentile ratio                            PSID: mean to tenth percentile ratio
 2.3                                                              2

 2.2            1st stage residuals                                              1st stage residuals
                                                                 1.9
                2nd stage residuals                                              2nd stage residuals
 2.1
                                                                 1.8
  2
                                                                 1.7
 1.9

 1.8                                                             1.6

 1.7
                                                                 1.5
 1.6
                                                                 1.4
 1.5
                                                                 1.3
 1.4

 1.3
       1970      1975      1980        1985   1990   1995              1970       1975     1980        1985   1990   1995
                             Year                                                            Year




Figure 3: Empirical analysis on PSID data. The first-stage residuals refer to the regression
on observable covariates. The second-stage residuals are the first-stage residuals demeaned
individually.




                                                            52
                                                  1


                                                  0
   Net value of leisure as a fraction of w (ρ)




                                                    Reasonable
                                                 −1  pairs
                                                                         Pairs of (ρ,r) consistent
                                                 −2                          with Mm=1.70

                                                 −3


                                                 −4


                                                 −5


                                                 −6


                                                 −7

                                                      0   0.05   0.1        0.15        0.2          0.25   0.3
                                                                   Monthly interest rate (r)



Figure 4: Pairs of the value of non-market time and the interest rate that can generate
M m = 1.70.




                                                                            53
                                                   0.7



                                                   0.6
                                                             Pairs (ρ,θ) consistent with Mm=1.70
     Net value of leisure as a fraction of w (ρ)




                                                   0.5



                                                   0.4



                                                   0.3



                                                   0.2



                                                   0.1
                                                                θ=8


                                                    0
                                                         5       10     15      20      25      30        35   40   45
                                                                             Relative risk aversion (θ)



Figure 5: Pairs of the value of non-market time and risk aversion that can generate
M m = 1.70.




                                                                                       54
                                                                    Pairs of (1−δ) and ρ consistent with Mm=1.70

                                                   0

                                                 −2                                                            Reasonable
                                                                                                                  pairs
   Net value of leisure as a fraction of w (ρ)




                                                 −4

                                                 −6

                                                 −8

                                                 −10

                                                 −12

                                                 −14

                                                 −16

                                                 −18

                                                 −20

                                                       0   0.1       0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6     0.7     0.8    0.9
                                                                 Annual autocorrelation coefficient of wage process (1−δ)


Figure 6: Pairs of the value of non-market time and the wage autoregression coefficient
that can generate M m = 1.70.




                                                                                           55
Net value of leisure as a fraction of w (ρ)




                                                                                                                          Net value of leisure as a fraction of w (ρ)
                                               1                                                                                                                         1

                                               0                                                                                                                         0

                                              −1                                                                                                                        −1
                                                             Reasonable pairs                                                                                                              Reasonable pairs
                                              −2                                                                                                                        −2

                                              −3                                                                                                                        −3

                                              −4                                                                                                                        −4

                                              −5                                                                                                                        −5           Pairs of (ρ,λ )
                                                             Pairs of (ρ,λ )                                                                                                                      e
                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                 consistent with Mm=1.70
                                              −6         consistent with Mm=1.70                                                                                        −6

                                              −7                                                                                                                        −7
                                                   0           0.1            0.2     0.3          0.4                                                                       0           0.1           0.2     0.3           0.4
                                                       Monthly offer arrival rate on the job ( λ )                                                                               Monthly offer arrival rate on the job ( λ )
                                                                                               e                                                                                                                         e




                                              50                                                                                                         0.07
    Mean job duration (months)




                                              45                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                          Monthly separation rate




                                              40                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                  CPS estimate of
                                                                 average job tenure
                                              35                                                                                                         0.04

                                                                                                                                                                                             JOLTS estimate of
                                              30                                                                                                         0.03                              average separation rate


                                              25                                                                                                         0.02
                                                   0           0.1            0.2     0.3          0.4                                                                       0           0.1           0.2     0.3           0.4
                                                       Monthly offer arrival rate on the job ( λ )                                                                               Monthly offer arrival rate on the job ( λ )
                                                                                               e                                                                                                                         e




                                              Figure 7: Top panels: pairs of the value of non-market time and the job offer rate during
                                              employment that can generate M m = 1.70. Bottom panels: mapping between the arrival
                                              rate of offers on the job and average job tenure (left panel), and separation rate (right
                                              panel).




                                                                                                         56
