                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND EEOTOMIC PERFORMANCE
                   GRIEVANCES AND PRODUCTIVITY


                         Casey Ichniowski


                     Working Paper No. 1367




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1984




The author would like to thank Richard Freeman and Thomas Kochan
for their comments on this paper. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies and project in
Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #1367
                                                      June 19811




                   Industrial Relations and Economic Performance:

                           Grievances and Productivity

                                     ABSTRACT


        This study documents a significant inverse relationship between grievance

rates and productivity. It is argued in the theoretical model in the paper

that this significant inverse relationship reflects greater discrepencies be-

tween reported and effective labor hours as grievance rates increase. A

grievance—free plant is some 1.3% more productive and up to i6.y% more profit-

able than when the plant operates with an average rate of grievances, so that

industrial relations performance can critically influence the performance of the

firm.




                                            Casey Ichniowski
                                            National Bureau of Economic Research
                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                            Cambridge, MA    02138
                                         —1—




I.   INTRODUCTION

         Following on the growing number of studies that document a strong,
generally positive link between union status and productivity,1 a second set of
studies has begun to explore the links between economic performance and       more

specific indicators of industrial relations environments, such as grievance
activity,   absenteeism, accidents, employee turnover, and strikes.2 these stu-

dies suggest specific dimensions of an establishment's industrial relations

system that can influence its performance. Systematic differences along these

dimensions between the union and nonunion sector, may, in turn, be the

underlying cause of the often observed union productivity differentials.
 -


      Among   this second set of studies, a common result has emerged.
Establishments with high grievance rates perform worse than those with low
grievance rates. While it might be hypothesized that this grievance produc-
tivity   relationship might be positive in some   settings,3   the inverse rela-

tionship has been documented in plants in several different manufacturing

environments) These studies put forward very similar interpretations for the

observed relationships——high grievance rates reflect in some way low morale or

poor labor relations5 and this in turn hinders the establishment's overall eff i—

ciency. However, the mechanism by which morale and labor relations affect a

plant's efficiency is left unclear due to a lack of data on other productive

inputs that would be needed to construct a more complete model.

      Here, I also focus on the relationship between grievance activity and
                                     —2—




productivity by analyzing detailed monthly data from January 1976 to September

1982 on the operations of eleven paper mills. Here, however, I test for the

relationship in a detailed production function framework with input variables

specifically designed to capture the principal sources of productivity variation.

Before estimating the production function, I first develop and test a model of

the determinants of grievances. From this model, I argue that most causes of

grievances will also tend to keep employees from performing work or from putting

forth maximum effort while on the job. Using this argument, I then modify the

production function to allow higher grievance rates to reflect a greater slippage

between hours reported and paid for and effective hours of work. This model then

presents a specific mechanism and rationale as to why poor labor relations-or low

morale, as reflected by grievance activity, might hinder the productivity of

an establishment.

      The study is developed in the following five sections.   The next section

develops a model of the determinants of grievance filing. This model is also

tested to uncover actual correlates of grievance activity. Section III presents

the production function framework which incorporates a role for grievances as an

indicator of reduced labor efficiency. Section IV estimates the detailed models

 of production, and reports the estimated slippage between hours reported and

paid for and effective hours of work. The basic model of Section IV is also

 expanded to include the correlates of grievance activity to see if the observed

 determinants of grievance rates help account for the inverse grievance—produc—
                                       —3—




tivity relationship. Finally, in Section V, by applying the estimated coef-

ficients obtained in Section IV to data on a nonunion mill, I calculate estimates

of implied grievance behavior for a nonunion firm. The major results and their

implications are summarized in the conclusion.

      By way of preview, this study uncovers a significant inverse relationship

between grievance rates and a plant's productivity. The magnitude of the

grievance rate coefficient implies that a grievance—free firm is 1.3% more pro-

ductive and up to i6.% more profitable than a firm that operates with an average

grievance rate. These differences can be attributed to a 1.8% difference in

labor efficiency between a grievance—free firm and a firm with an average

grievance rate. The nonunion firm behaves as if it has an average grievance rate

of .0012 —   or twelve times the average grievance rate in the sample of unionized

plants. This implicit average grievance rate corresponds to operating 19.5%

below full labor efficiency. In no month does any unionized mill operate that

far below full labor efficiency.
                                          _14...




II. TIlE DETEIIMINANTS OF GRIEVANCE ACTIVITY

        In the ten unionized mills in this sample, grievances proceed through a

four—step process; i) discussion with department foreman; 2) filing the

grievance in writing; 3) discussions with a committee on grievances usually

involving the labor relations director or mill manager; and 1-t)   arbitration.    The

grievance rate in this study is defined as total written grievance filed (step

2) per hourly manhour.       'With the short time periods between step 1 and step 2

specified in the mills' collective bargaining agreements, the time when a

grievance is filed should be close to the time when the original complaint

arose. The specific issues of interpretaion that arise from using a grievance

rate defined by the grievance activity in step 2 are considered in detail in the

theoretical model in this section and the empirical results of the next section.

        In this sample, the average for this grievance rate variable is .00011.

The lowest mill average is .00001, while the highest is .0002b. 10.3% of all

mill months are grievance free, while the maximum value is .00098,     or   approxima-

tely one written grievance for every 1000 production hours worked. The maximum

corresponds to a month in which seventy grievances were filed.

       To develop an explicit model of the role of grievance rates in determining

a   firm's   performance, one first must understand what causes a grievance to

arise. To that end, I develop a model of the determinants of grievances which

will be used to generate possible explanations for any observed correlations

between grievance rates and productivity. This model of the determinants of
                                      —5-.




grievance activity considers three separate paths that can lead to the filing of

a grievance.

      Path 1: Actual Violations Three steps are required in following this

path. First, there is a violation of an accepted practice of the workplace, as

specified by clauses in the labor agreement, sidebar agreements, or the common

law of the shop floor developed through past practices. This violation must

then be noticed by an employee or a union representative. The perceived

violation may be settled informally and not committed to writing. In path 1,

all three steps are required before a written grievance is filed.

      Path 2: Perceived Violations Here, the first of the three steps that

make up path 1 is omitted. While no violation actually occurs, one is in fact

perceived, perhaps because an employee or union representative does not fully

understand the rules of the workplace. If the supervisors can not satisfy the

grievant by explaining these rules, a written grievance will result. Since no

rule has been violated, it would seem reasonable to expect the probability of

informal settlement to be greater in path 2 than in path 1. This probability in

path 2 may still be positive.

      Path 3: Strategic Grievances Here again, rio violation actually

occurs. Employees or their union representatives may find it in their interests

to file grievances that they themselves feel are unfounded. Since the filing is

stratesic, there would be no interest in settling it informally. For example, a

disciplinary discharge may be supported by a plant's work rules; however, it is
                                         —6—




relatively    costless for the employee or the union to file a grievance in hopes

that an arbitrator unfamiliar with the plant's rules might reinstate the

discharged employee. The union would protect itself against charges that it

did not represent some employee fairly in this type of case.

         Figure 1 presents an overview of the path EDdel. All three paths and the

number of steps involved are indicated. To develop this model for empirical

testing, specific factors that might influence the stages in this model will be

identified.

Specific Factors in the Model of Grievance Activity

         An extensive list of factors that influcence the various stages in the

path model of grievance filing can be culled from the literatare on grievance

activity. Slichter, Ilealy and Livernash,6 and more recently Lewini provide the

most comprehensive treatment of the determinants of grievance activity. Their

schemes for categorizing these determinants are similar and will be used here.

Seven general categories of grievance determinants are presented in their

discussions: environment; working conditions; characteristics of the hourly

employees; characteristics of management; characteristics of the union; charac-

teristics of the grievance procedure; and the nature of the union—management

relationship. I will consider examples of each of these catagories of grievance

determinants and where they might fit within the framework of the grievance path

model.

         Environment. A comrrjn consideration here is the size of establishment.
      Figure 1: Path Model of Filing Grievances

STEP 1                STEP 2                STEP   3
                                             —7.-




Afnong steel plants, Peach and      Livernash   find higher grievance rates in large
plants in urban areas.8 Lewjn also argues that "a technology that minimizes

worker    autonomy and maximizes employer control" should lead to high grievance
rates.9 Both of these environmental factors could affect grievance rates by
increasing the frequency of violations. Larger workplaces tend to have more

formal personnel practices.lO This could lower the number of informal

settlements; in addition, there might simply be more rules to violate. A more

complex technology may       also require more work rules, increasing grievances
filed.     In this sample technololgy is constant from mill to mill.      One mill is
somewhat larger than the rest, but does •not, on average have high grievance

rates.


         Working Conditions. The "environment" category in this context should be

thought   of as   fixed parameters of the workplace (physical location, technology);
the"working conditions" category can be thought of as varying features of the
work relationship over which the participants have some control. Lewin argues
that higher paid workers will file fewer grievances,11 while Slichter, Healy and
Livernash find that those on piece—rate are more likely to file grievances.12

Level   and method of   payment, then, are   factors in the model of grievances. The

level of compensation might      affect grievance rates by influencing an employee's
perception   of how equitably he is being treated. A piece—rate method of

payment, on the other hand, particularly if it involves incentive and bonus

features, may     involve   more management discretion than a wage rate scheme. Such
                                     —8—




increased discretion may lead to more actual violations (employee paid too

little) and more perceived violations (employee perceives he was paid too

little).

     While the basic technolor can be placed in the environmental category,

changes in the operation of the plant, such as the introduction of a new

machine, might best be considered under working conditions. When changes within

the workplace occur, old rules may no longer be appropriate for new situations.

Actual violations may increase. Employees may also incorrectly perceive that an

old rule applies in the new situation so that perceived violations, where none

actually occur, may also increase. Such changes will also affect the likelihood

of informal settlements. Cases involving precedents that will govern new

situations are the types of cases taken to arbitration.

      Finally, the number of work rules should also affect grievance rates;

however, the direction of this effect is not necessarily clear. An overabun-

dance of rules, particularly those which conflict, will provide more oppor-

tunities for violation and perceptions of violations; however, with an

insufficient number of work rules, more situations will be discretionary arid

lead to more perceived violations that can not be settled informally.

      Characteristics of Hourly Employees. Low levels of worker satisfaction,

as with the pay issues mentioned above, may initiate path 3. Worker dissatis-

faction independent of some workrule or rights violation may lead workers to

generate unfounded grievances to burden the employer. In addition, dissatisfied
                                        —9--




 workers may be Bore aware of violations that do occur.

       Demographic characteristics of the workforce may also affect grievance

 rates. An experienced worker, in particular, may be more familiar with the

 existing rules and therefore be less likely to perceive violations incorrectly.

 Certain groups such as blacks and women that have historically faced discrimina-

 tion in the workplace may file more grievances.13

      Management Characteristics. The most often cited feature of plant manage-

ment that affects the grievance rate is front—line supervision.U4 An experienced

 supervisor may not violate rules as frequently. Certain attitudinal postures of

supervisors may cause hourly employees to generate unfounded grievances. Since

the foreman is generally the management representative who settles grievances

informally, the frequency of informal settlement is clearly affected by the

quality, style, and extent of supervision.
                                               Finally, management may develop
policies that stress either formal or informal settlement. Contract clauses

that allow stewards to be paid for time
                                          spent processing grievances should lead
to more grievances.

      Union Characteristics. Establishments
                                                with multiple bargaining units
should have higher grievance rates with more work rules in place and a greater

likelihood of craft—line disputes. Like
                                            management, the union nay also have
specific policies for or against informal
                                             settlement of grievances, particularly

for specific types of grievances.   In particular, a union1s policy may be to
pursue all discharges as far as possible in the grievance process even if the
                                        —10—




discharge accords with all rules and past practices. In addition, it is often

thought that unions strategically generate grievances, regardless of merit, as

negotiations approach. Lengthy grievance backlogs can then be used as a

bargaining chip in negotiations.

      The politics of the union, as well as its policies, may influence

grievance rates. More grievances may be generated around the time of union

elections as a sign to the rank—and—file that new actions are being taken, par-

ticularly if a new officer is elected. Other periods in which there is

increased militancy in union tactics may be periods of increased grievance acti-

vity. The point is often made that lower grievance rates may reflect fewer

problems in the workplace or a "weaker," less militant, union. Lower rates may

also result when a union does not police the contract as well, so that viola-

tions that do occur may go unnoticed.

      Characteristics of the Grievance Procedure. The contract provisions that

set out the grievance machinery can also emphasize informal approaches to

grievance settlements to varying degrees. Those that do are likely to encourage

lower filing rates. In this sample, the grievance procedures are quite similar,

so that grievance filina rates should not be affected by this factor.

      Union—Management   Relationship. It is often argued that nc're trust may
develop as a bargaining relationship matures; conversely, antagonisms may become
more ingrained over time. The age of the relationship then can affect the

violation rate, perception of violation, and frequency of informal settlement in
                                      —11—




 either direction. More than the age of the relationship, it is the quality of

the relationship that would seem to matter. A high level of trust between the

parties leading to more communication should reduce the grievance rates by

influencing all steps in all paths in this   model.   Moreover, open informal com-

munication should also affect maw of the other factors already discussed, such

as the number of work rules, employee satisfaction, union
                                                            politics, and policies
of management and the union.

      To test the grievance path model empirically, three sets of variables are

created to measure some of the specific factors just described:    total labor

contract pages in effect; bargaining cycle variables; and variables describing

when major machines were installed in these mills.15

      Work rules clearly play an important role in the Figure 1 model. The

number of pages in a mill's labor contract serves as a proxy for the extent of

work rule regulation. (Each mill has three or four different contracts in

effect over the seven year period studied.) This proxy for work rules may be

misleading. Sidebar agreements not incorporated in the contracts, rules set

forth in arbitration decisions, or unwritten shop floor practices will not be

captured by this measure. These other sources of work rules may not necessarily

increase with contract pages. Still this measure may provide some information

on work rules. As described above, a curvilinear relationship may exist between

grievances and work rules. Therefore, contract pages and its square will be

considered in the analysis.
                                        —12—




     The bargaining cycle variables measure whether a mill is in: the quarter
leading up to negotiations; the quarter after contract negotiations; the

quarter before any negotiations that ended in a strike; the quarter after a

strike; and the omitted group of months during the central period of contract

administartion. From the preceding discussion, one miht expect higher

grievance rates prior to negotiations as unions strategically generate grievan-

ces1 Also, if grievance rates are an indicator of labor—management conflict,

grievance rates may increase during bitter negotiations. Conversely, nego-

tiations    completed without a strike may   lead to a tihoneymoonti period of reduced

labor—management   conflict.
     The period in which major machines are installed can involve significant
changes in a plant's operations. Jurisdiction disputes over new work may        lead

to higher   grievance rates. In four mills in this sample, major new machines

were installed. Two dumw variables are created to measure the six month

installation period and the six month period after the date the machine was

capitalized.

      When these three sets of variables that are available for all mills are

entered in grievance rate equations along with a set of nine plant dummies, the

results in Table 1 are obtained. Columns 1, 2, and 3 show the coefficients when

the contract pages, the bargaining cycle variables, and the new machinery

variables are entered separately as grievance determinants along with a set of

plant duxnxriies. The coefficients in column 4 are obtained when all three sets of
                                               Uab1e 1

                         Correlates of Grievance Filing Ratea
         IDependent Variable: Grievances Filed per Hourly Manhour: N=791t]

                                        Ci)          (2)          (3)        (it)




la. Contract Pages                 6.0 E_7**         —                       6.1 E_1**
                                  (3.2 E—y)                                 (3.2 E—7)
lb. Contract Pages2               —1.1 E_9***        —             —         1.l
                                  (0.5 E—9)                                 (0.5 E—9)
2a. A Pre—Strike                    —                —
                                                                —8.3 E—6     8.1 E—6
                                                                (9.8 E—6)   (9.8 E—6)
2b. Post—strike
                                                                 1.0 E—5     8.5 E—6
                                                                (0.9 E—6)   (9.8 E—6)
2c. Pre—Negotiation                 —                            3.6 E—6     2.2 E—6
                                                                (1.1 E—5)   (1.1 E—5)
2d. Post—Negotiation                —                           —1.8 E_5*   —1.5 E5*
                                                                (1.1 E—5)   (1.1 E—5)
3a. Pre—Machiriery                  —               1.1  E—5           —     1.0    FJ—6
                                                    (1.6 E—5)               (1.5 E—5)
3b. Post—Machinery                                  1.2 E—5                 1.0 E—5
                                                   (1.6 &-s)                (1.6    E—5)


4   Plant Dummies                  Yes               Yes             Yes    Yes


    H2
                                   .588             .582           .58it     .590



          a — standard errors in parentheses

               —   significant   at the .01—level, one—tailed test
          **   — significant     at the .05—level, one—tailed test
          *    — significant     at the .10—level, one—tailed test
                                         —13—




potential grievance determinants are entered simultaneaously. Whether taken one

at a time or together, contract pages have the most noticeable impact. The

coefficients in line la in columns 1 and 1 suggest that grievance rates are

higher when the labor contract in a mill becomes longer. (With plant dummies

included, the coefficient gauges the average within—mill relationship. When,

the column   equation is estimated without plant dummies, the two contract pages

coefficients are similar in magnitude but somewhat less significant.) However,

from the coefficients in line lb, it appears that grievance rates increase with

contract pages at a decreasing rate. Using the coefficients in column 1, one

can calculate the point where grievance rates would begin to decrease with more

contract pages. That inflection point occurs at 272 contract pages. The

average number of contract pages in the sample is 195; the maximum value for

this variable is 465 pages. Therefore, one would want to describe the

grievances——contract pages relationship as an inverted U. For the range of

contract pages in this sample, grievance rates are higher when contracts are

longer up to some intermediate value •    After   that value up to the maximum

number of pages, more contract pages are associated with fewer grievances. From

the list of possible determinants of grievance activity suggested in the model

in this section, contract pages (as a proxy for work rules) appear to be the

most critical factor for this set of mills.

      Among all other potential grievance determinants, only the quarter after

contract negotiations without a strike (line 2d) is shown to have a significant
partial correlation with grievance rates. The negative coefficient on this

post—negotiation variable may by signalling a "honeymoon" period while the par-

ties adjust to new contract provisions after successful contract negotiations.
                                                   —15—




III.    SPECIFICATION OF THE PRODUCTION PROCESS MD INPUT—OUTPUT DATA

       With the aid of on—site investigations of each mill's production process,

the production function given by equation 1 was developed to account for

variations in productivity in these mills:16

                                  3                 9          3

            in Q =           ÷               }aJ1) +iP2i Vi) +i{3i PMDi) +jEj$]4i

                i)       +
Where: Q = tons of physical output;
                                      E) +   (6   L) -s-c               (Equation i)




            =   three    plant dummies to control for two major    product differences
                (white paper vs. newsprint; sheeted vs. not sheeted) and one
                major    process difference (make vs. buy pulp) across the eleven

                mills-

            =   total    depreciated, deflated value of assets in nine distinct cate-

                gories of assets;

  PMD1_3 = a set of three related dumn variables to describe whether a plant

                is operating two, three, four, or five or more paper machines (the

                two paper machine category is omitted);

            =   total    depreciated, deflated value of the two, three, four or five

                plus    paper machines;
         E = energy       input
         L =    labor    input

       The KD variables provide a direct control for major product and process
                                        —16—




differences observed in these mills. The more conventional method of

constructing a value added index is particularly difficult in these mills.11 The

PMD variable provides some control over scale of operations. The KY and PMV

variables   are fashioned to recognize the principles of input aggregation for a

heterogeneous capital stock.lB For example, three categories involving energy

generation capital, certain land and buildings, and   pollution   and recycling

capital are not a direct part of the machinery that acts upon the raw materials

flowing through the process. These categories of capital, then, are kept

separate from other categories of capital that is part of the production pro-

cess. The capital value variables are constructed from each mill's monthly

asset inventory which contains information on the current value of each asset.

In any month, there are some 15,000 assets that were allocated to these dif-

ferent categories of capital. E is the natural logarithm of BTU's used in pro-

duction.     The specification of the labor input, L, is taken up below.

    This unconventional specification is developed to provide an accurate model

of the production processes in these mills.     Equation 1 accounts for over 95%

of the total variation in production in this sample. More conventional

functional forms produce several nonsensical coefficients. For example, if all

capital is aggregated into one net investment figure, the coefficient on capital

is negative for this set of plants in which capital plays the central role in

transforming raw materials into final goods. More conventional forms explain a

much smaller proportion of the total variation in output.19
                                              —17—




      The specification of labor input and the role of the grievance rate in the

equation 1 framework must now be considered. First, consider that the logarithmic

form of equation 1 as a transformation of a simple Cobb—Douglas form:2°

                                +
                    Q   =       P (EL)1                              (Equation 2)
                            +
        In   equation 2,        reflects a vector of all inputs other than labor
described by equation 1, and EL represents effective hours of labor input. The

statistic available to describe labor input in these plants is quite similar to

statistics generally available on labor: total hourly manhours reported and paid

for (RL). Let EL be only a fraction of RL, so that:

                    EL = (1 +       Aj RL                          (Equation 3)

where A is the negative percentage slippage factor between effective labor

hours and reported labor hours.

        From   the discussion on the determinants of grievances in the previous sec-
tion,    it seems   reasonable to conclude that most grievance determinants also keep
labor    from working or from putting forth a maximum effort. For example, the

time spent filing a grievance is paid for but is actually spent away from the

employee's work station. Also, when employees file grievances concerning work

jurisdiction, employees are paid for time at the plant while the disputed work

is   left undone. Other examples described in the previous section can be con-
sidered in      the same way.

        Therefore, let data on the grievance rate (GRV) provide information on the

slippage factor, A, which can be reexpresed as 0 • GRY.           Equation 3 can therefore
                                                  —18—




also be reexpressed:

              EL = ( 1 + 5              0EV) EL                        (Equation 14)

Substituting equation 14 into equation 2 and taking the natural logarithm of

equation 2, one obtains

           lnQ = mci +       alnt   +   ylnRL + yln(1 +   S     0EV)   (Equation 5)


For y   GRV small (remember GRV is equal to zero in over io% of all observations

and has a maximum value of only .00098), equation 5 can be reexpressed:


           lnQ =   lna   +   1nI    +   ylnEL + y    5    0EV          (Equation 6)


With the first two terms expanded as in equation 2, the semi—logarithmic speci-

fication in equation 6 is the basic model to be estimated in the next section.

S can be isolated by dividing the 0EV coefficient by the EL coefficient. Labor

efficiency slippage (the difference between reported labor hours and effective

labor hours) can be calculated as S • GRV for different values of 3EV.
                                      —19—




IV. ThE PRODUCTIVITY — GRIEVANCE RELATIONSHIP

      When the equation 6 specification is estimated, the results in column 1 of

Table 2 are obtained. Higher grievance rates are consistently associated with

lower plant productivity. In this sample of panel data, this total effect is

some combination of cross—and within—plant effects. As described in Section II,

the capital dummies (listed in line 3) are actually controls for plant groups.

When these dummies are replaced with a complete set of nine mill dummies in the

column 2 specification, one observes that the average within—mill correlation

between grievances and productivity is still significant and negative. When a

set of time dummies (six year dummies and eleven month dummies) is added to the

column 1 specification, the coefficient in column 3 is obtained. This estimate

of the cross—plant relationship, while somewhat less significant, is still nega-

tive. Across all specifications, the point estimate of the grievance rate is

negative.

      The magnitude of these generally significant coefficients can be better

understood by evaluating them at various levels of the grievance rate variable.

Using the column 2 coefficient for this analysis, one obtains the percentage

change in a mill's production attributable to movements in this indicator of

industrial relations climate.

     When the coefficient from the column 2 equation (the average within—mill

effect) is evaluated at zero, low, average, high, and very high levels of the

grievance rate variable (respectively, the minimum, and 25th, 50th, 75th, and
          Table 2: Grievance Rate Coefficients in the Model

                           of Paper Productiona

             [Dependent Variable: in Tons of Paper; N = 531]




     Independent
      Variables
                             Equation
                                1           __
                                                 Equation
                                                    2       —   Equation
                                                                   3

1. grievance                 _.116.l0*           _126.2b**      —89.25
     rate                       (86.13)           (78.94)       (81.52)

2. capital dummies             yes                  no            yes

3. plant dummies                no                 yes             no

It, time dummies                no                  no            yes

5. other capital               yes                 yes            yes
   value, energy,
   and hourly man-
   hours controls
   appearing in
   Equation 1.


                               .958               .966           .966




 a —     standard   errors in parentheses

     —   significant   at the .01—level, one—tailed test

**   — significant     at the .05—level, one—tailed test

 *   — significant     at the .10—level, one—tailed test
                                        —20—




90th percentiles of the grievance rate distribution), the results shown in

Figure 2 are obtained. On average, a move from the zero to the median rate of

grievance activity corresponds to a .79% drop in a mill's paper production.

Moving from the median to the 90th percentile of grievance activity corresponds

to a further 2.56% drop in production.

       These   small percentage changes in production can be calibrated in terms of
shifts in a mill's profitability. Based on average month in 1980,      a   one percent
drop   in production without an associated swing in cost would result in approxi-

mately a 12% loss in operating income. An increase in grievances filed from

zero to the highest level would, on average, correspond to a 140% drop in pro-

fits. The recalibration of production losses to losses in profits obviously

ignores any costs that might be incurred in reducing grievance activity. Still,

these figures do suggest that the shifts in production attributable to movements

in this indicator of industrial relations climate can have critical effects on a

firm's profitability.

       From the labor efficiency model in the previous section, it was argued

that these drops in plant production and profitability associated with increases

in the grievance rate reflect a slippage between reported labor hours and effec-

tive labor hours. To calculate the slippage factor (a       GRV), the grievance
rate coefficient (1         must be divided by the coefficient on reported labor

hours (y). Using the coefficients from equation 2, one finds that 6 =

—l26.214/.7'62 = —165.67.   For grievance—free months (10.3% of   the sample), the
                                 fle2
                   GRIEVANCE RATES AND CHANGES IN PRODUCTION




PERCENT
             0
CHANGE

IN
PRODUCTION



          —1%




          —3%




                 ZERO           LOW          AVF.RkCE          HIGH       VERY HIGH

                                                                GRIEVANCE BAlE
                                             —21—




slippage factor (    A   = 6   GRY) equals zero. For the average grievance rate

(.oooii), the slippage factor is —1.8%. For the maximum grievance rate

(.00098), the slippage factor between reported and effective hours of labor is

—16.2%.

Further Interpretations of the Grievance—Productivity Relationship

        It is unlikely that the type of grievance—productivity relationship

reported reflects only those production losses directly associated with time

lost in filing and handling grievances. This direct effect of grievance filing

on productivity nay      account   for some of the observed relationship, and a rough

estimate of its potential nagnitude can be obtained. The Table 2 results are

based on a sample in     which the average number of hourly manhours worked per
month   is 85,823. The very high grievance rate (90th percentile) shown in Figure
2 implies production 3.35%     below    that of a zero grievance month. This very high
grievance rate, .00027, would mean approximately 23 grievances filed. If the
3.35% drop    in production were strictly the result of an        equal drop in production

hours worked (or 2,875 hours in an average month), the filing of one grievance

would have to take approximately 125 hours to account for the production drop.

If each grievance took one     hour    of employees' time for filing and handling, and

if   a one percent drop in hours corresponded to a one percent drop in output,
this direct effect would account for less than one percent of the production
losses attributable to increases        in grievance activity.

      These   simple calculations point out that the observed grievance—
productivity    relationship might best be     illustrated lv    the   diagram Figure 3.
                                        —22—




                                            Grievance Rate


           Omitted Variable


                                            Productivity



                                      Figure 3


     It   is likely some omitted factor simultaneously produces high (low)

grievance rates and low (high) productivity. The dotted line between grievance

rates and productivity could show as a strong negative relationship if the third

factor is omitted from the analysis.

     The model of grievance filing and the empirical test in Section II suggest

several possible candidates for potential omitted variables. Contract pages, in

particular, were shown to have a significant curvilinear relationship with

grievance rates within mills. Contract pages, as a proxy for work rules, may

also be correlated with productivity. The other variables which did not seem to

be powerful determinants of grievance rates may still be correlated with

productivity. For example, when new machinery is being installed, plant

operations may be dsrupted so that prodactivity is low given the measured level

of inputs.

     The equations shown in Table 2 are expanded to include those variables that

were considered as possible determinants of grievance rates. When the

bargaining cycle variables, new machinery variables, and contract pages are
                                         —23—




included   in the productivity equation, the results in Table 3 are obtained.

Column 1 replicates the column 1 specification in Table 2 with the lone addi-

tions of the three sets of grievance determinants considered in Section II.

Despite several important productivity effects of the new variables,21 the

grievance rate coefficient is almost identical to the coefficient obtained in

Table 2. Similarly, the column 2 equation in Table 3 replicates the column 2

equation in Table 2 with the addition of the grievance determinants. Again the

grievance rate coefficient is nearly identical in magnitude and significance to

the corresponding Table 2 coefficient.

      Since the grievance rate coefficient remains negative and generally

significant after a number of potential omitted variables are included in the

productivity equation, it appears that the grievance rate is still capturing

some other unmeasured dimension of the industrial relations environment in these

mills. The drop in plant production and labor efficiency corresponding to

increases in the grievance rate could riot be attributed to any of these specific

possible determinants of grievane activity; however, additional insights into

the basic result can be suggested by considering the theoretical model of

grievance determinants from Section II.

      Because of the critical role of informal settlements in paths 1 and 2 of

the   grievance aodel (see Figure 1), the style of communication in the mills may
help explain the inverse grievance—productivity relationship. In these mills,
it is important to find out about production delays so that production can flow
                                            Table 3



    Grievance Rates and Their Correlates in the Production Ekjuation
              [Dependent Variable = ln Tons of Paper; N531]




                                    (i)                     (2)



1. Grievance                      _l22.66*                 ..132.l9*
    Rate                           (Bb.oi)                  (86.50)

2. Correlates of                      Yes                         Yes
    Grievance rate
    Listed in lines la
    Through 3b in
    Table 1

3. Other Input                        Yes                         Yes
    Controls in
    Equation 1

.   Plant    Durpinies               No                           Yes

5. R                                  .962                        .969




            a —     standard errors in parentheses
                —   significant   at the .Ol—level, one—tailed test
        **      — significant     at the .05—level, one—tailed test
            *   — significant     at the .10—level, one—tailed test
                                       —   —




continuously from department to department. Open communication and informal
settlements may   assist in these coordinating efforts. The role of the foreman

as the connection between mill managers and production employees also deserves

further attention.22 Still a more detailed analysis of the determinants of

grievance activity would be required to provide a more precise interpretation of

the inverse relationship between grievance activity and productivity.
                                               —25—




V. THE IMPLICIT GRIEVANCE BEHAVIOR OF A NONUNION FIRM

     Monthly data for one nonunion mill are also available in this sample. This

mill did not have any grievance machinery and therefore could not be included in

the equations estimated in the previous section that required grievance rate

information. However, by estimating the basic production function (Table 2,

column 1 specification) without a grievance rate variable and with a plant dummy

for the nonunion mill, one finds that the nonunion mill is on average 9.5%       less
productive than the ten unionized mills given the measured level of inputs. If

one also includes time dummies in the equation (corresponding to the Table 2,

column 3   specification),     the coefficient on the duxmq for the nonunion firms is

—l.T%. Both coefficients are significant at conventional levels and are in

keeping with the positive union productivity differentials obtained in other

studies.

     Beyond this conventional analysis one can also solve for the implicit nonu-

nion grievance rates using the nonunion firm's input—output data and the

equations estimated in the previous section. Simply the implicit grievance

rates for the nonunion mill in each month can be predicted:


             GRYnu =      lnQnu —   (a + j3I   nu)            (Equation 7)

                                    GRit


where GRVnu = predicted nonunion grievance            rate
     nu = output data from nonunion firm

     'nu    =   vector   of input data from nonunion firm


           13GRV =   Estimated coefficients obtained in preceding section using data
                     from sample of unionized firms
                                        —26—



 The procedure described by equation 7 makes the strong assumption that the basic

 productivity equation with the grievance rate variable includes all factors that

would account for union/nonunion productivity differences. In other words, the

9.5% to 14.7% union productivity differential that remains after controlling for

the level of other principal inputs will be attributed solely to higher pre-

dicted grievance rates.

     When equation 7 is evaluated a grievance rate is predicted for each month

for the nonunion mill. The average predicted grievance rate, (using the coef-

ficients from the model in Table 2, Column i), is .0012 —   or   twelve times the

average grievance rate in the sample of union mills. This average grievance

rate exceeds the maximum grievance rate observed in any of the union mills

(.ooio). This implicit average nonunion grievance rate corresponds to a 19.5%

difference between reported labor hours and effective labor hours. After

controlling for the levels of other productive inputs, one finds that labor is

utilized in the production process far less efficiently in the nonunion mill

than in the unionized mills——consistent with the overall productivity

differential between this mill and the ten unionized mills that ranges between

—.095 and —.lb7.

     While other factors ommitted from the basic productivity equation might

also be responsible for some of the observed productivity differential, it may

not be unreasonable   to think of the nonunion mill as having grievance rates
significantly higher than those observed in the   union mills. Specifically, by

not providing the machinery to resolve conflicts or by not having work rules

clearly stated and written into a contract, disputes and grievances might linger
                                     —21—




and become exaggerated over time. Regardless of the reason, it seems safe to

assume that just because grievances are not written down in nonunion firms,

these firms should not be considered to be operating grievance—free.
                                      —28—




VI. CONCLUSION

      This unique look at micro—level data suggests that significant links exist

between economic and industrial relations performance by documenting a signif i—

cant inverse relationship between plant production and grievance rates. It is

argued in the theoretical model of this paper that this significant inverse

relationship reflects greater discrepancies between reported and effective labor

hours as grievance rates increase.

      The basic empirical results of the paper can be summarized by comparing a

mill operating at the average grievance rate to when it operates without

grievances. For a given mill, the move from zero grievances to the average

grievance rate would correspond to: a 1.3% drop in mill output; up to a 16.7%

drop in profits; and a —1.8% slippage between total reported hours of labor and

effective hours labor. Larger increases in the grievance rate would, of course,

correspond to even greater decreases in productivity.

      In addition, the average production losses attributable to movements in

grievance rates over the seven—year period vary from mill to mill. Allowing the

zero grievance state to serve as the benchmark, one finds that the mill with the

highest average grievance rate had production 6.7 percent below the level of

output possible without grievance activity. One mill lost only 0.1 percent of

its potential production. The average production loss associated with movements

in grievance rates among the ten unionized mills was 1.7 percent. Furthermore,

it is estimated that a nonunion mill in this sample behaves as if it had an
                                        —29—




average grievance rate of .0012, which corresponds to production 15.1 percent

below the grievance—free level of output. This implicit average grievance

rate for the nonunion mill in fact exceeds the maximum    grievance   rate in any of

the union mills in any month. While mills with relatively low grievance rates

may have devoted more resources toward reducing grievance activity than high

grievance mills, these production losses help gauge the economic value of these

sorts of efforts. This unique study of plant—level production suggests that

significant economic gains can be obtained from improving a firm's industrial

relations climate.

      Finally, these results suggest certain directions for future industrial

relations research. The notion of "good labor relations" should be defined in

terms of some objective criterion. Here I select a managerial criterion of pro-

ductivity. The suggestion that low grievance rates are associated with high

levels of productivity indicatee that this management—based criterion for good

industrial relations performance may   not be   in conflict with an employee—based

criterion; that is, it is reasonable to suspect that low grievance rates also

reflect higher levels of employee welfare. A more complete set of determinants

of grievances as well as other indicators of a firm's industrial relations

environment    should be considered as potential determinants of a firm's economic
performance.
                                      —30—




                                   FOOTNOTES


1. For a review of these studies, see Freeman, Richard B. and J.L. Medoff,
    "Trade Unions and Productivity: Some New Evidence on an Old Issue," FIBER
    Working Paper No. 12b9, Cambridge, Massachusetts, (December 1983).

2. Absenteeism, quit behavior, accidents, and strikes are correlated with pro-
    ductivity in Pencavel, John H. "Analysis of an Index of Industrial Morale,"
    British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 12(1), March 19Th. Grievance
    rates, absenteeism and contract negotiations behavior are correlated with an
    efficiency index in Katz, Harry, T. Kochan, and K. Gobeille, "Industrial
    Relations Performance, Economic Performance, and the effects of Quality of
   Working Life Efforts: An Interplant Analysis," Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review (October 1983); and in Katz, Harry, T. Kochan, and P4.
   Weber, "Assessing the Effects of Industrial Relations and Quality of Working
    Life Efforts on Organizational Effectiveness," December 1982, Sloan School
    of Management Working Paper No. 1381—82.

3. One simple hypothesis that would predict a positive grievance—productivity
    relationship would be that as economic activity in an establishment
    increases, more grievance activity would be generated, so that the causality
    would run from production to grievance activity.

    Katz, Kochan, and Gobeille, and Katz Kochan and Weber document an inverse
    relationship between grievance rates and plant efficiency in their studies.
    Also, see Hayes, Robert H. and Kim B. Clark, "Exploring the Sources of
    Productivity Differences at the Factory Level," Paper presented at the 15th
    Anniversary Colloquium on Productivity and Technology, March 28—29, 198b,
    Harvard Business School, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Hayes and Clark document
    an inverse relationship between grievance rates and a measure of a plant's
    total factor of productivity for manufacturing plants in several industries.

5. Hayes and Clark argue that increases in grievance rates reflect lower worker
    morale. See Hayes and Clark, pp. 28—29.    Katz, Kochan, and Gobeille and
    Katz, Kochan and Weber argue in favor of the increased grievance activity
    reflects poor industrial relations performance.

6. Slichter, Sumner, J. Healy and H. Livernash. The Impact of Collective
    Bargaining on Management. (Washington, D.C.: Brookings    Institution,
    1960), pp. 692—720.

1. Lewin, David. "Theoretical Perspectives on the Modern Grievance
    Procedure," paper presented at New Approaches to Labor Unions Conference,
    Virginia Polytechnic and State University (October 1981).
                                     —31—




8. Peach, David A. and E.R. Livernash, Grievance Initiation and Resolution: A
    Study in Basic Steel. (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University, l974).

9.   Lewin, p. 11.

10. Eisele, C.F. "Plant Size and Frequency of Strikes," Labor Law Journal 21
     (December 1970), pp. 779086; Shorey, John. "The Size of the Work Unit and
     Strike Incidence," Journal of Industrial Economics 23 (March 1915), pp.
     175—88.

11. Lewin, p. 12.

12. Slichter, Healy, and Livernash, p. 102.

13. Lewin, p. 11.

     See for example: Fleishrnan, Edwin A. and Edwin F. Harris, "Patterns of
     Leadership Behavior Related to Employee Grievances and Turnover,"
     Personnel Psycholo 15 (Winter 1962), pp. 14355; Peach, David A. "Union
     and Management Decision—Making in the Grievance Process," Relations
     Industrielles 27 (Fall 1972), pp. 757—67; Stagner, Ross. "Personality
     Variables in Union—Management Relations," Journal of &pplied Psycholor )45
     (October 1962), pp. 350—351.

15. For a smaller sample of observations, data on two labor turnover measures,
     quit and discharge rates, were also collected as potential correlates of
     grievance activity. Neither obtained consistently significant coefficients
     in grievance rate equations.


16. Ichniowski, Casey, "Micro Production Functions Aren't Pretty: Firm—Level
     and Industry—Level Specification for Inputs and Outputs." NBER Working
     Paper No. 1365, Cambridge, Massachusetts, (June, 198l), pp. 6—16.

17. Ibid., pp. 8—11.

18. Ibid., pp. 11—13.

19. Ibid., pp. 19—21.

20. While it is not precisely correct to consider the input specification for
     capital in equation 1 as being derived from the Cobb—Douglas form (see
     Ichniowski, p.22), this representation does provide a useful illustrative
     framework for considering the role of grievances in the production process.
     The specification of the labor input in equation 1 is in fact a direct ln—
     transformation of the specification for labor in equation 2.
                                     —32—




21. These productivity effects of the correlates of grievance rates, par-
     ticularly contract pages, are being explored in greater detail in current
     research.

22. A plant—level union productivity study also suggests that the role of
     formen is critical in the productive operation of firms. See Clark, Kim,
     "The Impact of Unionization of Productivity: A Case Study," Industrial and
     Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33 (July 1980), pp. 462—461.
