                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INSURANCE AND OPPORTUNITIES:
                      A WELFARE ANALYSIS OF LABOR MARKET RISK

                                          Jonathan Heathcote
                                           Kjetil Storesletten
                                          Giovanni L. Violante

                                         Working Paper 13673
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13673


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2007




We would like to thank, without implicating, Randy Wright. Several ideas in this paper originated
from a conversation we had with him. We also thank Marco Bassetto, Jeremy Greenwood, Guido Lorenzoni,
Victor Rios-Rull, one anonymous referee, and participants to many seminars and conferences for comments.
Heathcote and Violante thank the Economics Program of the National Science Foundation (grant SES
0418029) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insurance and Opportunities: A Welfare Analysis of Labor Market Risk
Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 13673
December 2007
JEL No. E21,J22,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a model with constant relative risk-aversion preferences, endogenous labor supply and partial
insurance against idiosyncratic wage risk, we provide an analytical characterization of three welfare
effects: (a) the welfare effect of a rise in wage dispersion, (b) the welfare gain from completing markets,
and (c) the welfare effect from eliminating risk. Our analysis reveals an important trade-off for these
welfare calculations. On the one hand, higher wage uncertainty increases the cost associated with missing
insurance markets. On the other hand, greater wage dispersion presents opportunities to raise aggregate
productivity by concentrating market work among more productive workers. Our welfare effects can
be expressed in terms of the underlying parameters defining preferences and wage risk, or alternatively
in terms of changes in observable second moments of the joint distribution over individual wages,
consumption and hours.


Jonathan Heathcote                                   Giovanni L. Violante
Dept. of Economics                                   Department of Economics
Georgetown University                                New York University
ICC Bldg. 5th Floor                                  19 W. 4th Street
Washington, DC 20057                                 New York, NY 10012-1119
jhh9@georgetown.edu                                  and NBER
                                                     glv2@nyu.edu
Kjetil Storesletten
Department of Economics
University of Oslo
Box 1095 Blindern
N-0317 Oslo
Norway
kjetil.storesletten@econ.uio.no
1         Introduction

Cross-sectional wage dispersion and individual wage volatility over the life-cycle are large.
For example, the variance of the growth rate of individual wages in the United States in the
cross-section is over 100 times larger than the variance of the growth rate of average wages
over time.1 Moreover, there has been a sharp increase in wage dispersion in the United
States over the past thirty years.2 An important task for macroeconomists is to study the
welfare consequences of this phenomenon.

        In this paper, we develop a tractable class of dynamic heterogeneous-agent economies
with partial insurance against idiosyncratic labor productivity (wage) risk and with endoge-
nous labor supply. The process for idiosyncratic wages has two orthogonal components: an
uninsurable piece, and a component that may be fully insured. This modelling strategy
for market incompleteness allows us to solve for the equilibrium allocations in closed form,
which in turn leads to a transparent welfare analysis.

        Several authors have examined the welfare consequences of changes in earnings or income
risk.3 We focus instead on wage risk and endogenize labor supply because the ability to adjust
hours can mitigate the welfare cost of rising wage inequality via two alternative channels.
First, agents may vary hours worked inversely with fluctuations in individual wages, thereby
reducing fluctuations in earnings. Alternatively, agents may choose to work more hours in
periods when individual wages are high, thereby increasing average earnings per hour. A
negative wage-hour correlation is more likely to be observed if agents cannot smooth income
by other means, such as by purchasing explicit insurance against wage risk. Conversely
the wage-hour correlation will be positive if wage inequality can be insured directly within
financial markets. Thus the model highlights an interesting interaction between the asset
market structure and the role of endogenous labor supply in absorbing idiosyncratic wage
shocks.4
    1
     This number is calculated from the PSID, 1967-1996. The variance of the mean wage growth over the
period is 0.0012 and the cross-sectional variance of individual wage growth, averaged over the period, is
0.161. See Section 7 for details on the sample selection.
   2
     For surveys on the causes of the changes in inequality, see Katz and Autor (1999), Acemoglu (2002),
Aghion (2002), and Hornstein, Krusell and Violante (2005).
   3
     See e.g. Attanasio and Davis (1996); Blundell and Preston (1998); Krueger and Perri (2006); and Krebs,
Krishna and Maloney (2005).
   4
     Low (2005) explores the implications of this interaction for the life-cycle profiles of consumption, hours
and asset holdings.


                                                      1
       We consider two standard classes of time-additive preferences with constant relative risk
aversion; one in which agents have CRRA preferences over a Cobb-Douglas composite of
consumption and leisure, and one in which preferences are additively separable between
consumption and hours worked. For each preference specification we derive intuitive ana-
lytic solutions for equilibrium allocations and expected lifetime utility as functions only of
preference parameters and of the variances of the insurable and uninsurable components
in individual labor productivity. These transparent expressions enable us to answer three
distinct questions related to welfare and inequality.5

       First, what are the welfare costs of rising wage dispersion, holding constant the asset
market structure? Second, what are the welfare costs of market incompleteness, defined as
the difference between expected lifetime utility in the baseline incomplete-markets economy
versus a complete-markets economy, holding constant the wage-generating process? Third,
what are the welfare effects from eliminating individual wage risk ? This last welfare calcu-
lation is the cross-sectional equivalent of the calculation underlying the vast literature on
the welfare costs of business cycles fluctuations (for a survey, see Lucas, 2003). Note that
these three inquiries reflect changes in different primitives of the model: technology in the
first (e.g., skill-biased technical change), markets in the second (e.g., the emergence of new
financial instruments), and policies in the third (e.g., redistributive taxation schemes that
align ex-post wages across all workers).

       When labor supply is flexible, increased wage inequality impacts not only consumption
inequality, but also leisure inequality and the average values for consumption and leisure.
More precisely, welfare effects are driven by two offsetting forces: an increase in idiosyncratic
wage risk increases the need for insurance, but also presents opportunities to increase the level
of aggregate productivity, measured as output per hour worked, by concentrating work effort
among more productive workers. To clarify the trade-off between risk and opportunities, we
decompose the overall welfare effects into the relative contributions of changes in aggregate
consumption and leisure on the one hand, and changes in the cross-sectional dispersion of
these variables on the other (see also Benabou, 2002; and Flodén, 2001).

       A related point is that there is an important difference between insuring risk and elimi-
   5
    It should be clarified that we study inequality in individual labor productivities within a competitive
labor market. Thus we do not analyze “frictional inequality” - pure wage dispersion arising between ex ante
identical workers because of search frictions (e.g., Mortensen, 2003).


                                                    2
nating risk when labor supply is flexible. In fact, eliminating risk will always lead to smaller
welfare gains than insuring risk, because removing risk also takes away opportunities to
increase average labor productivity.

    The first set of analytical welfare expressions we report incorporate structural model
parameters defining preferences and the insurability of wage risk. A key result of the paper
is that welfare effects can alternatively be expressed as simple functions of various moments
of the cross-sectional joint distribution over wages, hours and consumption. For example,
in the separable-preferences case, the welfare effect associated with a change in the wage
process can be expressed as the sum of the changes in (i) the covariance between log-wages
and log-hours, (ii) the variance of log-consumption weighted by the coefficient of relative
risk-aversion, and (iii) the variance of log-hours weighted by the inverse of the labor supply
elasticity.

    This representation of welfare effects has two advantages relative to our first structural-
model-based set of welfare expressions. First, it is more general, since it does not depend
on the particular market structure assumed. In particular, the expression applies to any
economy in which the standard intratemporal consumption-leisure first order condition con-
dition is satisfied, and in which equilibrium allocations and wages are jointly log-normally
distributed. The second advantage is that we do not have to take a stand on the fraction
of wage risk that is insurable. Thus we can estimate welfare effects simply by computing
the relevant moments in repeated cross-sections and assigning values to preference parame-
ters. However, a drawback with the cross–sectional-moment-based representation is that it
requires high-quality data on consumption and hours, while the first approach only requires
panel data on wages. We therefore view the two alternative approaches as complementary.
In the rest of the paper, we refer to the first set of welfare expressions as “model-based” and
to the second as “observables-based”.

    In the quantitative part of the paper we compute the answers to our three welfare ques-
tions by calibrating the model to the U.S. economy. With Cobb-Douglas preferences and a
coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to two, the welfare cost of the rise in labor market
risk in the U.S. over the past 30 years in the incomplete-markets economy is 2.5% of lifetime
consumption. This number is the combination of a welfare loss of 7.5% due to larger unin-
surable fluctuations in individual consumption and hours, and a welfare gain of 5% from an
increase in aggregate labor productivity.

                                               3
    For the same preferences, households would be willing, ex-ante, to give up almost 40%
of their expected lifetime consumption in exchange for access to complete markets. One
might suspect that this welfare gain stems from reducing inequality in the cross-sectional
distributions for consumption and leisure. Instead, we find that two thirds of the welfare
gains from completing markets take the form of higher average productivity. Thus our
analysis highlights an important cost of missing markets that has been largely overlooked
to date, namely the loss in aggregate labor productivity that arises when low productivity
agents work too much (because lack of insurance makes them inefficiently poor) while high
productivity agents work too little (because lack of insurance makes them inefficiently rich).
    Finally, we find that eliminating all individual wage risk through distortionary taxation
delivers a welfare gain which is only about half the size of the gain from completing markets,
but at least two orders of magnitude larger than Lucas’ estimates of the potential welfare
gains from stabilizing business cycles (0.008-0.1 percent of average consumption).
    The main contribution of our paper is to clarify what drives the welfare effects of changes
in the wage process, emphasizing the role of labor supply. In addition, our simple framework
can also shed light on the quantitative findings of richer incomplete-markets models with more
complex interaction between wages and the wealth distribution. In particular, when properly
calibrated, our model delivers quantitatively similar results to Krueger and Perri (2003), and
Pijoan-Mas (2005). The advantage of our approach is that welfare effects can be solved for in
closed form (rather than via numerical solution and simulation), and consequently the roles
of preference parameters, wage risk parameters and market structure are all transparent.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model economies,
and Section 3 defines our three welfare measures. Sections 4 and 5 characterize equilibrium
allocations and the analytical model-based welfare expressions that obtain under the two al-
ternative preference specifications we consider. Section 6 derives the alternative observables-
based welfare representation. Section 7 describes the calibration to the U.S., and reports
our quantitative results. Section 8 concludes the paper.


2     The Economy

Demographics and preferences: The economy is populated by a unit mass of infinitely-
lived agents. Each agent has the same time-separable utility function over streams of con-

                                               4
sumption {ct }∞                         ∞
              t=0 and hours worked {ht }t=0 ,

                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                    W = (1 − β)E0               β t u (ct , ht ) ,
                                                          t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the agents’ discount factor. We will consider two alternative specifications
for the period utility function. In the first, consumption and leisure (1 − ht ) enter in a Cobb-
Douglas fashion. In the second, period utility is separable between consumption and hours
worked.

       Production and individual labor productivity: The aggregate production function
exhibits constant returns to scale with labor as the only input. Output cannot be stored. The
labor market and the goods market are perfectly competitive, so individual wages equal in-
dividual productivity. Since we do not focus on growth or aggregate short-term fluctuations,
we normalize the hourly rental rate per efficiency unit of labor to unity.

       Individuals’ wage rates vary stochastically over time, and are independently and iden-
tically distributed across the agents in the economy. We assume that an individual’s log
wage at a point in time has two orthogonal components: a fixed effect α ∈ A ⊆ R, and a
transitory iid shock εt ∈ E ⊆ R:
                                             log wt = α + εt .                                            (1)

The fixed effect α is drawn in an initial period prior to the start of period 0. Then for every
t ≥ 0, each agent draws a value for εt .6 Let Φv denote the Normal cumulative distribution
function with mean − v2 and variance v. Then, εt ∼ Φvε and α ∼ Φvα . As a result, log w ∼ Φv ,
where v = vε + vα , which implies that the population mean wage (in levels) is equal to one.
The fact that the mean wage is invariant to dispersion will turn out to be convenient when
we study comparative statics with respect to the variances vε and vα .

       Market structure: Households have access to perfect insurance against the transitory
ε-shocks and no insurance against the permanent α-shocks. Since α is not insured, the
equilibrium of this economy will only offer partial insurance. The extent to which insurance
   6
    These assumptions on the statistical representation of the shocks are made mainly for ease of exposition.
In Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2007b) we demonstrate that the analysis can be extended to allow
for a richer specification of the wage process, while still retaining analytical tractability. The process for
α (the uninsurable component) can incorporate permanent shocks, and the process for ε (the insurable
component) can virtually follow any ARIMA process.


                                                      5
is incomplete depends on the size of vα relative to vε . We define competitive equilibria
sequentially: all assets traded are one-period-ahead Arrow securities in zero net supply.

       Budget constraints: The period-t budget constraint is given by
                            Z
                       ct +   pt (ε0 ) bt (ε0 ) dε0 = bt−1 + wt ht t ≥ 0,                                (2)
                                 E

                                                                                              0
where bt−1 is the realized gross return on assets purchased in t − 1, and pt (ε ) and bt (ε0 )
are functions defining respectively the price and quantity purchased of securities that pay
one unit of output in period t + 1 contingent on the realization of εt+1 . An arbitrarily loose
constraint on borrowing rules out Ponzi schemes.

       In period t = −1, the timing is as follows. First α is drawn. Then financial markets open
offering state-contingent claims conditional on the realization of ε0 . Agents are born with
zero financial wealth, so the initial portfolio purchased must satisfy the budget constraint
                              Z
                                  pt (ε0 ) bt (ε0 ) dε0 = 0 t = −1.
                                     E


       Discussion: Our model imposes exogenously a specific market structure leading to
partial insurance. In this respect, it belongs to the set of models in which markets are
exogenously incomplete, a set which also includes “Bewley models” in which asset trade is
limited to a non-contingent bond. Our approach to modelling partial insurance is designed to
capture, in a tractable way, the fact that actual economies allow some degree of risk sharing
through a variety of channels, but not perfect risk-sharing.7 We partition risks into two
categories: the first set of risks are assumed transitory in nature and fully insurable, while
the second are permanent and fully uninsurable. There are at least two ways to motivate
these assumptions.

       First, one natural interpretation of our framework is as an approximation to models in the
Bewley (1986) tradition in which a single risk-free asset is traded. Even though these models
do not have explicit insurance markets, allocations in the two environments are very similar
   7
    Cochrane (1991) finds evidence of full insurance against short-lived transitory income shocks (e.g. short
spell of illness, absence from work due to strikes). Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1992) argue that some
income shocks are fully absorbed within the family. Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi (2005) show that a
sizeable fraction of firm-level productivity shocks are insured by the firm and do not transmit to workers.
Livshits et al. (2006) demonstrate that bankruptcy laws act as effective insurance against some states with
low income realizations.


                                                     6
because borrowing and saving through a risk-free asset allows for near-perfect smoothing of
transitory shocks, but provides no insurance against permanent productivity differences.8
However, while Bewley models require numerical solution, equilibrium allocations in our
economies can be characterized analytically, as shown below. In Section 7 we revisit the
comparison between these two models.

       Second, one could interpret the model literally as capturing that there exists explicit in-
surance against some risks (such as short spells of unemployment or illness) but not against
others (such as being endowed with low ability or being born to poor or uneducated par-
ents). In environments where market incompleteness emerges endogenously as a result of
informational or enforcement frictions, it is typically relatively easy to provide insurance
against transitory risks, and relatively hard to provide insurance against permanent risks.
This suggests a further rationale for our assumed mapping between the persistence of shocks
and their insurability.9

       Solving for the equilibrium: It is instructive to sketch our approach for finding the
competitive equilibrium allocations (see Appendix A for full details). We start by guessing
that because the distributions for α and ε are independent, agents can perfectly diversify
shocks to ε by trading Arrow securities only with other agents sharing their particular
realization for α. In other words, we guess that the economy is equivalent to a world in
which agents are distributed across segregated “α−islands”, where each island is a closed
economy with complete insurance against the ε shocks. We can then solve for allocations at
the island level using a static planner’s problem with equal weights (equal since all members
of an island share the same uninsurable component α and have zero initial financial wealth).
The planner chooses how to allocate labor effort and consumption among all agents on
the island, subject to a resource constraint that equates aggregate island consumption to
aggregate island production. Given these allocations, we compute the implied prices of Arrow
securities in the corresponding within-island competitive equilibria, and verify that these
prices do not depend on α. This confirms the initial guess of no trade between α−islands.10
   8
     See Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1997) for discussions on the role of precautionary saving in smoothing
income shocks which are not too persistent.
   9
     See, for example, Huggett and Parra (2006) and Krueger and Perri (2006) for discussions of the link
between persistence of shocks and ability to provide insurance in economies with, respectively, private infor-
mation and limited commitment frictions.
  10
     In Heathcote et al. (2007b) we show that this approach for solving for the equilibrium allocations remains
valid even when agents face permanent stochastic innovations to α.

                                                      7
    A very convenient property of equilibrium allocations that follows intuitively from the
solution method is that the pair (α, ε) constitutes a sufficient statistic for equilibrium indi-
vidual consumption, hours worked, and start of period asset holdings. It is not necessary
to include individual financial wealth as a separate state variable when characterizing con-
sumption and hours worked because the distribution of individual wealth naturally does not
appear in the planner’s problem that is used to solve for within-island allocations. This
feature of the economy simplifies the solution considerably, since instead of keeping track
of the endogenous evolution of individual wealth, we need only worry about the exogenous
evolution of individual labor productivity. By contrast, in the typical Bewley model, no
shocks can be perfectly insured, and the welfare theorems do not apply. Thus the compet-
itive equilibrium must be tackled directly, which means including individual wealth as an
endogenous state variable.

    We denote the time-invariant functions defining equilibrium individual wages, consump-
tion, hours and start-of-period asset holdings w(α, ε), c(α, ε), h(α, ε) and b(α, ε) respectively.


3     Three welfare questions

We compare and rank allocations using the following utilitarian social welfare function:
                                           Z Z
                       P∞
                            t
       W = (1 − β)E0      β u (ct , ht ) =     u (c (α, ε) , h (α, ε)) dΦvε (ε)dΦvα (α)  (3)
                           t=0
                                             A E


    This expression for welfare has two interpretations. First, it is the value for a utilitarian
planner who weights all agents equally. Second, it is the expected lifetime utility for an agent
at time t = 0 “under the veil of ignorance”, i.e., before uncertainty is realized.

    We assess the welfare costs associated with labor market uncertainty from three related
perspectives. First, given the insurance market structure, what is the welfare effect of a
rise in labor market risk? Second, for a given level of risk, what are the welfare gains from
completing markets? Third, what is the welfare gain from eliminating all labor market risk?

    Welfare effect from rising labor market risk: Suppose the variances of permanent
and transitory shocks rise from vα and vε to vbα and vbε , respectively. Let ∆vα = vbα − vα and
∆vε = vbε −vε . Let ω denote the associated welfare gain, expressed in units of the “equivalent

                                                8
compensating variation” in lifetime consumption under the baseline wage variance:
  Z Z                                                Z Z
      u ((1 + ω)c(α, ε), h(α, ε)) dΦvε (ε)dΦvα (α) =       c(α, ε), b
                                                         u(b        h(α, ε))dΦvbε (ε)dΦvbα (α).
  A E                                                    A E
                                                                                             (4)
      c(α, ε) and b
where b           h(α, ε) denote equilibrium choices in the economy with vbα and vbε .

   A theme of our paper is that increases in wage dispersion can impact aggregate pro-
ductivity (by changing the covariance between hours worked and individual productivity)
in addition to affecting the amount of risk that agents face. We are therefore interested
in decomposing the overall welfare effect ω into two pieces – a level effect and a volatility
effect. The level effect captures the welfare effect associated with changes in the size of the
aggregate pie. The volatility effect captures the welfare effect associated with changes in
how evenly the pie is distributed.

   Formally, our strategy for identifying these two components closely follows that outlined
by Flodén (2001), who in turn builds on earlier work by Benabou (2002). Let capital letters
denote population averages. We define the level effect associated with an increase in wage
dispersion (in units of consumption) as the value for ω lev that solves:
                                    ¡¡            ¢    ¢
                                u                           b H).
                                         1 + ω lev C, H = u(C, b                             (5)

   Next, for an agent behind the veil of ignorance, define the cost of uncertainty (in terms
of consumption) as the value for p that solves
                                    Z Z
                u ((1 − p) C, H) =       u (c(α, ε), h(α, ε)) dΦvε (ε)dΦvα (α)               (6)
                                          A E

Note that the cost of uncertainty is a measure of the utility difference between drawing a
lottery over c(α, ε) and h(α, ε) versus receiving the expected values for consumption and
leisure associated with this lottery. Analogously, we can define the cost of uncertainty
associated with the higher variances vbα and vbε , which we denote pb.

   We then define the volatility effect ω vol of an increase in wage dispersion as

                                    (1 + ω vol )(1 − p) = 1 − pb.                            (7)

Thus the volatility effect is the percentage change in the cost of uncertainty associated with
the increase in wage dispersion.

                                                  9
       For both types of preferences, we will establish that the two components approximately
sum to the total welfare effect, i.e., ω ' ω lev + ω vol .

       Welfare gains from completing markets: We measure the welfare gain associated
with completing insurance markets, for given levels of permanent and transitory risk vα and
vε , as the percentage increase in consumption in the partial-insurance economy required to
achieve the same welfare as in the economy with complete markets. In particular, we define
the welfare gain as the value for χ that solves
Z Z                                                 Z Z
     u ((1 + χ)c(α, ε), h(α, ε)) dΦvε (ε)dΦvα (α) =     u (c(0, α + ε), h(0, α + ε)) dΦvε (ε)dΦvα (α),
A E                                                       A E
                                                                                                        (8)
where the expression on the right-hand side reflects welfare when markets are complete and
fluctuations in both α and ε are insurable.

       Completing markets amounts to reducing the variance of uninsurable risk, and simulta-
neously increasing the variance of insurable risk by the same amount vα . Thus the welfare
effect can be read directly from the expression for ω in (4) by setting v̂ε = vε +vα and v̂α = 0.

       Welfare effect of eliminating risk: In computing the welfare cost of business cycles,
Lucas (1987) compared welfare associated with the actual U.S. time series for aggregate con-
sumption to welfare associated with the trend for the actual path.11 Thus he calculated the
hypothetical welfare gain from eliminating aggregate fluctuations. We calculate the welfare
gains from eliminating idiosyncratic risk by making the same actual to trend comparison as
Lucas, but at the individual rather than the aggregate level. Thus we set every individual’s
wage at every date equal to its unconditional expected value.

       For Lucas, eliminating aggregate fluctuations was a hypothetical thought experiment.
One could view our experiment in a similar light, but in the context of our model this outcome
can in fact be achieved via an appropriate policy of full wage compression. In particular,
wage risk can be eliminated by a system of distortionary wage taxes and subsidies that
guarantees each worker an after-tax hourly wage rate equal to average labor productivity,
which in turn equals one. Thus, the tax (subsidy) rate paid by a worker with current pre-tax
  11
    More recently, Storesletten et. al. (2001), Krusell and Smith (1999), and Krebs (2003) have made similar
calculations in models with heterogeneous agents. See Lucas (2003) for a critical survey.



                                                    10
wage w is given by τ (w) = 1 − 1/w.12

       In the context of our model, eliminating wage risk amounts to reducing to zero the
variances of both components of the wage process. Thus the welfare calculation can be read
directly from the expression for ω in (4) by setting v̂ε = 0 and v̂α = 0.

       Finally, note that the solutions for ω, χ and κ represent welfare comparisons across two
steady states characterized by different variances for wages. However, this does not imply
that our welfare expressions ignore transitional dynamics. Rather the transition to a new
steady state in response to a change in the wage process is immediate in our environment.13


4        Cobb-Douglas preferences

First, we consider preferences that are Cobb-Douglas between consumption and leisure, i.e.,
                                                ¡               ¢1−θ
                                               cη (1 − h)1−η
                                    u (c, h) =                         .
                                                     1−θ
where η ∈ (0, 1) determines the relative taste for consumption versus leisure. Cobb-Douglas
preferences are widely used in the macro literature, since they are consistent with balanced
growth, irrespective of the choice for θ. In labor economics, this specification is often ad-
vocated because there is some empirical evidence of non-separability between consumption
and leisure (Heckman, 1974; Browning and Meghir, 1991).

       The parameter η is generally pinned down by the share of disposable time agents devote
to market work, implying that the single parameter θ governs both the intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution for consumption and the corresponding elasticity for hours worked. In
particular, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for consumption is given by 1/θ.
  12
     To verify that this system of wage taxes and subsidies is feasible we need to check that it is revenue
neutral. Since every agent faces the same after-tax wage, each agent works the same number of hours per
period and enjoys the same level of consumption. Per-capita consumption will equal per-capita after-tax
income, which in turn is equal to (constant) hours times the after-tax wage, which is equal to one given
the tax function τ (w). Since average labor productivity is also equal to one, output per-capita will equal
consumption per-capita. It follows immediately that the tax-subsidy scheme is revenue-neutral.
  13
     More precisely, the transition due to an unforeseen one-off change in the variances of either or both
components of the wage process is immediate in the sense that our expected welfare measure (3) takes
the same value in the period the wage process changes as in all subsequent periods. The key assumption
underlying this result is that assets are in zero net supply.



                                                    11
       The coefficient of relative risk aversion is
                                                      cucc
                                  γ̄ ≡ γ (θ, η) ≡ −        = 1 − η + ηθ.                                    (9)
                                                       uc

       The Frisch elasticity of labor supply depends on hours worked, and is given by φ (θ, η, h) =
λ (1 − h) /h, where λ ≡ (1 − η + ηθ) /θ defines the Frisch elasticity for leisure.14 It is useful to
define a “non-stochastic Frisch” elasticity of labor supply corresponding to a non-stochastic
version of the model, in which case h = H = η, where H denotes average hours worked:
                                                      uh                     λ(1 − η)
                           φ̄ ≡ φ(θ, η, H) ≡               u2ch h
                                                                    |h=H =            .                    (10)
                                                 uhh h −                        η
                                                            ucc



4.1        Equilibrium allocations with Cobb-Douglas preferences

The equilibrium consumption and leisure allocations in our partial-insurance economy are:
                                                                            vε
                           log c (α, ε) = log (η) + α + (1 − λ) ε + λ(1 − λ) ,                             (11)
                                                                            2
                                                                      vε
                    log (1 − h (α, ε)) = log (1 − η) − λε + λ(1 − λ) .
                                                                      2

       The insurable transitory shock ε reduces leisure proportionately to the Frisch elasticity
for leisure λ. Moreover, leisure is independent of the permanent uninsurable component α
since the income and substitution effects associated with an uninsurable change in the wage
exactly offset with Cobb-Douglas utility.
       Because α has no impact on hours worked, consumption is directly proportional to α.
Given non-separability between consumption and leisure, current consumption depends on
the insurable shock ε as long as λ 6= 1. For λ < 1 (which is equivalent to θ > 1), con-
sumption and leisure are substitutes, in the sense that the marginal utility of consumption
is decreasing in leisure. In this case, in order to equate the marginal utility of consumption
inter-temporally, individuals who draw a high value for ε and who therefore enjoy relatively
little leisure must be compensated with relatively high consumption. When θ = 1 (in which
case u (c, h) = η log c + (1 − η) log(1 − h)), consumption is constant and equal to η exp(α).
       Note that individual consumption and leisure also depend on the variance of the insurable
component of the log wage, vε . For λ ∈ (0, 1) , both consumption and leisure are increasing
  14
    The Frisch elasticity of labor supply (leisure) measures the elasticity of hours worked (leisure) to changes
in wages, keeping the marginal utility of consumption constant.

                                                      12
in insurable wage dispersion. We will return to this point when examining the welfare effects
of a rise in wage dispersion.

   Appendix A contains the derivations of the above expressions for c (α, ε) and h (α, ε) .
We also show that the cost of an individual’s portfolio of Arrow securities is zero. Hence the
budget constraint (2) implies that for each possible realization ε0 , the payoff from the cor-
responding Arrow security can alternatively and intuitively be expressed as the equilibrium
value for current consumption net of current labor income, or
                                                   ³                        vε ´
     0                  0          0       0                    0
 b (ε ; (α, ε)) = c(α, ε ) − w(α, ε )h(α, ε ) = exp α + (1 − λ)ε + λ(1 − λ)      − exp(α + ε0 ).
                                                                            2
Note that the dynamics of individual asset income inherit the process for the insurable
component of wages, which is iid over time.


4.2    Welfare analysis with Cobb-Douglas preferences

We collect the answers to our three welfare questions in the following proposition.

   Proposition 1: With Cobb-Douglas preferences the (approximate) welfare effect from a
change in labor market risk (∆vε , ∆vα ) is:
                                        ∆vα      ∆vε             ∆vε      ∆vα
                 ω (∆vα , ∆vε ) ' −γ̄       + φ̄     = φ̄∆vε −φ̄     − γ̄
                                         2        2    | {z } |   2 {z     2}
                                                        ω lev
                                                                       ω vol

Proof: See Appendix B.

   Corollary 1: Let χ (vα ) denote the (approximate) welfare gain from completing markets
in an economy with uninsurable risk variance equal to vα . Let κ(vα , vε ) denote the (approxi-
mate) welfare gain from eliminating risk in an economy with variances (vα , vε ) . Then:
                                                                vα      vα
                         χ (vα )   =     ω (−vα , vα )   ' γ̄      + φ̄
                                                                 2       2
                                                                vα      vε
                        κ(vα , vε ) = ω(−vα , −vε ) ' γ̄           − φ̄
                                                                 2      2

   In the Proof of Proposition 1 we derive the exact closed-form solutions for the wel-
fare effects. However, these expressions are cumbersome and not particularly transparent.
Through a set of log-approximations of the class ln (1 + x) ' x and ex ' 1 + x, one obtains

                                                 13
the simple and useful solutions stated in Proposition 1. The linearity of the welfare effects
in ∆vα and ∆vε is a feature of the approximation. In Section 7.2 we document the quality
of our approximations.

   Welfare effect from rising labor market risk (ω): The first term in the expression
for ω captures the welfare loss associated with a rise in the dispersion of the uninsurable
component of wages. This loss is equal to the expression computed by Lucas (1987) for
the welfare costs of aggregate consumption fluctuations in an economy with inelastic labor
supply. In particular, the welfare loss is proportional to the risk aversion parameter γ̄.

   The second term signals that increasing insurable productivity dispersion increases wel-
fare in proportion to the Frisch elasticity of labor supply φ̄. The intuition is that given
flexible labor supply, an unconstrained planner can achieve better allocative efficiency with
larger productivity dispersion, without any loss in terms of consumption smoothing, by
commanding longer hours from high-productivity workers and higher leisure from less pro-
ductive workers. This result is closely related to the one from classical consumer theory
stating that the indirect utility function of a static consumer is quasi-convex in prices, so a
mean-preserving spread of the price distribution raises welfare (see, for example, Mas Colell
et al., 1995, page 59). The complementarity between hours and productivity in production
– a very natural assumption – is central in obtaining this result.

   In the decomposition of welfare effects into level and volatility components, the level
effect, ω lev , captures the welfare gain associated with the increase in aggregate labor produc-
tivity. Why is there a negative volatility effect related to ∆vε , notwithstanding full insurance
against this source of risk? The reason is that to exploit greater dispersion in productivity
across workers, the planner must increase dispersion in hours. Since utility is concave in
leisure, this is welfare reducing. At the margin, the welfare gain for the planner from addi-
tional specialization in terms of increased average labor productivity is exactly offset by the
loss associated with greater dispersion in leisure.

   There is no level effect associated to a change in uninsurable wage dispersion because
with Cobb-Douglas preferences labor supply is insensitive to uninsurable wage differentials
(income and substitution effects exactly offset). The overall welfare impact from additional
uninsurable dispersion (i.e., Lucas’ expression) is thus equal to the negative volatility effect.

   Figure 1 provides a picture of how our welfare effects vary as we change θ, the parameter

                                               14
defining agents’ willingness to substitute inter-temporally (we hold constant η, the parameter
defining consumption’s share in utility). In panel (A) we plot ω for different values for the
                                       −1
inverse of the Frisch elasticity, φ̄ , which is increasing in θ.15 Raising the Frisch elasticity
              −1
(reducing φ̄ ) reduces the welfare cost of higher dispersion. If labor supply is sufficiently
elastic, rising dispersion is actually welfare-improving. In part this finding reflects the fact
that the productivity gain associated with larger insurable risk is increasing in the Frisch
elasticity, as discussed above. A second effect, working in the same direction, is that with
the Cobb-Douglas utility function a higher Frisch elasticity means a lower coefficient of risk
aversion (see panel (C)), which in turn implies a lower cost of rising uninsurable risk .

       Welfare gain of completing markets (χ): Recall that completing markets means
(i) a reduction ∆vα = −vα in the variance of uninsurable risk and (ii) a corresponding
increase ∆vε = vα in the variance of insurable risk. The first term in the expression for
χ – proportional to the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ̄ – captures the value of the
additional insurance provided by increased risk-sharing. The second term captures the gains
from specialization, whereby more productive households work relatively harder and less
productive households enjoy more leisure.

       Panel (B) of Figure 1 shows how the welfare gain from completing markets varies with
the elasticity of labor supply. Interestingly, the welfare gain is non-monotone. Initially, as
the Frisch elasticity falls (1/φ̄ rises), the welfare gain gets smaller, since it becomes harder
to reallocate hours in favor of more productive workers. However, as φ̄ is reduced, γ̄ rises
(panel (C)), and eventually a point is reached where the value of additional insurance to
shelter consumption fluctuations comes to dominate the welfare calculus

       Welfare effect from eliminating risk (κ): In a model with exogenous labor supply,
there would be no difference between insuring and eliminating idiosyncratic labor income
risk. Both changes would lead to income and consumption being equalized across individuals,
with no changes in aggregate quantities. With endogenous labor supply, however, increasing
risk-sharing is not the same thing as reducing risk at the source. The reason is that additional
insurable risk is welfare-improving with a labor supply choice, as discussed above.
  15
    The values for (vα , vε ) and (∆vα , ∆vε ) used to produce the plots are from the calibration described
                                                    −1
in Section 6.1. Plotting welfare effects against φ̄     rather than against θ facilitates comparison with the
separable preferences specification. We cannot consider very low values for φ̄ in the context of the Cobb-
Douglas utility specification, since lim φ̄(θ, η) = 1 − η.
                                   θ→∞


                                                     15
    Comparing κ with χ, it is clear that the welfare gains from eliminating risk are always
smaller than those from insuring risk. Eliminating the uninsured part of wage dispersion
is welfare-improving, since this reduces consumption dispersion. However, eliminating dis-
persion in the insurable component of wages is detrimental, since it eliminates the positive
covariance between the insurable component of individual productivity and individual hours
that boosts aggregate labor productivity. The cost associated with eliminating insurable
dispersion is increasing in the Frisch elasticity, which explains why the gap between χ and
                        −1
κ is decreasing in φ̄        in panel (B) of Figure 1.

    Our finding that there is a down-side to reducing risk in the presence of flexible labor
supply is mirrored in some work on the welfare costs of business cycles. Cho and Cooley
(2001) noted that if aggregate hours are pro-cyclical, then eliminating aggregate business
cycle risk may reduce average labor productivity. Gomes, Greenwood and Rebelo (2001)
provide an example where aggregate fluctuations may be welfare improving in an equilibrium
search model when the agent can choose to allocate time between work and search.

    Finally, throughout the analysis, we have emphasized that there are benefits and costs
to wage inequality. A natural question then arises: Is there an optimal level of inequality?
Other authors have addressed this question formally within models where there is a trade-off
between inequality and growth (Cordoba and Verdier, 2007) or where inequality has benefits
associated to incentive provision (Phelan, 2006). In our framework, the answer depends on
whether dispersion is insurable. If it is, inequality is unambiguously good, otherwise it is
unambiguously bad.


5     Separable preferences

Separability is a common assumption in the micro literature on consumption and labor
supply (for a survey, see Browning, Hansen and Heckman, 1999). In this case

                                                    c1−γ    h1+σ
                                       u (c, h) =        −ψ      ,                       (12)
                                                    1−γ     1+σ
where γ, σ ∈ [0, +∞). The coefficient of relative risk aversion is simply γ, while the in-
tertemporal elasticity of substitution for consumption is 1/γ. The Frisch elasticity for labor
supply is simply 1/σ. In contrast to Cobb-Douglas preferences, separability allows for a

                                                     16
lot of flexibility in distinguishing between agents’ willingness to substitute consumption and
hours intertemporally.
   Without loss of generality, in what follows we normalize ψ, the parameter measuring the
distaste for work relative to the taste for consumption, to one. It is easy to verify that such
a normalization has no impact on the welfare expressions. An important implication of this
result is that, even if we were to allow for heterogeneity with respect to ψ, our final welfare
expressions would remain unchanged. Thus our analysis is robust to an important class of
preference heterogeneity.
   The derivations for equilibrium allocations with separable preferences are described in
Appendix C.


5.1    Equilibrium allocations with separable preferences

When preferences are separable between consumption and hours worked, equilibrium allo-
cations in the partial-insurance economy are given by:

                                     µ    ¶    µ       ¶
                                      1+σ        1 + σ 1 vε
                     log c (α, ε) =         α+              ,                             (13)
                                      γ+σ        γ+σ σ 2
                                    µ     ¶          µ      ¶
                                      1−γ      1       1 + σ γ vε
                    log h (α, ε) =          α+ ε−                 .
                                      γ+σ      σ       γ + σ σ2 2

   The response of hours to permanent shocks is governed by the Marshallian (uncompen-
sated) elasticity of labor supply (1 − γ) / (γ + σ) . Whether hours increase or decrease with α
depends on the relative strength of substitution versus income effects. With separable pref-
erences, the income effect dominates the substitution effect if the risk aversion parameter
γ is larger than one. The Frisch elasticity 1/σ determines the responsiveness of individual
hours to insurable shocks to individual wages.
   Individual consumption is independent of the realization of the transitory shock ε, re-
flecting full insurance against this component of the wage process coupled with preferences
that are separable between consumption and hours worked. The response of consumption
to the uninsurable component of wages is equal to the response of earnings. Since log earn-
ings is equal to log wages plus log hours, the pass-through coefficient from the uninsurable
component of wages to earnings is given by 1 + (1 − γ) / (γ + σ) = (1 + σ)/(γ + σ).

                                              17
   As under the Cobb-Douglas specification, individual consumption and leisure also depend
on the variance of the insurable component of the log wage, vε . For any individual state (α, ε),
both consumption and leisure are increasing in vε .


5.2    Welfare analysis with separable preferences

We now state a pair of propositions analogous to Propositions 1 and 2.

   Proposition 1a: With separable preferences the (approximate) welfare effect from a
change in labor market risk (∆vε , ∆vα ) is:
                          ·            µ       ¶¸
                            γ−1          1+σ       ∆vα 1 ∆vε
     ω (∆vα , ∆vε ) ' −            +γ                 +
                            γ+σ          γ+σ        2   σ 2
                                                 ·        µ     ¶¸
                          γ−1           1          γ−1      1+σ    ∆vα   1 ∆vε
                    = −        ∆vα + ∆vε +             −γ              −       .
                          γ+σ           σ          γ+σ      γ+σ     2    σ 2
                        |         {z         } |             {z              }
                                    ω lev                              ω vol

Proof: See Appendix D.


   Corollary 1a: With separable preferences, the (approximate) welfare gains from com-
pleting markets and from eliminating risk in an economy with variances (vα , vε ) are given,
respectively, by:
                                                ·            µ         ¶¸
                                                    γ−1          1+σ        vα   1 vα
              χ (vα )   =   ω (−vα , vα )   '           +γ                     +
                                                    γ+σ          γ+σ         2   σ 2
                                                ·            µ         ¶¸
                                                    γ−1          1+σ        vα   1 vε
             κ(vα , vε ) = ω(−vα , −vε ) '              +γ                     −
                                                    γ+σ          γ+σ         2   σ 2

   Welfare effect from rising labor market risk (ω): As with Cobb-Douglas prefer-
ences, increasing insurable productivity dispersion strictly increases welfare in proportion
to the Frisch elasticity. Once again, the intuition is simply that an unconstrained planner
can achieve better allocative efficiency with larger dispersion by having the more productive
agents specialize in market work. An interesting difference between the two preference speci-
fications is that when preferences are separable, the productivity gain associated with greater
wage dispersion translates into higher average consumption, whereas in the Cobb-Douglas



                                                18
case productivity gains have no impact on average consumption, but translate into higher
welfare through an increase in average leisure.16

       The welfare effects of a rise in uninsurable uncertainty are more complex. When γ > 1,
the income effect from a positive wage shock dominates the substitution effect, so agents
increase work effort in bad times. In this case, flexible labor supply is used to improve
consumption smoothing at the expense of productivity (the level effect is negative). When
γ < 1, the substitution effect dominates the income effect, and agents increase work effort
in good times. In this case, flexible labor supply actually increases consumption volatility,
but it is still beneficial because agents are relatively unconcerned about fluctuations in con-
sumption, and concentrating work effort in high wage periods raises average output per hour
(the level effect is positive). In light of our discussion, we conclude that for flexible labor
supply to mitigate the welfare cost of increases in uninsurable wage risk, it must be the case
that γ 6= 1, implying that preferences are inconsistent with balanced growth.

       For γ ≥ 1, the expression for ω indicates that additional uninsurable risk is unambigu-
ously welfare-reducing. However, a surprising finding is that when γ < 1/ (2 + σ), a rise
in vα has a positive welfare effect.17 The intuition is that when risk aversion is sufficiently
small and the labor supply elasticity sufficiently large, agents willingly substitute labor sup-
ply intertemporally to raise average productivity, and are relatively unconcerned about the
resulting fluctuations in consumption. Two interesting benchmarks are γ = 0, in which case
ω = (1/2)(1/σ)(∆vα + ∆vε ), and γ = σ = 1, in which case ω = (1/2)(−∆vα + ∆vε )

       Panel (A) of Figure 2 provides a graphical summary of how the overall cost of rising
dispersion, ω, varies with risk aversion, γ, and the inverse of the Frisch elasticity, σ.

       Welfare gains from completing markets (χ): As in the Cobb-Douglas case, there
are two sources of welfare gains from insuring risk. The first is the gain from the additional
insurance provided by increased risk sharing. The second is the allocative efficiency gain
associated with elastic labor supply: under complete markets, more productive households
work relatively longer hours and less productive households enjoy more leisure.

       The welfare gain from completing markets is strictly increasing in γ, the degree of risk-
  16
     This can be easily seen by computing E [c (α, ε)] and E [1 − h (α, ε)] under both preference specifications.
See Appendix B for the Cobb-Douglas case, and Appendix D for the separable case.
  17
     Recall that in the Cobb-Douglas case, increases in uninsurable wage dispersion vα always reducing
welfare.

                                                       19
aversion. A few benchmarks are of interest. First, for γ = 0 (risk-neutrality), the welfare
gain is exactly zero, since consumption fluctuations are not costly. Second, in the absence of
flexible labor supply (σ → ∞), the welfare gain is χ ' γvα /2, the Lucas expression for the
welfare cost of consumption fluctuations. Third, if γ = σ = 1, then χ ' vα .
       Panel (B) of Figure 2 documents that χ is non-monotone in σ. For σ < 1, χ is always
increasing in the Frisch elasticity. However, for σ ≥ 1, whether or not χ is increasing in
the Frisch elasticity depends on whether γ ≤ 2σ/ (σ − 1). The intuition is that, given
high aversion to consumption fluctuations, an increase in the willingness to substitute hours
intertemporally can have a larger positive impact on welfare under autarky (by effectively
improving self-insurance) than under complete markets (by increasing average productivity).

       Welfare effect from eliminating risk (κ): As in the Cobb-Douglas specification,
eliminating labor market risk amounts to reducing to zero the variances of both components
of the wage process, which is welfare reducing for insurable risk, and likely welfare-improving
for uninsurable risks. Comparing panels (B) and (C) of Figure 2 it is clear that the welfare
gains from eliminating risk are similar to those from completing markets when the Frisch
elasticity is low (σ is high), but are much smaller - and in some cases negative - when the
Frisch elasticity is high.


6        Observables-based welfare analysis

It is possible to derive alternative representations for the welfare effects of rising inequality
(and for the level and volatility components) as functions only of preference parameters and
second moments of the joint cross-sectional distribution for wages, hours and consumption.
       The key advantage of these observables-based expressions, relative to the parametric
expressions described above, is that they are more general. They can be applied to any
economy in which (i) the standard intratemporal optimality condition between consump-
tion and leisure/hours worked is satisfied, and (ii) wages, consumption and leisure/hours are
jointly log-normal. Moreover, in order implement the observables-based approach, we do
not need estimates for how the variances of uninsurable versus insurable wages risks have
changed over time, (∆vα ,∆vε ).18 Thus we can estimate welfare effects simply by computing
  18
   Within the context of our particular model economy, information about these parameters is effectively
embedded in the evolution of equilibrium cross-sectional moments.

                                                  20
   the relevant moments in repeated cross-sections and assigning values to preference param-
   eters. However, the observables-based approach requires high-quality data on consumption
   and hours, while the model-based approach only requires panel data on wages. We therefore
   view the two alternative approaches as complementary.

      The following assumptions are convenient.

      Assumption A1: Preferences are Cobb-Douglas and wages w, consumption c, and
   leisure 1 − h are log-normally distributed in the cross-section.

      Assumption A1’: Preferences are separable and wages w, consumption c, and hours
   worked h are log-normally distributed in the cross-section.

      Assumption A2: Wages and allocations satisfy individual intratemporal optimality, ag-
   gregate consumption equals aggregate labor income, and the average wage equals one (so
   E [log w] = −var (log w) /2).

      We are now ready to state the main result of this section.

      Proposition 2: Under Assumptions A1-A2 and A1’-A2 the (approximate) welfare effect
   ω of a rise in wage dispersion can be expressed as:
                            µ         ¶                  µ     ¶
                          1     uCC C                  1 uHH H                  uCH H
ω ' ∆cov (log w, log h) −     −         ∆var (log c) −           ∆var (log h) +       ∆cov (log c, log h) ,
    |        {z       } 2        uC                    2   uH                    uC
             ω lev      |                                     {z                                         }
                                                                  ω vol

   where C = E (c) and H = E (h). In the Cobb-Douglas case we have

                     uCC C          uHH H             η               uCH H
                 −         = γ̄,          = γ̄ − 1 +     ,      and         = γ̄ − 1
                      uC             uH              1−η               uC
    and in the separable case, we have
                               uCC C        uHH H               uCH H
                           −         = γ,         = σ,    and         = 0.
                                uC           uH                  uC

   Moreover, the level effect ω lev (approximately) equals the percentage change in aggregate labor
   productivity ∆ log (C/H).

      Proof: See Appendix E.


                                                 21
   The expression for ω in Proposition 2 comprises four terms. The first term is the change
in the covariance between hours and wages: a higher positive correlation between individual
hours and individual productivities improves the level of aggregate welfare. This change in
the covariance is equal to the level effect ω lev as defined in (5), and can also be shown to
equal the change in aggregate labor productivity in the economy.

   The second and third terms capture the volatility cost of a rise in wage dispersion: an
increase in the variance of log consumption translates into a welfare cost proportional to the
risk-aversion coefficient, and an increase in the variance of log hours translates into a welfare
cost that is proportional to the coefficient uHH H/uH , which measures aversion to hours
fluctuations. In the separable case, this term is exactly the inverse of the Frisch elasticity,
σ. In the Cobb-Douglas case, when η = 1/2 (consumption and leisure receive equal weight
in utility), it is equal to the risk-aversion coefficient γ̄.

   The fourth term, involving the change in the covariance between consumption and hours
worked, is only present when utility is non-separable in consumption and leisure. It is zero
in the separable case and when the Cobb-Douglas utility function becomes “log-log”, i.e.,
for θ = 1. In the Cobb-Douglas case, when θ > 1 (which implies γ̄ > 1), consumption and
leisure (hours worked) are substitutes (complements); thus households gain from a rise in
the comovement between consumption and hours worked.

   Clearly, our model economy satisfies Assumptions A1-A2. Indeed, one can easily use
our closed-form equilibrium allocations to compute analytical expressions for cross-sectional
moments as a function of preference parameters and variances of uninsurable and insurable
shocks (vα , vε ). Substituting these expressions into the welfare representation of Proposition
2, and rearranging terms, yields the model-based welfare effects of Propositions 1 and 1a.

   A word on the approximations implicit in Proposition 2 is in order. The derivations in
Appendix E show that we can reach exact observables-based representations for both prefer-
ence specifications. However, while the one for the separable case is in terms of hours worked,
the one for the Cobb-Douglas case is in terms of leisure. In order to obtain the common
representation for welfare change in Proposition 2, one needs to take an approximation, in
the Cobb-Douglas case, in order to to translate cross-sectional moments involving leisure
into moments involving hours worked.

   Assumptions A1 and A1’ can be relaxed. In fact, the observables-based expression for

                                                  22
the welfare effect in equation in can alternatively be obtained from a second-order Taylor
approximation of any continuously differentiable concave utility function (where the Taylor
approximation is taken over log c and log h around the average consumption and hours
worked). Log normality of the allocations is required to show that the welfare gain from
changes in aggregate consumption and leisure – the level effect – is approximately equal to
the change in the covariance between log hours and log wages. Details are available upon
request.


7     Quantitative welfare analysis

7.1    Calibration and measurement

First we discuss our baseline choices for preference parameters. Next we discuss the cross-
sectional moments of the joint wage, hours and consumption distribution which we use to
implement our alternative observables-based approach to quantifying the welfare effects of
rising wage dispersion, given the expressions in Proposition 2. Finally, we estimate the
variances of insurable and uninsurable wage risk before (vα , vε ) and after (b
                                                                              vα , vbε ) the recent
well-documented surge in wage dispersion (see Katz and Autor, 1999; Eckstein and Nagypal
2004, for empirical surveys). These variances are a key input of our model-based welfare
expressions of Propositions 1 and 1a.

    Preference parameters:         We begin with the separable case. Estimates for the risk-
aversion coefficient γ (or, identically, for the inverse of the intertemporal labor supply elastic-
ity) between one and three are typical in the empirical consumption literature (see Attanasio,
1999, for a survey), so we set γ = 2. Domeij and Flodén (2006) sample the empirical lit-
erature on male labor supply and conclude that the typical estimates of Frisch elasticities
for male labor supply range between 0.1 and 0.3. However, they argue that these estimates
are downward-biased because the standard estimation methods ignore the possibility that
borrowing constraints may bind. By simulation, they show that the unbiased estimates can
be up to twice as large. Moreover, estimates of this elasticity for females are, in general, 3-4
times as large as those for men (see Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999, Table 2). We therefore
set the Frisch elasticity to 0.5, corresponding to σ = 2.



                                                23
       With Cobb-Douglas utility, the Frisch labor supply elasticity and the coefficient of risk-
aversion are not independent since they are both functions of the pair of parameters (θ, η), as
discussed in Section 4.2. Moreover, the parameter η has a natural counterpart in the fraction
of the time endowment devoted to work activities. Following the macroeconomic literature
on business cycles, we set η = 1/3 (see e.g. Cooley, 1995).19 We then set θ = 4 so the
implied coefficient of risk-aversion γ̄ equals two, as in the separable case. As a by-product,
we obtain a Frisch elasticity φ̄ equal to one – a higher number than in the separable case.20

       We recognize that there is disagreement regarding appropriate values for preference pa-
rameters, and that some may object to our particular choices. One advantage of our closed-
form expressions for welfare is that one can easily plug in alternative values. We present
results for a large set of alternative parameterizations in Figures 1 and 2.

       Measurement of wage, hours and consumption dispersion: From the 1968-1997
waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we select a sample of roughly 2,400
observations/year including every head of household aged between 20 and 59 with positive
earnings (not top-coded and not below half of the current minimum wage), and with annual
hours worked between 520 and 5824.21 We compute hourly wages as annual pre-tax earnings
divided by annual hours worked, and we regress both wages and hours on race dummies and
a quartic in age in order to filter out predictable life-cycle variation.22 We construct variances
and covariances on the (log) residuals of these regressions. We find that the variance of log
wages rose by 0.10 (from 0.25 to 0.35) over this time period, the variance of log-hours worked
rose by 0.01 (from 0.082 to 0.092), and the covariance between hours and wages rose by 0.017
(from -0.023 to -0.006).

       For consumption dispersion, we rely on existing studies based on the Consumer Expen-
  19
      More precisely, the first-order condition for hours worked in a non-stochastic version of the model implies
h = η.
   20
      We chose to equate the coefficient of risk aversion across alternative preference specifications, rather than
the Frisch elasticity for labor supply, because the lower bound on the Frisch elasticity under the Cobb-Douglas
specification is φ = 1 − η = 2/3.
   21
      This latter restriction serves the purpose of reducing the extent to which measurement error in hours,
which is well known to be pervasive, can affect our statistics. In general, the levels of variances and covariances
are potentially affected by measurement error. However, as long as the measurement error 1) is multiplicative
in levels, 2) is orthogonal to the true value, and 3) exhibits constant variance over the period, then the changes
in these measured cross-sectional moments, which are the inputs to our cross-sectional calculations, will not
be affected.
   22
      This first-stage regression ensures consistency with the consumption data, since Krueger and Perri (2006)
report cross-sectional variances for log consumption using residuals from a similar regression.

                                                        24
diture Survey (CEX). For consistency with individual wage and hours data, we focus on
consumption data expressed in adult-equivalent units. According to Slesnick (2001), the rise
in the variance of log-consumption between 1980 and 1995 was small, around 0.01 (0.20 in
1980, 0.21 in 1995). Krueger and Perri (2006) and Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2004)
argue that consumption inequality rose by about 0.05 over the same period. Since there are
important measurement issues that are not yet settled in this literature, we simply adopt a
mid-point estimate of 0.03 for our calculations. Finally, Krueger and Perri (2003) report that
the covariance between hours and consumption declined by 0.007 (from 0.037 to 0.030).23

       Measurement of insurable/uninsurable wage components: We estimate a simple
permanent/transitory model for the variance of log wages, exactly the process specified in
the description of the model economy. The estimated variance of the transitory/insurable
component vε starts around 0.08 in the late 1960s and levels off thirty years later at around
0.13. The variance of the permanent/uninsurable component vα starts at a value around 0.17
and rises to 0.22 in the mid 1990s. In light of these results, we set ∆vε = ∆vα = 0.05 when
evaluating the welfare implications of rising dispersion. Moreover, focusing on the levels of
labor market uncertainty for the 1990s, we set vα = 0.22 and vε = 0.13.24

       An alternative approach to estimating (∆vε , ∆vα ) would involve using expressions for the
variances and covariances of wages, hours and consumption, which can be derived in closed-
form given the equilibrium decision rules in Sections 4 and 5. The idea is that observed
changes in second moments involving endogenous variables are informative about changes
in the variances of underlying insurable and uninsurable shocks. We pursue this strategy in
a companion paper (Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante, 2007b) and find that it delivers a
similar breakdown of increased cross-sectional wage dispersion into insurable and uninsurable
components.
  23
     Note that our PSID sample has an earlier start date than the CEX, which is only available on a consistent
basis since 1980. Fortunately, almost all of the observed rise in wage inequality occurred after this date.
  24
     Our findings can be summarized as follows: (i) the transitory component accounts for roughly 1/3 of the
total dispersion; (ii) the rise in wage dispersion is accounted equally by the two components. These results
are broadly in line with the findings by Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994).




                                                     25
                              Table 1: Welfare Effects (% of lifetime consumption)

                     Welfare effect of                      Welfare gain from        Welfare effect from
                 rise in wage dispersion                   completing markets         eliminating risk
         model-based              observables-based
                                           Cobb-Douglas Preferences
                 ω                         ω                         χ                         κ
       -2.47% (-2.50%)                 -2.75%                 +39.1% (+33.0%)        +16.9% (+15.5%)
        Volat.        Level       Volat.        Level       Volat.        Level       Volat.        Level
       -7.50%        +5.00%       -4.45%       +1.70%      +11.0%        +22.0%      +28.5%        -13.0%

                                                Separable Preferences
                 ω                         ω                         χ                         κ
       -3.06% (-3.13%)                 -2.30%                 +29.2% (+24.8%)        +17.8% (+16.0%)
        Volat.        Level       Volat.        Level      Volat.         Level       Volat.       Level
       -4.38%        +1.25%       -4.00%       +1.70%      +8.3%         +16.5%      +17.0%        -1.0%




7.2       Results

We summarize our results in Table 1. To gauge the quality of our approximations relative to
the exact welfare expressions contained in the Appendix, we also report, in parentheses, the
values implied by the approximated welfare expressions described in Propositions 1 and 1a.
Below the total welfare changes, we report the decomposition of our approximated welfare
effects into level and volatility components.

      Welfare effects of rising dispersion, model-based approach: The welfare losses
associated with the observed rise in wage dispersion are quite similar across the two pref-
erences specifications, between 2.5% and 3% of lifetime consumption. With Cobb-Douglas
preferences, the welfare loss due to the volatility component is 7.5% of lifetime consumption,
while the partially offsetting welfare gain due to improved aggregate labor productivity is
5%. With separable preferences both components are smaller in absolute value. One reason
is that the Frisch elasticity is lower under the separable specification, which implies that
additional insurable risk translates into a smaller increase in hours dispersion, and a smaller
increase in aggregate productivity.25
 25
      In addition, the fact that γ > 1 means that additional uninsurable risk reduces average labor productivity


                                                         26
    Welfare effects of rising dispersion, observables-based approach: For the sep-
arable preferences case (assuming γ = σ = 2), one can easily plug in the observed changes
in the variances of hours, consumption, and in the covariance between hours and wages to
obtain ω = −2.3%. A similar computation for the Cobb-Douglas case (for which we also
need the change in the covariance between hours and consumption) yields ω = −2.75%.
    These estimates are very close to those from the model-based approach, which is encour-
aging given that the two sets of calculations rely on very different inputs. The reason for the
broad correspondence between the two sets of welfare numbers is that viewed through the
lens of our model, the observed changes over time in empirical cross-sectional variances and
covariances for wages, hours and consumption point to values for (∆vε, ∆vα ) that are very
close to the ones we used as inputs to the model-based welfare calculations, i.e., (0.05, 0.05).
    Krueger and Perri (2003) propose evaluating welfare effects using individual consump-
tion data. Using the panel-dimension of CEX, they estimate Markov transition matrices
for consumption and hours worked in two sub-samples (before and after the rise in wage
inequality) and use these stochastic processes directly into preferences to compute welfare
effects. However, in constructing their data, they abstract from the level effect by demean-
ing all observations, so their calculations should be compared to our volatility effect. They
assume Cobb-Douglas preferences and set φ̄ = γ̄ = 1.33. Given the observed changes in
cov (log h, log w) , var (log c) and var (log h), this parameterization maps into a volatility
effect of ω vol = −2.5%, which is quite close to their estimated welfare loss of −2.1%.26
    From Proposition 2 it follows that the degree to which a society is able to allocate labor
efficiently – labor productivity – has the simple empirical representation cov (log h, log w),
irrespective of preferences. In our PSID sample, labor productivity, measured as the ratio
of aggregate earnings to aggregate hours, increased by 13% from 1975 to 1995. Thus, the
increase in the wage-hours covariance (1.7%) can alone account for more than a tenth of the
increase in aggregate labor productivity over this period.

    Welfare gains from completing markets: With Cobb-Douglas preferences, a house-
hold in the partial-insurance economy values the availability of a complete set of insurance
when preferences are separable, partially offsetting the positive effect of additional insurable risk, since strong
wealth effects induce permanently more productive agents to increase leisure.
   26
      We obtain this number as follows. They report that when using consumption data only, welfare losses are
of the order of −1.6%. Incorporating leisure into their analysis subtracts another 0.5% from their benchmark
estimate.

                                                        27
markets against the permanent component of wages at 39% of her lifetime consumption.
With separable preferences, this estimate is smaller, around 29%. The striking feature of
these results is that, in both cases, the gains associated with better productive opportunities
in complete markets are twice as big as the gains from reduced dispersion. Recall that in the
separable case, since γ > 1, households with low permanent (uninsurable) wage components
work longer hours than those with high permanent components. However, efficiency dictates
a positive correlation between wages and hours. Our calculations indicate that the aggregate
productivity loss due to this inefficient assignment is huge, accounting for two thirds of the
welfare cost of market incompleteness.

   Attanasio and Davis (1996, Table 6) calculated the gains from insuring all consumption
risk between age/educational groups to be around 2.67% for a risk aversion value of 2. This
number is an order of magnitude lower than ours for two reasons. First, the data show a large
amount of consumption dispersion even within groups that we capture in our calculations.
Second, by abstracting from labor supply, they miss what we find to be the largest source
of welfare gains from completing markets.

   Welfare gains from eliminating risk: It is instructive to compare quantitatively the
welfare gains from eliminating labor market risk to those from insuring risk. In the Cobb-
Douglas case we obtain κ = 16.9%, compared to χ = 39.1%. Thus, eliminating risk implies
a welfare gain less than half as large as the welfare gain from completing markets. The
corresponding numbers for the separable preferences case are κ = 17.8% and χ = 29.2%.

   The fact that eliminating the insurable component of wage risk is welfare-reducing leaves
open the theoretical possibility that the welfare effect from eliminating all idiosyncratic wage
risk through some redistributive policy might be negative. In our calibration to the United
States, however, most wage dispersion is uninsurable in nature, and given plausible choices
for preference parameters, the welfare gains from eliminating uninsurable risk exceed the
costs of eliminating insurable risk.


7.3    Relation to numerically-solved Bewley models

How do the results from our analytical model compare to standard incomplete-market models
relying on self insurance through hours worked and borrowing and lending? To provide a
natural and comparable benchmark, we compute the equilibrium of an economy identical

                                              28
to our partial-insurance model, except that instead of having access to a complete set of
state-contingent claims providing perfect insurance against transitory wage shocks, agents
trade only a non-contingent bond (e.g., Bewley, 1986; Imrohoroglu, 1989; Huggett, 1993;
Aiyagari, 1994; Rı́os-Rull, 1994). At the aggregate level, bonds are in zero net supply.

       In the Bewley economy, the welfare effect associated with an increase in wage disper-
sion will depend on two additional parameters that could be left unspecified in the partial-
insurance model: the borrowing limit, and the discount factor β.27 The borrowing constraint
is set to the “natural” limit (see, for example, Aiyagari, 1994) which ensures that interest
payments never exceed earnings, given maximum labor effort. Preferences are Cobb-Douglas
and the discount factor is β = 0.97, which implies a final steady state interest rate of 3.05%.
The expected welfare effects are computed for individuals born with zero wealth who draw
lifetime wage profiles at random from the unconditional wage distribution.

       The expected welfare effect in the Bewley economy associated with the measured rise in
wage dispersion is a 2.77% loss. This number should be compared to the 2.37% loss in our
partial-insurance economy.28 Increases in wage risk are slightly more costly in the model
with a single bond, because with a positive interest rate a transitory wage shock has some
effect on lifetime income. Nevertheless, the two models deliver surprisingly similar answers
to our main welfare question.

       For comparisons with other papers, consider e.g. Pijoan-Mas (2005). He calculates
the welfare gain from completing markets to be about 16% of lifetime consumption in an
infinitely-lived-agent, production economy with separable preferences and flexible labor sup-
ply. Since fixed effects implicitly remain uninsured under his interpretation of what it means
for markets to be complete, this number should be compared to the welfare gain of moving
from autarky to an environment where the transitory component of wages is fully insured,
while the permanent component remains uninsured (i.e. the partial-insurance economy).
This is given by ω (−vε , vε ). Setting γ = 0.98 and σ = 0.61 (the parametrization used by
  27
     Levine and Zame (2002) study an endowment economy with infinitely-lived agents, CRRA preferences,
and a non-contingent bond as the only traded asset. They show that as the discount rate goes to zero, agents
achieve arbitrarily good insurance against non-permanent shocks.
  28
     To solve this model numerically, both the permanent component of the wage α and the transitory
component ε are drawn from symmetric two-point distributions. Given this two-point distribution, the
welfare effect from increased wage dispersion in our benchmark partial-insurance economy is −2.37% as
compared to the −2.47% loss reported in Table 1 for the continuous Normal distribution. More details on
the numerical implementation are available upon request.


                                                    29
Pijoan-Mas) gives 18.6%.

      We conclude that our simple and transparent framework can shed light on the economics
underlying numerical findings in richer models in the Bewley tradition.

      However, our framework cannot be expected to match the quantitative welfare effects
when additional channels of opportunities and insurance are introduced, over and above
savings and hours worked. For example, in Heathcote et al. (2007a), we explore two addi-
tional choices that allow households to increase average labor productivity and mitigate the
welfare loss in response to changes in the wage structure: the flexibility to adjust enrollment
decisions in response to a widening college premium, and the flexibility to reallocate market
work within the household in response to a narrowing gender wage gap.


8       Concluding remarks

The main contributions of the paper are (1) the analytical characterization of the welfare
effects from an increase in the dispersion of labor productivity, and (2) the focus on the
role of endogenous labor supply. In addition, welfare effects are shown to have a common
representation in terms of observable second moments (variances and covariances) of the
joint equilibrium distribution of wages, hours worked and consumption. This is true for
both Cobb-Douglas and separable preferences,

      Our analytical insights, together with a simple calibration exercise, show that eliminating
idiosyncratic wage risk implies a welfare gain that is at least two orders of magnitude larger
than most estimates of the welfare gains from eliminating business cycle risk. Thus, according
to our model, the potential gain for a society from applying progressive taxes and wage
compression is much larger than the potential gain from obtaining aggregate stabilization.

      However, we also emphasized that the welfare gains from eliminating wage risk (through
policies that compress after-tax wages) are only around half as large as the gains that would
accrue from perfectly insuring wage risk. From a policy perspective, an important implica-
tion is that the government should develop the legal and institutional frameworks that will
allow new insurance markets to develop. Sargent (2001) and Shiller (2003) discuss a range
of proposals along these lines.29
 29
      For example, Shiller proposed six types of insurance that should be further developed, namely “livelihood


                                                       30
   Throughout the analysis, income shocks have been assumed to be verifiable and contracts
have been assumed to be perfectly enforceable. Informational asymmetries and imperfect
commitment may limit the amount of insurance that one could ever hope to see provided.
In this sense, our estimates of the welfare costs of market incompleteness are upper bounds.
At the same time, to the extent that risk sharing is limited by fundamental frictions, these
frictions can interact with changes in labor market risk in interesting ways. For example,
Krueger and Perri (2006) study a calibrated endowment economy in which debt contracts
can only be imperfectly enforced. They show that a rise in income dispersion might increase
welfare by making default more painful, thereby increasing the amount of credit that can
be supported in equilibrium. The implications of increased labor market risk in a private
information environment have not yet been addressed. More broadly, an important challenge
in introducing these sorts of frictions is to do this in a way that maintains tractability, thereby
allowing for a transparent characterization of the various mechanisms at work.

   Finally, the trade-off between insurance and opportunities emphasized in relation to the
labor supply decision could also apply to other margins of adjustment. For example, the
widening gap between the wages of college and high-school graduates offers opportunities to
increase average earnings if agents can respond by extending their education. As discussed
above, Heathcote et al. (2007a) incorporates an explicit education choice, and explore how in-
troducing this margin of adjustment (as well as explicit labor supply decisions in two-member
households) mediates the effect of changes in the wage structure on labor productivity and
welfare.




insurance”, “home equity insurance”, “macro markets”, “income-linked loans”, “inequality insurance” and
“intergenerational social security”.


                                                  31
9       Appendix
Appendix A: Derivation of Equilibrium Allocations (Cobb-Douglas Utility)
   We follow the “α−island representation” of our economy outlined at the end of Section
2. We start by guessing that agents on different α−islands do not trade with each other.
This allows us to solve for allocations within islands using an island-planner problem. Next,
we verify our guess.
   The static equal-weight planner problem for an island indexed by a specific value of α
can be written as                  Z
                            max       u (c (α, ε) h (α, ε)) dΦvε (ε)
                            {c(α,ε)h(α,ε)}   E
subject to a static resource constraint that reflects the absence of inter-island trade and the
lack of a storage technology
                          Z
                              w (α, ε) h (α, ε) − c (α, ε) dΦvε (ε) = 0.                   (14)
                             E

      With Cobb-Douglas utility, the planner’s first-order condition for hours is
                                                                     1−η
                           w (α, ε) h (α, ε) = w (α, ε) − c (α, ε)       .                (15)
                                                                      η
Substituting the right-hand side of this latter equation into equation (14) and collecting
terms determines total consumption on the island
                   Z                        Z
                      c (α, ε) dΦvε (ε) = η   w (α, ε) dΦvε (ε) = η exp(α).           (16)
                       E                         E

The first-order condition for consumption is
                           µ = ηc (α, ε)η(1−θ)−1 (1 − h (α, ε))(1−η)(1−θ) ,               (17)
where µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the resource constraint (14). Using (15) to substitute
out for leisure in (17) and rearranging gives
                             µ ¶1/θ µ       ¶(1−η)(1−θ)/θ
                              η       1−η
                  c (α, ε) =                              w (α, ε)−(1−η)(1−θ)/θ .       (18)
                              µ         η
Integrating (18) across the population yields an alternative expression for total consumption

Z                         µ ¶ θ1 µ     ¶ (1−η)(1−θ) Z       µ                          ¶
                           η       1−η       θ                  (1 − η) (1 − θ)
      c (α, ε) dΦvε (ε) =                               exp −                   (α + ε) dΦvε (ε)
    E                      µ        η                 E                θ
                          µ ¶ θ1 µ     ¶ (1−η)(1−θ)      µ                 µ     µ           ¶ ¶¶
                           η       1−η       θ             (1 − η) (θ − 1)         1 − η + ηθ vε
                        =                           exp                     α−
                           µ        η                             θ                     θ        2

                                                     32
where the last step exploits the fact that ε is log-normal. Combining this last equation with
(16) yields an expression for µ. Substituting this expression into (18) to solve for consump-
tion, and then using (15) to solve for hours yields the candidate equilibrium allocations, as
functions of primitive parameters, reported in Section 4.1 in the main text.
    The last step of the proof requires verifying the no-trade guess. At the candidate alloca-
tions c (α, ε) and h (α, ε), the agent’s Euler equation
                                               Z
                  uc (c (α, ε) , h (α, ε)) = βR uc (c (α, ε0 ) , h (α, ε0 )) dΦvε (ε)
                                              E

yields an interest rate of R = 1/β which supports the equilibrium without trade across
α−islands, since it is independent of α.
   Finally, we guess and will verify that net savings are zero for every agent. Under this
conjecture, from the budget constraint

             b (ε0 ; (α, ε)) = c(α, ε0 ) − w(α, ε0 )h(α, ε0 )
                                   ³                          vε ´
                             = exp α + (1 − λ)ε0 + λ(1 − λ)        − exp(α + ε0 ).
                                                              2
The first-order condition for the purchase of Arrow securities paying one unit of consumption
in the event that an individual with state (α, ε) receives shock ε0 ∈ E next period is
                                                  Z
                uc (c (α, ε) , h (α, ε)) p (E) = β uc (c (α, ε0 ) , h (α, ε0 )) dΦvε (ε),
                                                  E
                         R
which yields p (E) = β E dΦvε (ε), i.e., asset prices are discounted probabilities. It is then
straightforward to verify that the cost of the entire portfolio of Arrow securities is zero:
                   Z                             Z
                          0             0   0
                      b (ε ; (α, ε)) p(ε )dε = β   b (ε0 ; (α, ε)) dΦvε (ε0 ) = 0.
                    E                             E


   Appendix B: Proof of Proposition 1

   Start by computing unconditional expected utility


                        "¡                    ¢1−θ #
                    c(α, ε)η (1 − h(α, ε))1−η
           W = E                                     =
                                1−θ
               ³ ´(1−η)(1−θ)
                 1−η
                  η
                                  h                                            i
             =                  E exp (− (1 − η) (1 − θ) (α + ε)) c (α, ε)(1−θ) ,
                     1−θ


                                              33
 where the second equality follows from the intratemporal first-order condition (15). Substi-
 tuting for the equilibrium expression for c(α, ε) in (11), expected utility becomes:
              µ                                                           µ                  ¶¶
                                                  (1 − θ) (1 − η) (θ − 1)      1 − η + ηθ vε
W = κE exp η (1 − θ) α − (1 − η) (1 − θ) ε +                               ε+
                                                             θ                      θ     2
             µ                                                             ¶
               (1 − η + ηθ) (1 − η) (1 − θ) vε                          vα
   = κ exp                                     − (1 − η + ηθ) η (1 − θ)                      (19)
                            θ               2                            2
  where κ ≡ ((1 − η) /η)(1−η)(1−θ) η 1−θ / (1 − θ), and where the second equation follows from α
  and ε being log-normal. Recall that ω is defined by equation (4). Substituting (19) into (4)
  and collecting terms yields an exact expression for ω
                 µ      µ              ¶                           ¶       µ                ¶
                   1 − η 1 − η + ηθ ∆vε                        ∆vα            ∆vε       ∆vα
    1 + ω = exp                                 − (1 − η + ηθ)       = exp φ̄      − γ̄       .
                     η          θ            2                  2               2        2
  Taking logarithms on both sides and using a log-approximation of the type ln (1 + ω) ' ω
  for the left-hand side yields the expression stated in Proposition 1.
      We now show how to decompose ω into a level effect and a volatility effect. From equation
  (5), the level effect of changing variances from (vα , vε ) to (v̂α , v̂ε ) is given by
                                                          µ ³               ´1−η ¶1−θ
                      ¡¡          ¢η              ¢1−θ      Cb 1−H
                                                               η         b
                         1 + ω lev C η (1 − H)1−η
                                                       =                                   (20)
                                     1−θ                            1−θ
  where aggregate consumption and leisure are given by
                              C = E [c(α, ε)] = η,
                            1 − H = E [1 − h(α, ε)] = (1 − η) exp (λvε ) .
                                                          ¡         ¢               ³        ´1−η
                                                                 lev η        1−η          b
  Since C is invariant to wage dispersion, it follows that 1 + ω       (1 − H)    = 1−H           ,
  which yields the level effect of Proposition 1. Flodén (2001) shows that if u (·) is such that
  u (xc, h) = g (x) u (c, h), then
                                   ¡        ¢¡        ¢
                           1 + ω = 1 + ω lev 1 + ω vol ⇒ ω ' ω lev + ω vol ,                  (21)
  up to second-order terms. Since Cobb–Douglas preferences satisfy this homogeneity property,
  equation (21) defines ω vol residually, given ω lev .

      Appendix C: Derivation of Equilibrium Allocations (Separable Utility)
      When preferences are separable between consumption and hours, the first-order condi-
  tions for the planner problem (14) imply
                              c (α, ε) = µ−1/γ ,                                              (22)
                                                            µ         ¶
                                                                α+ε
                              h (α, ε) = c (α, ε)−γ/σ exp                 .
                                                                 σ

                                                 34
Equation (22) implies that all agents on an α−island get the same consumption (since
preferences are separable). Using the planner’s resource constraint (14), one can solve for
the multiplier µ:                    µ                     ¶
                                          ³     vε ´ 1 + σ
                             µ = exp −γ α +                  .
                                                2σ σ + γ

    Substituting this expression into equations (22) yields efficient allocations only as a func-
tion of the primitive parameters, as described in Section 5.1 in the main text. We then can
verify the no-trade guess exactly as done for the Cobb-Douglas case.

   Appendix D: Proof of Proposition 1a

   As in the proof of the Cobb-Douglas case (Appendix B), we start by computing ex-
pected welfare. When preferences are separable between consumption and hours worked,
unconditional expected period utility is given by
                                    ·                         ¸
                                      c(α, ε)1−γ   h(α, ε)1+σ
                            W=E                  −              .
                                        1−γ          1+σ

   Using the equilibrium expressions for c(α, ε) and h(α, ε) in the above equation yields
                        µ                    ¶ ·     µ                  ¶¸
               1          (1 + σ) (1 − γ) vε           (1 + σ) (1 − γ)
     W =            exp                       E exp                    α −
             1−γ              γ+σ         2σ                γ+σ
                        µ               ¶ ·      µ                  ¶     µ       ¶¸
               1          −(1 + σ)2 γvε            (1 + σ) (1 − γ)          1+σ
                    exp                    E exp                   α exp         ε .
             1+σ            γ + σ 2σ 2                  γ+σ                  σ

   Since α and ε are normally distributed, the terms inside the expectation signs are log-
normally distributed too, and one can easily compute that
                     ·    µ                   ¶¸       ³
                            (1 + σ) (1 − γ)                      vα ´
                   E exp                    α    = exp κ(κ − 1)       ,
                                γ+σ                               2
      ·   µ                   ¶     µ         ¶¸       ³                  µ          ¶
             (1 + σ) (1 − γ)          1+σ                        vα ´       1 + σ vε
   E exp                     α exp          ε    = exp κ(κ − 1)       exp              ,
                 γ+σ                    σ                         2           σ2 2
            (1+σ)(1−γ)
where κ ≡      γ+σ
                       .
   Collecting terms, the expression for expected lifetime utility reduces to
                             ³          vα ´    ³ v ´µ 1              1
                                                                         ¶
                                                     ε
                 W = exp κ(κ − 1)            exp κ               −
                                         2          2σ    1−γ 1+σ
                             ³          vα ´    ³ v ´1
                                                     ε
                      = exp κ(κ − 1)         exp κ        .                                 (23)
                                         2          2σ κ


                                               35
   Using this expression for expected lifetime utility together with the definition of ω in
equation (4), we obtain that ω is implicitly defined by
                 Ã                     !         µ                    ¶
                   (1 + ω)1−γ      1                      ∆vα     ∆vε 1
                              −           = exp κ(κ − 1)      +κ
                      1−γ        1+σ                       2       2σ κ

   or                      ·      µ                    ¶¸ 1−γ
                                                           1
                       1−γ γ+σ              ∆vα    ∆vε
                 1+ω =    +    exp κ(κ − 1)     +κ
                       1+σ 1+σ               2     2σ
    This welfare expression is exact, but somewhat involved. However, ω can be very closely
approximated by a much simpler expression. In particular, we use a log-approximation
of the type ln (1 + x) ' x on the left-hand side of the equation, and the approximation
exp (x) ' 1 + x on the right-hand side, which gives

                                ·                µ                         ¶¸
                         1        1−γ γ+σ                       ∆vα    ∆vε
               ω '           ln         +          1 + κ(κ − 1)     +κ
                       1−γ        1+σ 1+σ                        2     2σ
                                ·          µ                        ¶¸
                         1           γ+σ       ∆vε              ∆vα
                   =         ln 1 +          κ       + κ(κ − 1)
                       1−γ            1+σ       2σ               2
                         µ                       ¶
                       1     ∆vε             ∆vα
                   '       κ      + κ(κ − 1)
                       κ     2σ               2
                       ∆vε            ∆vα
                   =        + (κ − 1)
                        2σ      ·      2              ¸
                       1 ∆vε      (1 − γ) − γ(1 + σ) ∆vα
                   =          +                             ,
                       σ 2              γ+σ              2
where the last expression is the one we report in the text in Proposition 1a.
   We now show how to decompose ω into a level effect and a volatility effect. Aggregate
consumption and leisure allocations are given by:
                                 µµ        ¶ ¶        µ                   ¶
                                     1 + σ vε           (1 + σ)(1 − γ) vα
        C = E [c(α, ε)] = exp                     exp                       ,       (24)
                                     γ + σ 2σ              (γ + σ)2     2
                                 µ               ¶     µ                        ¶
                                   1 − 2γ − σ vε         (1 − γ)(1 − 2γ − σ) vα
       H = E [h(α, ε)] = exp                       exp                            . (25)
                                    (γ + σ)σ 2                 (γ + σ)2       2
With these expressions in hand, we compute the level affect associated with an increase in
the variances of the two components of the wage from (vα , vε ) to (b   vα , vbε ) by applying the
definition in equation (5) to the separable preference specification:
                        ¡           ¢1−γ 1−γ
                          1 + ω lev     C      H 1+σ   Cb1−γ     b 1+σ
                                                                 H
                                             −       =        −        ,
                                1−γ            1+σ     1−γ 1+σ

                                               36
where C b and Hb denote average consumption and hours worked in the economy with the more
volatile wage process. Substituting in the expressions for aggregate variables and collecting
terms gives
                                   µ            ¶     ³ v ´
     ¡         ¢
            lev 1−γ      1−γ           1 + σ vε            α
       1+ω          =         exp −               exp −κ
                         1+σ             σ 2              2
                                     µ                 ¶       µµ                    ¶¶
                           1−γ         κ ∆vε 1 + σ vbε            1 − γ ∆vα      vbα
                         −       exp          −           exp          κ      −κ
                           1+σ         σ 2         σ 2            γ+σ 2            2
                              µ       ¶      µ            ¶
                                  ∆vε          1 − γ ∆vα
                         + exp κ         exp         κ       .
                                   2σ          γ+σ 2

    Applying the approximation exp(x) ' 1 + x to the righ-hand side of this expression and
collecting terms gives
                         ¡          ¢1−γ
                          1 + ω lev         1  1      1−γ
                                         '    + ∆vε +     ∆vα .
                             1−γ           1−γ σ      γ+σ


   Multiplying both sides by (1 − γ), and taking logs,
                                        µ           ·                 ¸¶
                       ¡      lev
                                  ¢                   1     1−γ
             (1 − γ) ln 1 + ω       ' ln 1 + (1 − γ) ∆vε +         ∆vα .
                                                      σ    (γ + σ)

   Using the approximation ln (1 + x) ' x on both sides of this expression gives
                                            γ−1      1
                                ω lev ' −       ∆vα + ∆vε ,
                                            γ+σ      σ
which is the expression reported in Proposition 1a.
     We now compute the volatility component of the welfare effect. The first step is to
calculate a certainty equivalent value for consumption c(H), such that the utility associated
with consuming c(H) and working H hours is equal to expected equilibrium lifetime utility,
i.e.                              Z Z
                    u(c(H), H) =        u (c(α, ε), h(α, ε)) dΦvε (ε)dΦvα (α).
                                  A E

Given the separable specification for preferences, and equations (23) and (25) for expected
utility and aggregate hours, the expression for certainty equivalent consumption can be
rewritten in terms of the pair (vα , vε ) and preference parameters:
                                         µ                 µ                    ¶¶
            1−γ        1                   (1 + σ) (1 − γ) 1 − 2γ − γσ vα 1 vε
       c(H)      =        (γ + σ) exp                                     +         +
                    1+σ                         γ+σ            γ+σ      2   σ 2
                                         µ                     µ               ¶¶
                       1                   (1 + σ) (1 − 2γ − σ) 1 − γ vα 1 vε
                          (1 − γ) exp                                    +        .
                    1+σ                           γ+σ            γ+σ 2     σ 2

                                               37
Applying the approximation exp(x) ' 1 + x and collecting terms gives
                         (1 − γ) [(1 − 2γ − γσ)(γ + σ) + (1 − γ) (1 − 2γ − σ)] vα
          c(H)1−γ '                                                               +
                                               (γ + σ)2                         2
                           1 (1 − γ)2 vε
                         +               + 1.
                           σ γ+σ 2
Using the approximation 1 + x ' exp(x) and raising both sides of the equation to the power
 1
1−γ
     gives
               µ                                                    µ       ¶ ¶
                 (1 − 2γ − γσ)(γ + σ) + (1 − γ) (1 − 2γ − σ) vα 1 1 − γ vε
    c(H) ' exp                                                  +                  . (26)
                                  (γ + σ)2                    2   σ γ+σ 2
Applying the definition in equation (6), the cost of uncertainty p is the solution to
                                 u((1 − p)C, H) = u(c(H), H)
which, given separable preferences, implies 1 − p = c(H)/C. Substituting in equations (24)
and (26) gives
                 µ                     ¶       µ               µ      ¶            ¶
                     1 + σγ vα    1 vε             1 − γ vα      1 + σ vα     1 vε
     1 − p ' exp −             −         = exp −            −γ             −         .
                      γ+σ 2       σ 2              γ+σ 2         γ+σ 2        σ 2
Using the definition for the cost of volatility in equation (7) gives
                                      µ                   µ        ¶            ¶
                vol      1 − pb           1 − γ ∆vα         1 + σ ∆vα     1 ∆vε
          1+ω        =          ' exp −               −γ                −
                         1−p              γ+σ 2             γ+σ       2   σ 2
                             ·           µ         ¶¸
                               γ−1          1+σ       ∆vα     1 ∆vε
                     ' 1+            −γ                    −
                               γ+σ          γ+σ        2      σ 2
which implies the expression for ω vol reported in Proposition 1a.

   Appendix E: Proof of Proposition 2
   Cobb-Douglas utility: From the log-normality of c and 1 − h (Assumption A1), ex-
pected utility is given by
     ·                           ¸
        1 ¡ η           1−η ¢1−θ      1
   E          c (1 − h)            =     E [exp ((1 − θ) η log c + (1 − θ) (1 − η) log (1 − h))] (27)
       1−θ                           1−θ
                 Ã                                            £                                     ¤!
        1                                            (1 − θ)2 η 2 vc + (1 − η)2 vl + 2η (1 − η) vcl
  =         exp (1 − θ) ηµc + (1 − θ) (1 − η) µl +                                                     ,
      1−θ                                                                   2

where we have used the notation E [log x] ≡ µx , var (log x) ≡ vx , and cov (log x, log y) ≡ vxy
for any variables x and y. The welfare effect ω of changing to a new distribution of allocations
(denoted with hats) is defined as
                                h        i
                              E u(ĉ, ĥ) = E [u ((1 + ω) c, h)] .                          (28)

                                                38
Substituting (27) into (28) we obtain
                                                                          £                                    ¤
                                                                (1 − θ)2 η 2 vc + (1 − η)2 vl + 2η (1 − η) vcl
   η (1 − θ) log (1 + ω) + (1 − θ) ηµc + (1 − θ) (1 − η) µl +
                                                  £                                     2¤
                                         (1 − θ)2 η 2 v̂c + (1 − η)2 v̂l + 2η (1 − η) v̂cl
  = (1 − θ) ηµ̂c + (1 − θ) (1 − η) µ̂l +                                                   .
                                                                 2
Rearranging terms, using the fact that log (1 + ω) ' ω for ω small, and noting that C ≡
E (c) = exp (µc + vc /2), and 1 − H ≡ E (1 − h) = exp (µl + vl /2) yields
                  1−η                  1 − (1 − θ) η         1−η
ω ' ∆ log C +          ∆ log (1 − H) −               ∆vc −        [1 − (1 − θ) (1 − η)] ∆vl
                    η                        2                2η
    + (1 − θ) (1 − η) ∆vcl
                                                   ·               ¸µ       ¶2
                  1−η                  1         1              η      1−η
    = ∆ log C +        ∆ log (1 − H) − γ̄∆vc −       γ̄ − 1 +                   ∆vl
                    η                  2         2            1−η        η
               µ      ¶
                 1−η
    + (1 − γ̄)          ∆vcl ,                                                           (29)
                   η

   By Assumption A2, the individual intratemporal first-order condition is satisfied:
                                      (1 − η)c = ηw (1 − h)                                      (30)
Taking expectations of (30), and using W ≡ E (w) = 1 by Assumption A1, as well as
E (wh) = C by Assumption A2, yields C = η (and therefore, ∆ log C = 0). At the same
time, by Assumption A2 and by the log-normality of the allocations, we also have that
                                            ³     vl      ´
  C = E (wh) = W − E [w (1 − h)] = 1 − exp µl + + vwl = 1 − (1 − H) exp (vwl ) (31)
                                                  2
where we have used the fact that W = 1. Setting C = η,
                                     ∆vwl = −∆ log (1 − H) .                                     (32)

   Now, note that, for small deviations of h from its mean, we can write
                                     1−h                      1−h
     log (1 − h) = log (1 − H) + log        ' log (1 − H) +       −1
                                     1 −µH      ¶             1−H         µ ¶
                                    H      h                       H       h
                   = log (1 − H) −           − 1 ' log (1 − H) −      log
                                   1−H H                          1−H      H
                                    H              η
                   ' log (1 − H) +      log H −        log h,
                                   1−H           1−η
where the last approximation uses H ' η, which is true for vwl small (see equation (31)).
Exploiting this relationship between log (1 − h) and log h, it is easy to see that
                     µ      ¶2
                       1−η                  1−η                        1−η
               vh '            vl , vwh ' −       vwl , and vch ' −          vcl .   (33)
                         η                    η                          η

                                                 39
   Substituting (32) and (33) into equation (29) yields immediately the representation for
ω in Proposition 2 for the Cobb-Douglas case.
    It remains to show how to decompose ω into a level effect and a volatility effect. The
definition of level effect in (20) for the Cobb-Douglas case implies, after rearranging terms,
                      ¡         ¢                    1−η
                   log 1 + ω lev ' ω lev = ∆ log C +     ∆ log (1 − H) .                 (34)
                                                      η

Since ∆ log C = 0, equations (32) and (33) imply that ω lev ' vwh . Moreover, equation (34)
and                                µ      ¶
             1−η                     1 − η ∆ (1 − H)       −∆H
                   ∆ log (1 − H) '                     '         ' −∆ log H,
               η                       η      1−H            H
where we have used H ' η, jointly imply that ω lev ' ∆ log (C/H). As argued in the proof
of Proposition 1, the volatility effect is defined residually.

    Separable utility: In this case, expected utility is given by
                 · 1−γ             ¸
                   c          h1+σ
E [u (c, h)] = E         −ψ
                  1−γ         1+σ
                 1                              ψ
             =       E [exp ((1 − γ) log c)] −      E [exp ((1 + σ) log h)]               (35)
               1−γ                             1+σ
                 1        ³                      vc ´     ψ       ³                      vh ´
             =       exp (1 − γ) µc + (1 − γ)2        −        exp (1 + σ) µh + (1 + σ)2      .
               1−γ                                2     1+σ                              2
Using (35) into the definition of the welfare effect ω of equation (4), and rearranging terms,
yields
             ·    µ                            ¶                 ³                          ´¸
         1                               2 v̂c            1−γ                          2 vc
              exp (1 − γ) µ̂c + (1 − γ)          − (1 + ω)    exp (1 − γ) µc + (1 − γ)
       1−γ                                  2                                            2
             ·    µ                             ¶      ³                         ´ ¸
         ψ                                  v̂h                               vh
    =          exp (1 + σ) µ̂h + (1 + σ)2         − exp (1 + σ) µh + (1 + σ)2        .
       1+σ                                   2                                 2
Using the expressions for average allocations C and H under log-normality gives
      ·    µ                                 ¶      ³                                     ¸
  1                                      v̂c                                         vc ´
        exp (1 − γ) ∆ log C − γ (1 − γ)        − exp (1 − γ) log (1 + ω) − γ (1 − γ)
1−γ                                       2                                           2
             1+σ
                      ·     µ                                ¶       ³             ´ ¸
         ψH       1                                      v̂h                    vh
     =      1−γ
                        exp (1 + σ) ∆ log H + σ (σ + 1)        − exp σ (σ + 1)         . (36)
          C      1+σ                                      2                      2

   Consider now the term
                                      ¡                         ¢
                         ψH 1+σ    exp (1 + σ) µh + (1 + σ) v2h
                                =ψ    ¡                         ¢.                       (37)
                          C 1−γ    exp (1 − γ) µc + (1 − γ) v2c

                                             40
       The intratemporal first-order condition (satisfied by Assumption A2), can be expressed
as
                                   log ψ + σ log h = log w − γ log c

       Taking expectations, we obtain
                                          ³ v           ´
                                              w
                                   ψ = exp − − γµc − σµh .                                            (38)
                                             2

       Moreover, recall that, from Assumption A2,
                                         ³      vh       vc    ´
                        C = E (wh) ⇒ exp µh +      − µc − + vwh = 1.                                  (39)
                                                2        2
Using (38) and (39) into (37), and simplyfing, yields

                           ψH 1+σ       ³ v       vc vw        ´
                                            h
                                  = exp  σ    + γ   −   − v wh   ' 1,                                 (40)
                            C 1−γ          2      2   2

       where the approximation holds when cross-sectional dispersion is small.30
   Using this result into (36), and exploiting approximations of the type log (1 + x) ' x and
exp (x) ' 1 + x for x ' 0, we arrive at
               ·µ                                      ¶ ³                             ´¸
            1                                   v̂c                              vc
                   (1 − γ) ∆ log C − γ (1 − γ) + 1 − (1 − γ) ω − γ (1 − γ) + 1
         1−γ                                     2                                2
               ·                                        ³               ´ ¸
            1                                 v̂h                  vh
     '           (1 + σ) ∆ log H + σ (σ + 1)       + 1 − σ (σ + 1)    +1 ,
         1+σ                                   2                   2

which implies
                                                    γ     σ
                             ω ' ∆ log C − ∆ log H − ∆vc − ∆vh .                                      (41)
                                                    2     2
       From (39), we have that C/H = exp (vwh ) . Taking logs and first differences,

                                 ω lev = ∆ log C − ∆ log H = ∆vwh .

Substituting this expression into (41) yields the representation of Proposition 2 for separable
utility.
  30
     For example, consider the parameterization of Section 7.1, where γ = σ = 2, and the empirical values
for the variances and covariances needed to compute expression (40)
                                                                 ¡ are: vh = 0.092, vc = ¢ 0.25, vw = 0.35,
and vwh = −0.006 (see Table A). This parameterization gives exp σ v2h + γ v2c − v2w − vwh ' 1.19.




                                                    41
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D. (2002); “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market,” Journal of Eco-
     nomic Literature 40 (1), 7-72.

 [2] Aghion, P. (2002); “Schumpeterian Growth Theory and the Dynamics of Income Inequality,”
     Econometrica 70 (3), 855-82.

 [3] Aiyagari, R. (1994); “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings,” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 109 (3), 659-684.

 [4] Altonji, J.,Hayashi F., Kotlikoff L. (1992); “Is the Extended Family Altruistically Linked?
     Direct Tests Using Micro Data,” American Economic Review, vol. 82(5), 1177-1198.

 [5] Attanasio, O. (1999); “Consumption,” Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume 1B, Chapter 11,
     Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
 [6] Attanasio, O., Davis S. (1996); “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Consump-
     tion,” Journal of Political Economy 104(6), 1227-62.

 [7] Attanasio, O., Battistin E., Ichimura H., (2004); “What Really Happened to Consumption
     Inequality in the US?,” NBER Working Paper No. 10338.

 [8] Benabou, R. (2002); “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy: What
     Levels of Redistribution Maximizes Growth and Efficiency?,” Econometrica, 70, 481-517.

 [9] Bewley, T. (1986):    “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of In-
     dependently Fluctuating Consumers,” in W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell, eds.,
     Contributions to Mathematical Economics: In Honor of Gerard Debreu, New York: North
     Holland, 79-102.

[10] Blundell, R., MaCurdy, T. (1999), “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches,” in
     A. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier
     Science.
[11] Blundell, R., Pistaferri L., Preston I. (2005); “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,”
     IFS Working Paper, W04/28.

[12] Blundell, R., Preston I. (1998); “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 113 (2), 603-640.

[13] Browning, M., Hansen L.P., Heckman J. (1999), “Micro Data and General Equilibrium Mod-
     els,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1A, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

[14] Browning, M., Meghir C. (1991); “The Effects of Male and Female Labor Supply on Com-
     modity Demands,” Econometrica, vol. 59(4), 925-51.

[15] Carroll, C. (1997); “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 1-56.

[16] Cho, J.O., Cooley T.F. (2001); “Business Cycle Uncertainty and Economic Welfare,” mimeo
     Stern School of Business, New York University.



                                                42
[17] Cochrane, J. (1991); “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, vol. 99(5), 957-76.

[18] Cooley, T. (1995); Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton University Press.
[19] Cordoba J., Verdier G. (2007); “Lucas vs. Lucas: On Inequality and Growth”, IMF Working
     Paper No. 07/17.

[20] Deaton, A. (1991); “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, vol. 59(5), 1221-48.
[21] Domeij, D., Flodén M. (2006); “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Constraints: Why
     Estimates are Biased,” Review of Economic Dynamics 9, 242-262.

[22] Eckstein, Z., Nagypal E. (2004); “The Evolution of U.S. Earnings Inequality: 1961-2002,”
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 28(2), 10-29.

[23] Flodén, M. (2001); “The Effectiveness of Government Debt and Transfers as Insurance,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 48(1), 81-108.

[24] Gottschalk, P., Moffitt R. (1994); “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
     Market,” Brookings Papers of Economic Activity 2, 217-272.

[25] Gomes, J., Greenwood J., Rebelo S. (2001); “Equilibrium Unemployment,” Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics, vol. 48(1), 109-152.

[26] Guiso, L., Pistaferri, L., Schivardi F. (2005); “Insurance within the Firm,” Journal of Political
     Economy, vol 113, 1054-1087.

[27] Heathcote, J., Storesletten K., Violante G.L. (2007a); “The Macroeconomic Implications of
     Rising Wage Inequality in the United States,” CEPR Working Paper no. 4296.

[28] Heathcote, J., Storesletten K., Violante G.L. (2007b); “Consumption and Labor Supply with
     Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework,” mimeo, NYU.

[29] Heckman, J. (1974); “Life-Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation of the
     Relationship between Income and Consumption over the Life-Cycle,” American Economic
     Review 64, 188-194.

[30] Hornstein A., Krusell P., Violante G.L. (2005); “The Effects of Technical Change on Labor
     Market Inequalities,” in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth,
     Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1(B), 1275-1370.

[31] Huggett, M. (1993); “The Risk Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agents Incomplete-Insurance
     Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953-969.

[32] Huggett, M., Parra J.C. (2006); “How well does the US Social Insurance System provide Social
     Insurance,” mimeo, Georgetown University.

[33] Imrohoruglu, A. (1989); “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity Con-
     straints,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(6), 1364-1383.

[34] Katz, L. M., Autor D. (1999); “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality,” in O.
     Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier
     Science.

                                                 43
[35] Krebs, T. (2003); “Growth and Welfare Effects of Business Cycles in Economies with Idiosyn-
     cratic Human Capital Risk”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 6, 846-868.
[36] Krebs, T., Krishna P., Maloney W. (2005), “Trade Policy, Income Risk, and Welfare,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 11255.
[37] Krueger, D., Perri F. (2003); “On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in Inequality in
     the United States,” in M. Gertler and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003,
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[38] Krueger, D., Perri F. (2006); “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality?
     Evidence and Theory,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 163-193.

[39] Krusell, P., Smith, A. Jr. (1999); “On the Welfare Effects of Eliminating Business Cycles,”
     Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(1), 245-272.

[40] Kubler F., Schmedders K. (2001); “Incomplete Markets, Transitory Shocks, and Welfare,”
     Review of Economic Dynamics, 4(4), 747-766.

[41] Levine D.K., Zame W.R. (2002); “Does Market Incompleteness Matter?,” Econometrica 70(5),
     1805-1839.
[42] Livshits, I., MacGee, J., Tertilt M. (2006); “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start,” American
     Economic Review, forthcoming.
[43] Low, H. (2005); “Self-Insurance in a Life-Cycle Model of Labor Supply and Savings,” Review
     of Economic Dynamics, 8(4), 945-975.

[44] Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1987); Models of Business Cycle, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
[45] Lucas, R. E., Jr. (2003); “Macroeconomic Priorities,” American Economic Review, 93(1),
     1-14.
[46] Mas-Colell A., Whinston M.D., Green J.R. (1995); Microeconomic Theory, Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.
[47] Mortensen, D. (2003); Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Differently?, Cam-
     bridge: MIT Press.
[48] Phelan, C. (2006); “Opportunity and Social Mobility,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(2),
     487-505.
[49] Pijoan-Mas, J. (2005); “Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours?,” CEPR Discussion
     Paper No. 5322.
[50] Rios-Rull, V. (1994); On the Quantitative Importance of Market Incompleteness,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 34, 463-496.
[51] Sargent, T. (2001); Discussion of “Can Market and Voting Institutions Generate Optimal
     Intergenerational Risk Sharing”, by A. Rangel and R. Zeckhauser, in J.Y. Campbell and
     M. Feldstein (eds.), Risk Aspects of Investment-Based Social Security Reform, Chicago: The
     University of Chicago Press.
[52] Shiller, R.J. (2003); The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century. Princeton: Prince-
     ton University Press.

                                               44
[53] Slesnick D. (2001); Consumption and Social Welfare: Living Standards and their Distribution
     in the United States. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

[54] Storesletten, K., Telmer C., Yaron A. (2001); “ The welfare cost of business cycles revisited:
     Finite lives and cyclical variation in idiosyncratic risk,” European Economic Review, 45(7),
     1311-1339.




                                                45
         Table A: Summary statistics from PSID data

Year     Variance of    Variance of         Covariance
         log-wages       log-hours      log-wages log-hours

1967        0.25496        0.08064             -0.02473
1968        0.24756        0.08362             -0.02184
1969        0.25206        0.08225             -0.02417
1970        0.26076        0.09592             -0.02128
1971        0.25906        0.08718             -0.03173
1972        0.26850        0.09268             -0.02474
1973        0.26640        0.08595             -0.02443
1974        0.25705        0.09583             -0.02027
1975        0.26036        0.10521             -0.02227
1976        0.26632        0.09131             -0.02326
1977        0.24934        0.08500             -0.01365
1978        0.26696        0.08103             -0.01856
1979        0.25401        0.08318             -0.01258
1980        0.26865        0.08975             -0.01631
1981        0.27447        0.08906             -0.00852
1982        0.30802        0.10198             -0.00863
1983        0.30302        0.10537             0.00172
1984        0.31745        0.09564             -0.00824
1985        0.34405        0.09292             -0.00573
1986        0.34248        0.09463             -0.00550
1987        0.33425        0.09132             -0.00178
1988        0.33973        0.09331             -0.00476
1989        0.33208        0.08535             -0.00605
1990        0.34373        0.09598             0.00102
1991        0.34268        0.09764             -0.00917
1992        0.36225        0.09871             -0.01445
1993        0.35083        0.10329             -0.01457
1994        0.34625        0.09318             -0.00285
1995        0.34679        0.09238             -0.00511
1996        0.34430        0.09066             -0.00726

Note: years in bold (1967-1968 and 1995-1996) are those used to
compute values in initial and final steady-state. See Section 7.1
for details on the sample selection.




                          46
                                                 (A) Welfare effect from rising labor market risk (ω)
                                                                  (∆ v =∆ v =0.05)
                                                                        α        ε
lifetime consumption        0.1


                             0
      Fraction of




                        −0.1


                        −0.2

                              0.2         0.4            0.6                0.8               1         1.2
                                                          Inverse of the Frisch elasticity (1/φ)

                                    (B) Welfare change from completing markets (χ) and from eliminating risk (κ)
                                                               (v =0.22, v =0.13)
                                                                    α                ε
     lifetime consumption




                             1             χ
                                           κ
           Fraction of




                            0.5


                             0


                              0.2         0.4            0.6                0.8               1         1.2
                                                          Inverse of the Frisch elasticity (1/φ)

                                                (C) Coefficient of Risk Aversion as a function of 1/φ
                            10

                             8
      risk aversion (γ)
       Coefficient of




                             6

                             4

                             2

                             0
                             0.2          0.4            0.6                0.8               1         1.2
                                                          Inverse of the Frisch elasticity (1/φ)




Figure 1: Cobb-Douglas Preferences: Panel (A) plots the welfare effect from a change in
wage dispersion as a function of the inverse of the Frisch elasticity. Panel (B) plots the
welfare effects from completing the markets and eliminating risk as a function of the inverse
of the Frisch elasticity. Panel (C) plots the coefficient of risk aversion as a function of the
inverse of the Frisch elasticity, assuming η = 1/3. Panels (A) and (B) are based on the
estimates for (changes in) vα and vε described in Section 7.1. The black dots represent the
baseline parameterization.



                                                                            47
                                              (A) Welfare effect from rising labor market risk (ω)
                                                                 (∆ v =∆ v =0.05)
                                                                      α       ε


                               0.05
lifetime consumption
      Fraction of




                                 0                                                                            γ=1
                                                                                                              γ=2
                        −0.05
                                                                                                              γ=5
                               −0.1
                                                                                                              γ=10
                        −0.15
                                      1   2      3          4             5        6           7     8   9           10
                                                        Inverse of the Frisch elasticity (σ)

                                              (B) Welfare change from completing markets (χ)
                                                             (vα=0.22, vε=0.13)

                                                                                                             γ=10
                               0.6
        lifetime consumption




                               0.5                                                                           γ=5
              Fraction of




                               0.4

                               0.3
                                                                                                             γ=2
                               0.2
                                                                                                             γ=1
                               0.1
                                      1   2      3         4           5           6           7     8   9           10
                                                       Inverse of the Frisch elasticity (σ)


                                                (C) Welfare change from eliminating risk (κ)
                                                            (vα=0.22, vε=0.13)

                               0.6                                                                           γ=10
 lifetime consumption




                               0.4                                                                           γ=5
       Fraction of




                               0.2                                                                           γ=2
                                                                                                             γ=1
                                 0


                         −0.2
                                      1   2      3         4           5          6            7     8   9           10
                                                       Inverse of the Frisch elasticity (σ)


  Figure 2: Separable Preferences: Panel (A) plots the welfare effect from a change in wage
  dispersion as a function of the inverse of the Frisch elasticity. Panel (B) plots the welfare gain
  from completing markets as a function of the inverse of the Frisch elasticity. Panel (C) plots
  the welfare change from eliminating risk as a function of the inverse of the Frisch elasticity.
  All plots are based on the estimates for (changes in) vα and vε described in Section 7.1. The
  black dots represent the baseline parameterization.


                                                                     48
