                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       VOTES OR MONEY? THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE US CONGRESS.

                                         Matilde Bombardini
                                          Francesco Trebbi

                                        Working Paper 13672
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13672


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Matilde Bombardini and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Votes or Money? Theory and Evidence from the US Congress.
Matilde Bombardini and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 13672
December 2007
JEL No. D72,H7,P48

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the relationship between the size of interest groups in terms of voter representation
and the interest group's campaign contributions to politicians. We uncover a robust hump-shaped relationship
between the voting share of an interest group and its contributions to a legislator. This pattern is rationalized
in a simultaneous bilateral bargaining model where the larger size of an interest group affects the amount
of surplus to be split with the politician (thereby increasing contributions), but is also correlated with
the strength of direct voter support the group can offer instead of monetary funds (thereby decreasing
contributions). The model yields simple structural equations that we estimate at the district level employing
data on individual and PAC donations and local employment by sector. This procedure yields estimates
of electoral uncertainty and politicians effectiveness as perceived by the interest groups. Our approach
also implicitly delivers a novel method for estimating the impact of campaign spending on election
outcomes: we find that an additional vote costs a politician between 100 and 400 dollars depending
on the district.


Matilde Bombardini
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997 - 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
Canada
matildeb@interchange.ubc.ca

Francesco Trebbi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ftrebbi@chicagogsb.edu
1        Introduction

The role played by special interest groups in shaping policy-making is hard to ignore. One simple
reason is the considerable size of the amounts the special interest groups (SIGs) inject into the
political system. During the 1999-2000 election cycle the first 50 donor industries disbursed to
incumbents of the 106th Congress a cumulated $368, 438, 170, about the size of the GDP of a (not
so) small developing economy. In the 2005-2006 election cycle the first 50 donor industries disbursed
the 109th Congress $444, 505, 353. Much research eﬀort has gone towards understanding the way in
which special interest groups (SIGs) aﬀect the political process and policy formulation, if and how
SIGs buy influence. In particular, within this literature one specific path has been to investigate the
importance of campaign contributions by SIGs to politicians who value such donations as inputs
that increase their probability of electoral success.
        One aspect that has received little attention along this path of research is that, since the prob-
ability of being (re-)elected ultimately depends on the number of votes a politician can attract,
the legislator should take into account both the electoral strength of an interest group (i.e. the
share of voting population it represents) and its contributing possibilities when deciding whether
to support or not legislation in favor of such group.1 On the one hand, SIGs that represent a large
number of voters in a district also benefit more from a given policy and therefore might contribute
more. On the other hand, such interest groups might be required to make fewer contributions if
they can pledge voter support.2 The ability of employers to aﬀect the electoral orientation of their
    1
        The power of firms in terms of voter representation has been at the center of discussion following a recent move by
Wal-Mart: “In August, Wal-Mart distributed a letter to its employees in Iowa and three other states, highlighting what
it said were inaccuracies in criticism by Governor Tom Vilsack, as well as Senators Evan Bayh of Indiana and Joseph
Biden of Delaware and New Mexico’s Governor Bill Richardson. The letter encouraged employees to talk to ‘friends,
neighbours and family about the good that Wal-Mart does’. It also promised that the company would ‘keep you informed
about what these political candidates are saying about your company while on the campaign trail’. Wal-Mart has also
highlighted the significant number of its employees in both swing states. In Ohio its 50,000 workers represent roughly 1
per cent of voters in the 2004 presidential election, enough to be a factor in the current Senate battle between Sherrod
Brown - a Wal-Mart critic - and Mike DeWine, the Republican incumbent. Wal-Mart’s political action committee is
also one of the largest corporate donors to Mr DeWine’s campaign.” (Financial Times - September 30, 2006)
   2
     The idea that politicians may accept lower contributions by firms that represent a large number of voters is
clearly expressed in the following interview to Representative Guy Vander Jagt (R-Michigan): “I have one Fortune
500 company in my district that was so fuddy-duddy that they would never ever, ever do anything to help me. If their
plane was going back to Michigan, they wouldn’t let me ride on it. And that was before we got all these rules in.
Nobody would do it now [accept a ride on a corporate jet], but back then, everyone would do it. When the Washington
Senators were still here, instead of [this company] getting me tickets, I’d scramble around and get them tickets. In
other words, I could not have been treated more shabbily in terms of anything they might do for me. And yet I always



                                                              2
employees is illustrated by initiatives like the NAM (National Association of Manufacturers) Pros-
perity Project, which provides employers with the tools to inform workers of how their legislators
are voting on issues of concern to their sector.         3

    This turns out to be a quantitatively important mechanism at play in the data. The main
contribution of the paper is to show that the number of voters represented by interest groups is an
important variable in explaining the pattern of campaign contributions. The data indicate that an
inverted-U shape describes the relationship between the share of voters represented by an interest
group and the contributions to a legislator.
    As a departure point, the paper exploits the variation in economic structure across US states
and congressional districts to investigate the relationship between the electoral strength of a given
interest group and the political contributions to a given politician. For each US House Representa-
tive and each Senator, we match PAC and individual contributions by each economic interest group
(e.g. tobacco, insurance, steel producers, textiles) to the number of employees in the corresponding
sector.4 We find that, within each Congressional District and each State, an inverted-U describes
the relationship between campaign contributions and the number of employees in the sector repre-
sented by the corresponding interest group. At low employment levels (i.e. fewer voters), interest
group contributions to the politician increase with the number of employees in a sector. At higher
employment levels the interest group contributions decrease with the number of employees. Indeed,
the data show that the largest employers are practically never the largest contributors. This pattern
knocked myself out for them because they were the biggest employer in that county. Their health was essential to the
health of my constituents, the people who worked there.” - Speaking Freely by Martin Schram for the Center for
Responsive Politics (1995, First Edition)
  The following quote by Senator Dennis DeConcini (D-Arizona) clarifies further the concept: “If I get a contribution
from, say, Allied-Signal, a big defense contractor, and they’ve raised money for me. And then they come in and say,
‘Senator, we need legislation that would extend some rule of contracting that’s good for us.’ They lay out the case.
My staﬀ goes over it. I’m trying to help them. Why am I trying to help them? The cynic can say: ‘Well, it’s because
they gave you 5,000 bucks. And if you ran again, they’ll give you another 5,000 bucks.’ Or is it because they have
15,000 jobs in Arizona and this will help keep those jobs in Arizona? Now to me, the far greater motivation is those
jobs, because those are the people that are going to vote for me. But I can’t ignore the fact that they have given me
money... Now the ideal situation is if I was motivated only by the jobs and the merits and there was no money here -
that’s the way it ought to be - or if the money was so minimal that nobody would think it was a factor. If I could only
spend a half a million dollars in a Senate campaign and they could only give me $1,000, it would not be a factor.”
   3
     See the project web site at http://www.bipac.net/page.asp?content=nam&g=nam&parent=p2demo.
  In 2004 NAM reports “By Election Day, the program reached more than 19 million employees, delivered more than
40 million messages and helped 1.7 million employees with voter registration and early ballot information.”
   4
     It seems reasonable to proxy the number of voters an interest group represents with the number of employees in
the sector.



                                                             3
is robust to a battery of specifications and controls and, to the best of our knowledge, has not been
explored before in the literature on political contributions. Furthermore, we believe this framework
highlights a channel of influence at work in a wider sample than the one we consider here. For
instance, several surveys of legislators indicate AARP as the most influential special interest group
in Washington. AARP gives $0 of political contributions by statute. These two facts cannot be
reconciled by standard models of lobbying, but they are rationalized in the framework we present,
given the large fraction of voters represented by the elderly.
      From a theoretical standpoint, we interpret the evidence by modeling the interaction between
heterogenous interest groups in a district and a politician in a simultaneous bilateral bargaining
framework, which illustrates the eﬀects of interest group size on the amount of campaign contri-
butions. Each interest group bargains with its representative over the latter’s support for a policy
favorable to the SIG and over the amount of contributions and voter support by the interest group.
The politician is interested in ensuring support because it faces electoral uncertainty and aims at
increasing the probability of winning by trading legislation support for (i) a guaranteed number of
votes by individuals members of the SIG’s and (ii) contributions that are then employed to aﬀect
the decision of impressionable voters through advertising. The size of the interest group aﬀects
the bargaining because: (i) a larger interest group benefits more from a given favorable policy and
must therefore give larger contributions, (ii) a larger interest group can ensure the legislator a wide
support in the sense of persuading the voters it represents to vote in favor of the politician and
therefore it might not be required to contribute as much, if it suﬃciently increases the probability
of winning of the politician by just committing the support of its members.
      The model delivers a structural relationship between votes and contributions, which we estimate,
thus obtaining a measure of the rate at which politicians transform contributions into votes, of the
degree of electoral uncertainty, and of the implicit ability of politicians to support legislation in
favor of interest groups. We employ our results to make four points.
      First, according to our parameter estimates, each politician expects to be spending between
$100 and $400 in order to assure an additional vote through advertising and other forms of cam-
paigning. Levitt (1994) finds that campaign spending has a small impact on electoral outcomes5 ,
or equivalently, that to obtain on average one more vote politicians need to spend a large amount
of money. Interpreting Levitt’s estimates in this direction yields a cost of $130 − $390 per vote.
Our estimates, though the result of a diﬀerent empirical approach, are of the same magnitude.
  5
      The impact is also not significantly positive, but here we simply make use of his point estimates to illustrate the
comparison.




                                                            4
       Second, we relate our estimates of the cost of a vote to the density of population finding that
more urbanized districts have a higher cost of votes. This result is consistent with findings in
Stratmann (2004), who reports that some districts have a higher cost of media advertising. If we
think that cities like New York have both high density and high cost of media advertising then the
positive correlation we obtain can be rationalized.
       Third, the estimates of ex ante electoral uncertainty are compared to measures of lopsidedness
using ex-post vote margins. We find that in districts where electoral races are closer (ex-post victory
margin is thin) our estimates indicate higher ex-ante uncertainty. Analogously, for races that are
considered more lopsided our estimates indicate lower ex-ante variance.
       Fourth, by considering the electoral support oﬀered by an interest group along with its contribu-
tions, we are able to recalculate the return to political ‘investment’, broadly defined and we assess
its magnitude. Ansolabehere, de Figueiredo and Snyder (2003) provide a comprehensive review of
the discussion surrounding the question of whether returns to political contributions are too high
(implying that contributions should be several orders of magnitude higher) or too low (implying
that we should observe very little contributions). The very nature of this question presupposes
that contributions are similar to an investment decision and that interest groups are buying favors
at some implicit price. The conclusion that Ansolabehere et al. reach is that if contributions
were truly an investment decision then we should observe higher levels of monetary support, as
their returns appear considerably higher than other types of investment. Therefore, they claim,
contributions must rather be a form of consumption. We argue that in order to calculate the re-
turn to contributions one needs to take into account that interest groups give votes (which can be
translated into money) and money.6 The method we propose delivers considerably lower (and more
reasonable) returns.
       Relation to previous literature
       The literature on campaign financing is vast.7 The models that have been proposed in the
literature attribute to political contributions diﬀerent motivations and consequences. We will focus
on those papers that are more relevant to this study here, with the full knowledge that this review
is far from complete.
       Various theoretical models have identified reasons why contributions are given and how they
are used. According to these models contributions are given in order to (i) aﬀect the policy choice
   6
       So an extra dollar would earn return on a larger denominator and not the return found by simply dividing the
value of political favors by the amount of dollar contributions.
   7
     A recent and detailed survey is provided by Stratmann (2005).




                                                          5
of an incumbent government (Grossman and Helpman, 19948 ), (ii) to influence the platform of
political candidates (Grossman and Helpman, 19969 ), (iii) to increase the likelihood of election of a
candidate with a given (i.e. non-flexible) favorable position (Grossman and Helpman, 1996; Morton
and Myerson, 1992) or (iv) to buy access (Austen-Smith, 1995). Politicians find those contributions
useful because campaign spending can be used to inform voters of a candidate position (Austen-
Smith, 1987) or to convince them of the candidate’s quality (Coate, 2004).
       Empirical studies of mechanisms (i) and (ii) have found some eﬀect of contributions on voting
behavior on specific pieces of legislation10 although others have not.11 In this paper, we assume
contributions are valued by politicians and therefore aﬀect legislators’ votes on certain bills. Eﬀect
(iii) is hard to distinguish empirically from eﬀect (ii), but many studies have nevertheless tried
to assess the impact of a given candidate spatial position on the contributions raised (Poole and
Romer, 1985; Poole, Romer and Rosenthal, 1987; McCarty and Poole,1998). Ansolabehere, Snyder,
and Tripathi (2002) and references therein discuss eﬀect (iv)12 .
       Whether the politicians’ perception that contributions can indeed aﬀect voters decisions is
justified has been the subject of very close empirical scrutiny. This literature has pursued the
goal of quantifying the impact of campaign spending on the share of votes obtained in the election
(Jacobson, 1978; Green and Krasno, 1988, Palda and Palda, 1998). The diﬃcult task faced by
this literature has been to control for other variables that aﬀect electoral outcomes and that might
therefore bias the estimate of the impact of spending. A few studies have addressed this issue
using diﬀerent techniques and obtaining diﬀerent results (Levitt, 1994; Milligan and Rekkas, 2006,
Erikson and Palfrey, 1998). This paper is not going to address the issue directly, but it oﬀers an
implicit way of estimating the monetary value of a vote, which is just another way of expressing
how much money is needed to ‘influence’ an additional voter. Our methodology, using within-
district data, is not subject to bias coming from unobserved candidate characteristics because such
   8
       Grossman and Helpman (1994) study the impact of political contribution on trade policy determination, but the
electoral process is not modeled and contributions are assumed to increase the utility of politicians.
   9
     In Grossman and Helpman (1996) political candidates have a given position on some issues, but their platform on
other topics can be aﬀected by contributions (valued as a tool to gather votes). Interest groups have two goals in giving
contributions: influencing the platform of candidates and aﬀecting the probability of winning of those candidates that
are ex-ante aligned with them. In this paper, policy is taken to be exogenously given for the individual candidate,
who has the choice of supporting it or not. This is a realistic assumption when we analyze the case of an individual
politician during a given legislature.
  10
     Baldwin and Magee (1998), Stratmann (2002)
  11
     Ansolabehere et al. (2003) report a number of studies that have found mixed results in support of this hypothesis.
  12
     The authors also have a relevant discussion of the relationship between size of the SIG’s membership and access
to politicians for AARP, Business Round Table, and other groups.



                                                           6
characteristics are constant at the district level. Admittedly we cannot perform the same exercise
as the previous studies, but we can obtain an estimate for the implicit cost of a vote that is free of
individual candidate bias.
       Another strand of research has focused on identifying the strategy of interest groups in terms of
choice of timing and recipients of contributions. Several papers have found committee assignments
and constituency characteristics to be important determinants of interest group donations, both
theoretically and empirically (Grier and Munger, 1991; Denzau and Munger, 1986; Stratmann,
1991). Generally, the view in these studies is that interest groups at the national level decide
where to allocate a given amount of money according, for instance, to whether the legislator’s
constituents’ interests are or not aligned with the interest group. The view that we take in this
paper is to consider an individual politician and abstract from the national interest group allocation
problem.
       There is also relevant political science research on the role of groups as vote providers and
turnout, which include both theoretical and empirical contributions. For the former, see Morton
(1987, 1991), Schram (1990), Uhlaner (1989). For the latter, see Filer, Kenny, and Morton (1993)
and Nalebuﬀ and Shachar (1999).
       The study that comes closest to what we do in this paper is Stratmann (1992). Stratmann looks
at the relationship between farm PAC contributions in a given district and the fraction of farm
population in that congressional district13 . He finds that farm PAC contributions are low for those
legislators whose district has a low fraction of rural population (approximately below the median
for the country) suggesting that, according to Stratmann, those politicians are ‘too costly’ to bring
to the farm cause because they do not have support for those policies from their constituency14 .
Stratmann also finds that, conditional on the fraction being (approximately) above the median,
contributions first decrease in farm population (because politicians with larger farm constituencies
care more about farming and need to be compensated less for supporting farming-favorable policies),
but then increase. Stratmann explains that the latter eﬀect is suggestive of the fact that politicians
with large farming constituencies are the ones with the highest productivity in pushing legislation
that is pro-farming and therefore PACs that try to maximize their return should invest more heavily
in them. Although this paper primarily focuses on the interaction between a politician and interest
  13
       Rural fraction is used as a proxy for the fraction of population with some interest in policies favorable to
farming. This measure is also taken to proxy the position of the specific legislator about issues concerning farming,
independently of campaign contributions.
  14
     An interest group interested in guaranteeing that the majority of legislators will support a given policy, will try
to influence the ‘least costly’ half of the legislature.



                                                           7
groups in his electoral district, in Section 3 we discuss the relationship between our results and
Stratmann’s regressions.
         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the data and presents the
reduced-form evidence. Section 3 presents a model of bargaining between the legislator and interest
groups and derives a structural relationship between votes and money. Section 4 presents the
estimation procedure and the structural estimation results. Section 5 concludes.


2         Presentation of the data and reduced-form estimation

This section presents the data on the number of voters pertaining to each special interest group and
the amount of political contributions to each legislator by each interest group. The data come from
two sources. Data on local employment by sector are contained in the Country Business Patterns
database, an annual series15 published by the U.S. Census Bureau, which provides U.S. county-level
employment16 by 6-digit NAICS.17 The county-level data is aggregated to the congressional district
level and the state level using the MABLE-Geocorr software.18
         Campaign contributions data from the Federal Election Commission (FEC) files are collected
and aggregated by the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP). The CRP classifies Political Action
Committee (PAC) contributions and individual contributions according to the industry to which the
PAC or the individual donor is associated1920 . We use the subset of groups identified by the CRP
    15
         The series excludes data on self-employed individuals, employees of private households, railroad employees, agri-
cultural production employees, and most government employees.
  16
     The Business Register database contains information about every known establishment in the United States. The
information on employment is summarized in CBP by establishment size bracket.
  17
     In this paper we employ the 1989-90 and 1999-2000 issues.
  18
     Supported by the Missouri Census Data Center. Whenever counties are split between two congressional districts,
we utilize the following methodology to allocate employment to the two districts. Consider county i, part of which
lies in congressional district d and part in d0 . Define as P OPid and P OPid0 the population of county i in districts d
and d0 respectively. The county-level employment in sector s, vsi is attributed to the two districts in the following
                                           P OP
amounts: vsi P OPPidOPid
                    +P OPid0
                                                0
                             and vsi P OPid +PidOP    .
                                                  id0
  19
     FEC regulation requires the disclosure of the donor’s employer.
  20
     Noticeably, the approach followed by the CRP may induce a form of measurement error in the data if voters’
contributions are unrelated to the economic SIGs inferred from employment data (for instance, because donors are
driven exclusively by ideological concerns). This would clearly induce attenutation bias in the data, moving against
the mechanism we present. As we report in what follows, attenuation bias does not seem to be a first-order issue,
given the quantitative strenght and precision of our estimates.
    Finally, the absence of generalized information concerning aﬃliation to non-economic interest groups prevents
us from extending the analysis beyond economic SIGs. The eﬀects we describe however directly generalize to any
instance in which groups have non-zero electoral mass.


                                                              8
for which we have employment data and match the CRP interest groups to 6-digit NAICS sectors21
using the definitions reported by the U.S. Census Bureau. The 86 SIG’s and the corresponding
NAICS industries are listed in Table 1. For each SIG we have contributions to each member of the
Senate and the House of Representatives for the 101st (election cycle 1989-90) and 106th Congress
(election cycle 1999-2000). Data collected by the CRP have been extensively employed in the
politico-economic literature22 .
       As additional controls, data concerning electoral districts and elections are obtained from the
Oﬃce of Clerk of the House (for election results) and the Poole and Rosenthal’s voteview data
base23 (for names, party aﬃliation, and characteristics of congressmen and senators). Finally, in
order to remove the largest outliers we winsorize contributions and number of workers at the 99th
percentile of the right-end tail of the pooled densities of each variable.
       We now proceed to gauge the qualitative features of the data. Our starting point is to present
evidence of a non-monotonic, inverted-U pattern between contribution and SIG’s employment sizes.
We present evidence of this empirical regularity in Table 2. The table is divided in three sections,
corresponding to the House, the Senate, and the subgroup of Senators running for reelection at
the two sampling dates of November 2000 and 199024 respectively. The dependent variables of
interest are contributions by each SIG s in district d, which corresponds more directly to Csd ,
and, in alternative, the fraction of all contributions received by a politician from each SIG. The
independent variable, vsd , is the fraction25 of total population of total employment in district d
represented by sector s. The four specifications that we estimate in Table 2 are:

                            (col. 1) Csd = φ + δ 1 vsd + µsd

                            (col. 2) Csd = φ + δ 1 vsd + κd + ψ s + µsd
                                                              2
                            (col. 3) Csd = φ + δ 1 vsd + δ 2 vsd + µsd
                                                              2
                            (col. 4) Csd = φ + δ 1 vsd + δ 2 vsd + κd + ψ s + µsd .

The first two specifications presented account for a linear relationship between the number of voters
represented by a given SIG and its contributions to a given legislator. A parametric (quadratic)
polynomial is the simple but flexible approximation that we employ in columns (3) and (4). In
  21
     For the 2000 data. For the 1990 data we match the CRP groups to 4-digit SIC (1987 version) industries.
  22
     Among the others see Ansolabehere, de Figueiredo, Snyder (2003) and de Figueiredo and Silverman (2004).
  23
     Initially from Poole and Rosenthal (1997).
  24
     The House is renewed every two years, while the Senate is staggered in electoral classes of size 1/3 every two
years. The term in oﬃce of representatives is therefore two years, relative to six years for Senators.
  25
     We utilize shares of total population in order to account for possible diﬀerences in the size of the diﬀerent polities.
This is not particularly important for the House, but it is relevant for the Senate.


                                                             9
order to partial out unobserved sector-specific and politician-specific characteristics, we pool across
districts all the observations for each branch of Congress and include both sector and legislator
fixed eﬀects. We include the fixed eﬀects in columns (2) and (4).
       The linear specifications indicate a positive correlation between contributions and size of the
lobby, δ 1 > 0, that is robust to the inclusion of fixed eﬀects that is significant at standard confidence
levels. Such relationship holds for the House and the Senate in 1990 and 2000, indicating a consistent
pattern over time and across Congressional branches. As expected the relationship is stronger in
the subgroup of Senators up for reelection in November 2000.
       More interestingly Table 2 shows that the pooled regression indicates a hump-shaped relation-
ship between votes and contributions: the parameters present a positive sign on the linear term and
negative on the quadratic (δ 1 > 0 and δ 2 < 0) and are always statistically significant, whether we
include the fixed eﬀects or exclude them. In order to give quantitative intuition the table reports
also the point of maximum and the number of observations above the point of maximum of the
parabola implied by the estimated coeﬃcients. For the House the peak is located between 1.4 and 3
percent of the overall district population. In a congressional district of size approximately 600, 000
it corresponds to a SIG employing between 8, 400 and 18, 000 workers. This number is particularly
reasonable considering that the margin of victory in the 2000 House elections was on average about
80, 000 − 90, 000 voters, implying a pivotal group size around 40, 000 − 45, 000 voters. As we could
have expected, the number of observations above the point of maximum is not very large. Within
each district there are never too many relatively large voter groups (the distribution of industry
sizes is well approximated by a Pareto distribution)26 . Furthermore, understanding the behavior
of the function over the rightmost portion of the size range is important. Large employers are
particularly interesting since they cover a substantial portion of the electorate.
       For the Senate the peak of the inverted-U is located between 1.1 and 3.97 percent of the
State population. Senatorial races operate over substantially larger constituencies and the number
of lobbies large enough to exercise electoral pressure could diﬀer from that for the House. This
notwithstanding, the data seem to support an hump-shaped relationship for Senatorial races as well,
especially for those Senators that had completed their fund-raising and were running for reelection
in 2000 and 1990 (part 3 of Table 2).
       We now proceed in further detail conditioning along the two main dimensions of the data (by
district and by sector). Table 3(a) reports the results for the coeﬃcients of interest after removing
  26
       It is also mechanically impossible to have many relatively large sectors since their fractions of total employment
have to add up to one.




                                                            10
the assumption of common behavior of the polynomial approximation across districts, while 3(b)
reports within-sector results. Within each district we estimate the equation:

                                                                      2
                                        Csd = κd + δ d,1 vsd + δ d,2 vsd + µsd ,                                     (1)

and we consider the overall distributions of various test statistics (sign, 0.05 F-test, 0.05 and 0.10
t-tests). We find that δ d,1 > 0 and δ d,2 < 0 (i.e. the relationship between votes and contributions
exhibit an inverted-U shape) in almost all the districts27 and such pattern is significant at least at
the 10 percent level generally in half the seats for all our samples28 .
       A reasonable insight that we obtain from this table is that heterogeneity across congressional
and senatorial races is quantitatively relevant. The fitted parabolas in column (1) change from
district to district considerably. For instance, albeit the estimated mean peak of the parabola for
the House in 2000 was 0.018, the standard deviation across district was almost as high (0.013).
In the section devoted to structural estimation we devote considerable attention to what specific
characteristics of the races may determine the pattern of contributions. The approach of Table
3(a) operates within politician by construction and does not allow accounting for unobserved SIG’s
characteristics that might be correlated with sector size and could be inducing certain levels of
contributions. In column (2) we control for the value added of the sector in 2000, as computed by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis, to obviate such design problem. The results of column (1) are
broadly confirmed. We can reject at 5 percent the joint hypothesis of δ 1d = 0 and δ 2d = 0 for more
than 2/3 of the districts. Column (3) of Table 3(a) repeats the analysis excluding from the sample
four particular sectors29 exhibiting often a large employment level and a low level of contributions
and that might be suspected of driving the results (notice that from column 1 and 2 an average
between 5.3 and 6.2 SIG’s locate on the declining portion of the parabola). The results do not
change substantially once we exclude those four observations. In fact, the results suggest that
there is variation on which sectors belong to the declining portion of the parabola (their number
varies between 3.7 and 5.2).
       Table 3(b) reports the results for the coeﬃcients of interest after removing the assumption of
  27
       Congressional districts for the House and States for the Senate.
  28
       We perform three types of tests on the subset of districts that present point estimates δd,1 > 0 and δ d,2 < 0.
First we test whether we can reject the null hypothesis that jointly δ d,1 = δ d,2 = 0 at the 5% confidence level. Second
we test whether we can reject the null hypothesis that separately δ d,1 = 0 and δ d,2 = 0 at the 5% confidence level.
Finally we repeat this second test at the 10% confidence level.
  29
     The SIG excluded are Retail Sales, Hospitals and Nursing Homes, Food and Beverage, Restaurants and Drinking
Establishments.




                                                           11
common behavior of the polynomial approximation across sectors. Within each sector we estimate:

                                                                     2
                                       Csd = hs + δ s,1 vsd + δ s,2 vsd + µsd ,

and report tests on the signs of δ s,1 and δ s,2 similarly to the case of district-level regressions. We
find that for about two thirds of the sectors δ s,1 < 0 and δ s,2 > 0. In about half the sectors such
pattern is significant at the 10 percent level30 in the House, while the results for the Senate are less
conclusive, mostly due to the fact that we are not distinguishing between Senate seats that are up
for vote and those that are not.
       An intuitive check for the nonmonotonicity documented in the previous tables is that by and
large the largest employers should not be the largest contributors both within districts and within
industries. It turns out they are not. Table 4 presents evidence of this finding. In the first panel
of Table 4 we first report the number of districts in which the largest employer in that district is
the top contributor and we find that this is the case for less than 2% of the districts31 . The second
line in the same panel reports the number of districts in which the top 5 percent (ventile) of sectors
is the largest contributor. This condition is realized in less than 4% of districts. A monotonic
increasing relationship between money and votes can hardly be reconciled with these figures. The
second panel of Table 4 repeats the same calculation considering the distribution of contributions
across districts for a given sector. We find that the largest employer in a sector is also the largest
contributor in generally less than 7% of sectors. This fraction increases when considering the case
of the top ventile of districts within each sector: the top 5 percent employment group is the top
contributor in 18% to 37% of the cases. In the majority of instances sectors do not pay the largest
contributions where their employment is the largest. We report the same type of evidence in Figure
1 where the employment size of the largest contributor is plotted against the employment size of
the largest employer within a district (Figure 1a, for 106th and 101st House) and within a sector
(Figure 1b). If contributions were increasing in employment size then all observations should lie
along the 45◦ line, but we observe that the large majority of the observations lie strictly above such
line. The graphs provide a snapshot of the size dispersion of the largest contributors as well.
       As additional checks we report two important robustness extensions in Appendix Tables A1
and A2. Tables 2 and 3 do not allow for any role of electoral challengers. We consider this in
Table A1. Large incumbency advantages are a robust feature of US Congressional elections and
challengers usually garner relatively small amounts of resources for elections. Nonetheless, some
  30
       We perform an F-test with a null hypothesis of δ s,1 = 0 and δs,2 = 0 on the subset of sectors where we find
coeﬃcient point estimates that point to a hump.
  31
     All the data used in table 4 and the graphs are not winsorized in order to properly compute frequencies.


                                                         12
special interests contribute to challengers, either exclusively or jointly with incumbents/favorites.
Table A1 shows that considering the contributions to incumbents net of challengers’ contributions
does not change the frequency and robustness of the non-monotonicity that we report in the data
in any significant way. As a second check we consider the case where SIGs may not deliver all their
votes to only one candidate. To address this we split the SIG’s votes proportionally to the splitting
of the SIG’s contributions across the two diﬀerent candidates32 . Table A2 shows the robustness of
the results along this dimension. This specific way of controlling for SIG’s vote-splitting does not
change the frequency and robustness of the non-monotonicity.
         By and large the reduced-form evidence tends to support the idea of a non-monotonic relation-
ship between number of SIG’s voters and SIG’s contributions. This particular feature of the data is
novel to the best of our knowledge and surprisingly robust. In the next section we present a model
of the interaction between a legislator and several interest groups that rationalizes the results.


3         The model

This section presents a formal description of the game between politicians and SIGs. An initial
caveat is in order. The model is rigged toward empirical estimation and as such it is simplified
(radically) along several dimensions. Being critical of our own approach, we require cross-checking.
First, whenever restrictive assumptions are made, we show how the empirical results are aﬀected
by relaxing them. Second, we check our structural estimates against information external to the
model: parameter estimates should appear unreasonable if the model’s assumptions are excessively
restrictive.


3.1         Structure of the polity

Legislature and policy choice
         Consider a jurisdiction where the population is divided into D equally sized electoral districts.
The parliament is formed by D legislators, each representing an electoral district d, d = 1, ..., D.
The task of the legislature is to pass or reject a set of policies. In order to simplify matters we
disregard the agenda-setting stage and consider the decision of each legislator d to vote in favor
or against each of the exogenously proposed policies. We do not model the interaction among the
legislators and the determination of the national policy since we are interested in the district-level
    32
         Given the absence of turnout and electoral data by SIGs, we are constrained by addressing the matter indirectly
in Table A2.




                                                             13
interaction between the incumbent legislator and the set of local interest groups, in view of future
electoral competition between the incumbent and a challenger.
       Special interest groups
       The economy is divided into S sectors producing goods or services. For the purpose of this
model a sector s in electoral district d is a group of capital owners and workers, which share a
common interest in policies that favor the sector.33 In each electoral district d the economy is
characterized by a diﬀerent size distribution of sectors. The size of interest group s in electoral
district d is represented by the number of workers/voters in the sector: vsd (the set of all voters who
have some stakes in policies that favor the sector). We indicate with the vector y = (y1 , y2 , ..., yS )
the set of policies proposed by the agenda setter. Policy ys might be an industry-specific subsidy
or tariﬀ, which increases the rent of interest group s. We assume that the benefit of the lobby
depends only on the aggregate income of the interest group. Ignoring for now the role played by
contributions, the income of the interest group depends on the benefit from policy ys . We allow the
benefit from ys to depend on the size of the interest group and the ability of the politician. Interest
group size matters because, for example, the benefit created by a subsidy given to an industry is
increasing in the size of the industry. By allowing the benefit to depend on the specific politician,
we want to capture the idea that more experienced legislators are more likely to be eﬀective at
supporting a piece of legislation and increase the size of the benefit to the interest group they agree
to support. For simplicity let us assume that in the absence of policy ys the rent of the interest
group is zero.34 The expected utility of interest group s, denoted by Usd is therefore:

                                               Usd = γ d + ρd vsd + εsd

       where ρd and γ d are the legislator-specific parameters and εsd is a random component that
might depend on the specific ability of a politician to support a particular sector.
       We assume that agents with a stake in sector s act as a unified special interest group vis-á-vis
the district legislator.35 Since this paper focuses on the interaction between interest groups and
  33
       Although we recognize that the interests of workers and capital owners might not always coincide, we here focus
on policies for which they are suﬃciently aligned.
  34
     Members of the interest group might have other sources of income, which do not depend on the policy imple-
mented. We disregard them here.
 35
    We will be interchangeably use the expression (special) interest group and lobby, even though the word lobbyist
would more strictly identify individuals that act on behalf of interest groups and do not necessarily decide on the
amount of political contributions. Lobbyists are more likely to channel information to the legislators while interest
groups decide independently to make campaign contributions (through their PAC’s, for example, in the United
States).



                                                           14
politicians, it seems plausible to abstract from coordination problems among individuals belonging
to an interest group. Since Olson (1965) contribution, a large literature has tried to identify
the characteristics that exacerbate the free-rider problem within groups that pursue a common
objective. We assume that when the group decides to vote for a given politician no individual
defects (defection is typically due to costly eﬀort or any other private cost of voting).
       In this paper we concentrate on the interaction between a legislator and its constituents, that
is interest groups located in the electoral district. While we recognize that interest groups are able
to organize at the national level, it is common to observe that national associations promoting
special interests are divided into local chapters, which interact more closely with their respective
legislator.36 The importance of this local dimension of the interaction between interest groups and
politicians is testified by the predominance of in-state versus out-of-state political contributions for
the majority of politicians.37 Although the model can be extended to the simultaneous interaction
between legislators and lobbies at the national level, we choose not to pursue this avenue of research
here as it would greatly complicate the empirical estimation of the game by making the SIG’s payoﬀs
functions of the payoﬀs and the bargaining outcomes in all districts.38
  36
       It is also the case that many companies have their own PAC’s. So another interpretation is that companies
located in a district interact mainly with their legislator.
  37
     For the electoral cycle 1995-96 the median of the percentage of in-state contributions as a fraction of the total is
80% while the mean is 74%.
  38
     It is however interesting to address the question of how our results relate to previous research, particularly Strat-
mann (1992), focusing on a national lobby allocating resources across politicians. Stratmann considers a specific sector
and explores the relationship between the number of employees in diﬀerent districts and the amount of contributions
given to each legislator. This is similar to our within-sector analysis, which we can perform on 86 (or 84 depending
on the year) sectors (Stratmann only considers 1 sector, farming). Taking this standpoint, within-district results
should be the byproduct of the relationship between SIG’s and politicians at the national level. Five observations are
in order when comparing Stratmann’s results and ours. 1) As mentioned above, contributions are overwhelmingly a
local phenomenon. Out-of-state contributions are a small minority. 2) When comparing within-district and within-
sector results in Table 3, within-district results seem to present stronger evidence of a non-monotonic relationship
than within-sector results. 3) Taking Stratmann’s model seriously, one should not observe positive contributions for
districts where a sector’s employment size is smaller than the median (given majority voting in Congress). This
would not strictly hold if there is uncertainty about politicians’ behavior, so Stratmann does expect to observe some
positive contributions even for observations below the median. However, the amount of contributions for observations
below the median is too large for such interpretation: about 40 percent of total sector’s contributions on average. 4)
We find that the peak of contributions is generally well above the median (above the 3rd quartile) and not around
the median. 5) Stratmann argues that for observations with employment levels above the median the relationship
between votes and contributions should be first decreasing (politicians that have aligned interests have to be paid less)
and then increasing (politicians with aligned interested are more productive and should be paid more). We do not
find generalized evidence of a spike in contributions for the highest levels of employment in nonparametric analysis


                                                           15
    Voters
    Like Baron (1994) and Grossman and Helpman (1996) we consider two types of voters, the
informed and the uninformed. Diﬀerently from these papers, the informed voters here are identified
by their occupation and general economic interests. In this paper the set of informed voters also
corresponds with the members of the interest groups, broadly defined as the set of individuals with
some stake in the sector. Therefore the number of informed voters in a district corresponds to
the sum of the individuals employed in each sector, vsd , in that district. The informed voters’
only concern is whether the proposed policy which benefits their sector, is supported by the elected
politician (and subsequently passed by the legislature). Interest groups can influence the incumbent
to vote in favor of their preferred policy not only by promising support of the informed voters in
the sector, but by also making political contributions which in turn can be used by the candidate
in the election campaign to aﬀect the decision of uninformed voters.
    Uninformed voters are not influenced by the position of the candidates on the specific policy
vector y, but some of them can be aﬀected by the amount of advertising and other campaign ex-
penditures undertaken by the candidates and directed to them. We define the set of uninformed
voters that responds to advertising as impressionable uninformed voters while the remaining un-
informed voters are defined as non-impressionable uninformed voters. For simplicity we assume
that for each dollar spent on campaigning, the incumbent obtains the vote of αd impressionable
                                                                                                    1
uninformed voters with certainty (alternatively, the ‘cost’ of an additional vote is               αd ).   Conversely
we assume that there is uncertainty over the behavior of non-impressionable uninformed voters: the
incumbent (and members of special interest groups) does not know how many of those uninformed
voters will turn up on election day and how many will vote for him or his challenger. The nature
of the uncertainty is described in the next subsection.
    The incumbent legislator
    The incumbent legislator in district d is concerned with winning the election (or re-election) so
her expected utility UdI depends on the return from being elected Ed , the probability of winning
                ¡    ¢
the election, Pr WdI and some exogenous factor ξ d :
                                                        ¡   ¢
                                             UdI = Ed Pr WdI + ξ d

    Let us indicate by vI the number of NIU (non-impressionable uninformed) individuals who
vote for the incumbent, while vA is the number of NIU individuals who vote for the adversary
(the challenger). Knowledge of the incumbent legislator is limited to the ex-ante distribution
(not reported). These results suggest that, while Stratmann’s explanation for the farming sector contributions is still
valid, we need to explore other models in order to account for these diﬀerent features of the data.


                                                          16
of the diﬀerence between v A and v I . Uncertainty over the margin of victory of the challenger is
summarized by a cumulative density function which can diﬀer according to the characteristics of the
           ¡         ¢                                                                   ¡          ¢
district Fd vdA − vdI . We assume for simplicity that the probability density function fd vdA − vdI
is continuous and diﬀerentiable. In the absence of contributions and voter support by interest
groups39 the incumbent wins the election whenever vdA − vdI ≤ 0                40 ,   so the probability of winning
for the incumbent is Fd (0).
       Through bargaining with interest groups, the incumbent ensures a certain amount of contribu-
                                                                              I the number of
tions and votes by interest group members (the informed voters). Indicate by vsd
informed voters in interest group s who vote for the incumbent and by Csd the contributions by
interest group s to the incumbent. The incumbent’s probability of winning is then:
                             µ                           ¶      µ S              ¶
                  ¡    ¢                 PS                      P
               Pr WdI = Pr vdA − vdI ≤                I
                                            αd Csd + vsd   = Fd               I
                                                                    αd Csd + vsd
                                                   s=1                          s=1


3.2       The political game

We model the interaction between candidates and interest groups as a multiple bilateral bargaining
problem. Each political candidate engages in simultaneous bilateral bargaining with each of the
S special interest groups in her district. The structure of the game is therefore similar to the
one analyzed by Chipty and Snyder (1999) and Raskovich (2003). Both papers analyze a game
where one seller simultaneously negotiates with several buyers. This modeling approach oﬀers the
advantage of allowing us to find a unique solution in the level of contributions oﬀered by each lobby
provided we make some assumptions about the structure of uncertainty.41
       We assume simultaneity in bargaining for two reasons. First, there is no obvious order in which
negotiations should take place since the each candidate could approach any interest group or vice
versa at any point in time. Second, as Raskovich (2003) argues, imposing an order of negotiations
implies that every interest group and candidate can observe whether negotiations of other players
have broken down. Since the negotiations between lobbyists and politicians can simply consist of a
phone call, it seems plausible that they could be resumed at any time and therefore any bargaining
  39
       For simplicity we assume that voters represented by interest groups would cast their vote randomly for the two
candidates in the absence of successful bargaining with the incumbent, so that on average their vote would not have
an impact on the electoral prospect of both candidates.
  40
     A tie is resolved in favor of the incumbent for simplicity
  41
     The politican economy literature has recently employed other modeling devices such as common agency (Gross-
man and Helpman (1994)). These models, under the assumption of quasi-linear preferences, lead to a unique equi-
librium policy, but to a multiplicity of equilibrium contributions. Another interesting example of bilateral barganing
between lobbies and politicians is Drazen and Limâo (2007).



                                                          17
could not be considered terminated by other lobbies at any point in time.
       As a result of the structure imposed, all the lobbies and the legislator can contract upon is the
favorable vote by the legislator, not the final outcome of the legislature vote, since the politician
can only decide on his own vote. Let us indicate the action of legislator d to support policy ys
by ads : if the politician supports the policy then asd = 1 and asd = 0 otherwise. For simplicity
supporting each policy ys entails no cost for the politician4243 .
       The game is played in two stages:

   1. In the first stage the incumbent legislator d enters into simultaneous negotiations with each
         lobby s separately. Bargaining between the incumbent and each lobby s determines the
                                   I ≤ v , the amount of contributions C
         amount of votes promised vsd   sd                              sd and the position of the

         candidate, asd . We assume that the order in which negotiations are made and whether they
         succeed or not is not observable by other lobbies until the second stage.

   2. In the second stage the legislature votes on the set of proposed policies y, the contributions
         obtained by each candidate are spent in an electoral campaign to sway the IU voters and the
         election takes place.

       We assume that the outcome of the negotiations between lobby s and the incumbent is given
by the Nash bargaining solution, taking as given the behavior of other lobbies j 6= s in the district.
              P            I . The reaction function of each lobby in terms of other lobbies’ votes
Define V−sd =    αd Cjd + vjd
                    j6=s
and contributions and the decision by the politician to support the policy, asd , are determined by
  42
       Introducing a cost of supporting policies would entail no diﬀerence in the results of this analysis, unless two
specific cases are introduced. First, if the marginal cost of supporting a policy increases with the number of “favors”
then a politician will not decide to support every policy. Second, in the case the total amount of resources (e.g. eﬀort)
a politician can devote to supporting policies is limited, the legislator will again decide not to support every piece
of legislation. Both cases would introduce competition among lobbies. Since it is not immediate to us the extent
to which these eﬀects would interact with the mechanisms we intend to illustrate in this paper, we abstract from
competition among lobbies.
  43
     The main reason for excluding competition between special interests is data-driven. We tested extensively for
competition eﬀects by looking at obvious competititors such as upstream and downstream producers employing input-
output tables. We could not find any empirical regularity of sort. We believe that, although competition between
special interests is relevant for specific bills and earmarks, it is unlikely to have such a systematic component across
all districts and special interests (so various ranging from tobacco to steel to hospitals) to be picked up precisely in
our empirical design.




                                                           18
the solution to the following problem:
                     ¡ I             ¢                             h                      i1
                      vsd , Csd , asd =          arg max e                             esd 2 ×
                                                              asd γ d + ρd vsd + εsd − C                       (2)
                                              (vesd esd ,e
                                                 I ,C    asd )
                                              h        ³                        ´              i1
                                                Ed Fd αd C     esd + veI + V−sd − Ed Fd (V−sd ) 2              (3)
                                                                  sd
                                   I
                             s.t. vsd ≤ vsd and 0 ≤ Csd ≤ γ d + ρd vsd + εsd

Assumption 1            We assume that fd (·) is decreasing.44
       Under Assumption1 (2) is a concave problem and therefore delivers a unique choice of Csd for
a given behavior of other lobbies.
                                                                                         ¡ I∗ ¢
Definition 1 A Nash Equilibrium of the political game is represented by a vector of votes vsd  ,a
                          ∗ ) and a vector of legislator positions (a∗ ) that satisfy (2) for politician
vector of contributions (Csd                                         sd
d and each interest group s = 1, ..., S.

       Two simple predictions of this framework are stated in the following lemmas.

                                                                                       I∗ = v
Lemma 2 In equilibrium each lobby s promises the support of all voters it represents: vsd    sd

∀s

Proof. By inspection.

Lemma 3 In equilibrium the politician supports each piece of legislation ys .

Proof. The absence of costs of supporting policy ys guarantees the politician always chooses to
support the policy.
       We see these two lemmas as relatively unrealistic but useful simplifications. Given the robustness
checks of Appendix Tables A1 and A2, we know that relaxing them produces minimal consequences
for estimation purposes (the main goal of the model). At the same time these lemmas allow us to
focus on the first-order theoretical mechanism.
       Consider for now the case of an interior solution to problem (2) in terms of Csd . Such solution
delivers the following first order condition for Csd :
                                                                         Substitution Eﬀect
                            Surplus Eﬀect                 z                 }|                {
                               z }| {                     Fd (αd Csd + vsd + V−sd ) − Fd (V−sd )
                    Csd =      ρd vsd       + γ d + εsd −                                                      (4)
                                                               αd fd (αd Csd + vsd + V−sd )
                                                               |            {z           }
                                                                       Marginal Impact Eﬀect
  44
       This assumption is needed to guarantee the concavity of the maximization problem, but for the main result to
hold we just need fd (·) to be decreasing over its positive support.


                                                           19
Everything else equal, the size of lobby s aﬀects the amount of its contributions through three
eﬀects:

   1. Surplus Eﬀect: a larger vsd means that the interest group benefits more from legislation ys .
         This eﬀect tends to increase contributions as the increased surplus is shared between the
         legislator and the interest group. This eﬀect is constant because of the linearity assumption
         in the benefit function.

   2. Substitution Eﬀect: as an interest group promises more votes, the amount of contributions
         needed to transfer a given surplus share to the legislator declines. This eﬀect declines with vsd
         due to the assumption of a decreasing fd (·): an increase in vsd yields progressively a smaller
         increase in the probability of winning. Therefore, this eﬀect causes contributions to decline
         with vsd , but at a declining rate.

   3. Marginal Impact Eﬀect: as the number of votes promised increases, the marginal value of
         contributions declines because of the assumption of a decreasing fd (·). If an interest group
         promises a large number of votes, then it resolves most of the uncertainty. Extremely fa-
         vorable events are less and less likely to happen. Therefore the marginal impact of a dollar
         of contributions is evaluated at a point where fd (·) is low. Due to this eﬀect contributions
         decrease with the size of the lobby45 . The strength of this eﬀect hinges on the degree at which
         fd (·) declines.

       The eﬀects described above are implied by a comparative statics exercise that takes V−sd as
given. Therefore the discussion has ignored the impact that size has on contributions through
the optimal response of other lobbies. This is because under a general distribution function it is
diﬃcult to determine the direction of such eﬀects.46 The non-monotonicity of the FOC (4) creates
the possibility of multiple equilibria in contribution levels Cd∗ = (C1d
                                                                      ∗ , ..., C ∗ ), which makes it
                                                                                Sd
impossible to investigate the behavior of contributions unless we make further assumptions about
the density function of the challenger margin. To close the model parametrically we consider
the case in which the margin vdA − vdI follows an exponential distribution. The assumption of an
exponential distribution for the challenger margin greatly simplifies the analysis, as the optimal
  45
       The eﬀect can be interpreted as a microfoundation for the reduced-form assumption of decreasing returns to
political contributions. See Drazen and Limâo (2007).
  46
     Reaction functions are generally non-linear.




                                                        20
amount of contributions is independent of the choice by other lobbies47 . This is crucial in order
to deliver uniqueness of the equilibrium contributions, without which it would not be possible to
proceed to structural analysis.
       Assumption 2          The margin of victory vdA − vdI is distributed according to an exponential
cumulative distribution function:
                                                                     Ã       ¡          ¢!
                                      ¡         ¢                        λd − vdA − vdI
                                    Fd vdA − vdI = 1 − exp
                                                                               βd

In order to guarantee that contributions are positive when γ d = 0 and εsd = 0 we also make the
following assumption about ρd and αd .
                                                          1
       Assumption 3          By assumption: ρd >         αd .
       We will verify later that estimates of ρd and αd confirm that the assumption is satisfied in the
data.

Proposition 4 Under Assumption 2, for each vsd , the equilibrium amount of contributions is
unique and is determined by the following expression:
                                                     n          o
                                     ∗
                                    Csd = max            bsd , 0
                                                         C                                                           (5)
                                                                         Ã       Ã                  !    !
                                                                                        bsd + vsd
                                bsd = ρd vsd + γ d − β d
                     bsd solves C
               where C                                                     exp
                                                                                     αd C
                                                                                                        −1   + εsd   (6)
                                                     αd                                   βd

Proof. See Appendix.

Proposition 5 For given εsd , the equilibrium amount of contributions by lobby s,the relationship
         ∗ and v
between Csd                                                                       bsd and it
                sd follows an inverted-U pattern: it increases with vsd for vsd ≤ v
                                                                                      ∗ (v ) in (5).
decreases with vsd for vsd > vbsd where vbsd is the maximum of the implicit function Csd  sd


Proof. See Appendix.
       The exponential distribution presents some properties that are desirable in the context of our
model. First, the pdf is always decreasing48 , as required in order to obtain a concave maximization
problem. Second, it is decreasing at a rate such that the combination of the Marginal Benefit
  47
       The intuition behind this assumption relies on the property of negative exponentials that "the future is indepen-
dent of the past" (i.e. they are memoryless). Notice that this assumption is similar in spirit to the assumption of
no economic interaction among lobbies made in several papers in the political bargaining literature, see Drazen and
Limâo (2007).
  48
     This property also implies that, if the location parameter λ is negative, then for the incumbent victory by a
larger margin is more likely than victory by a smaller margin, up to margin vdI − vdA = λ, but larger margins have
zero probability. We recognize this might not be a fully realistic representation of the ex-ante form of uncertainty.


                                                                21
Eﬀect and the Substitution Eﬀect dominate over the Surplus eﬀect for large values of vsd , which is
consistent with the empirical regularity found in the data in Section 2. Third, the exponential is
parametrically parsimonious, in that it is identified by just two parameters. This is an important
technical condition that we need to keep in mind when bringing the model to the data.
                                             ∗ we show the inverted-U shape by means of a numerical
       Since we cannot solve explicitly for Csd
example. Figure 2 illustrates the behavior of the contribution function for the indicated values of
the parameters.
                                      ∗ it is possible to assess the eﬀect of changes in the parameters
       Given the simple structure of Csd
(β, α, γ, ρ) on the shape of the inverted-U relation. Such eﬀects are described in the following
proposition.

Proposition 6 Setting for simplicity εsd = 0

  (i) the maximum amount of contributions in district d is given by the interest group of size:
                                         max     β d (ln αd ρd + αd ρd − 1) − αd γ d
                                        vsd  =                                                                      (7)
                                                               1 + αd ρd
         and the level of contributions by that group is:
                                     max      αd γ d + β d (1 − αd ρd + αd ρd ln αd ρd )
                                    Csd  =                                                                          (8)
                                                            αd (1 + αd ρd )
                                                                           max increases and C max
 (ii) as uncertainty of the electoral race increases, i.e. β d increases, vsd                 sd
         increases under the condition that ln αd ρd > 1

Proof. See Appendix
       The intuition for this result relies on the fact that when elections are more uncertain the marginal
benefit of contributions does not decline as rapidly so the surplus eﬀect dominates for a larger range
of values of vsd , which makes the ‘hump’ shift to the right. In this section we have presented a
model of the interaction between a legislator and several lobbies that, under some assumptions,
delivers the observed inverted-U relationship between votes and contributions49 .
       In Section 4 we estimate the structural parameters of the model: the electoral impact of a
dollar, αd , the uncertainty of the race, β d and the eﬀectiveness of the politician ρd .
  49
       Although this framework provides a possible explanation for the observed hump-shaped pattern, an alternative
explanation could be developed along the following lines. Imagine that, as in Grossman and Helpman (1994), politician
d cares about contributions, but also about the welfare of its constituents (in this case all voters in district d). The
proposed policy ys causes an overall distortion in welfare, but also benefits the group of voters vsd . In this case
contributions might increase with the size of the group for the same reason as in our model (the politician obtains a
fraction of a larger surplus), but might decrease because the welfare loss caused by a given policy ys in the district
decreases with the size of the group vsd . For simplicity, let the welfare loss at the national level be constant. Then


                                                          22
4        Estimation

This section presents a Maximum Likelihood estimator of the structural parameters of the model.
In order to implement ML we impose the distributional assumption that εsd be i.i.d. within district
d and normally distributed with mean zero and variance σ 2d . We account for the censored nature
of political contributions50 (which cannot be negative) through specifying a latent contribution
equation:                                             Ã        Ã                  !    !
                                                β                     bsd + vsd
                                                                   αd C
                          bsd
                          C     = ρd vsd + γ d − d       exp                          −1   + εsd
                                                αd                      βd
and a realized (observed) contribution equation:
                                             ⎧
                                             ⎨ 0 if C  bsd ≤ 0
                                         ∗
                                 Csd = Csd =                    .
                                             ⎩ C        bsd > 0
                                                 bsd if C

With the substantial exception of the nonlinear nature of the model, the problem is a common
censoring framework, that is nicely accommodated by MLE. Notice that while εsd is normally
             bsd , which is a nonlinear transformation, is not. Now define
distributed, C
                            "                         Ã    Ã              !   !#
                         1 b                       βd           bsd + vsd
                                                             αd C
                  ω sd =      Csd − ρd vsd − γ d +     exp                  −1   .
                         σd                        αd             βd
It follows that for given d the log-likelihood of the problem is:

                   ln L(θd |v1d, ..., vSd )                                                                           (9)
                                       µ             µ                ¶¶
                    P
                    S                                  αd Csd + vsd
                 =     (1 − Zsd ) ln 1 + exp
                   s=1                                      βd
                      PS               1¡                           ¢
                   −      (1 − Zsd )        ln σ 2d + ln 2π + ω 2sd
                      s=1              2
                                   Z0  Ã             Ã                !!           ∙     ¸
                      PS                               αd Cbsd + vsd        1        1 2
                   +      Zsd ln         1 + exp                            √              bsd ,
                                                                                exp − ωsd dC
                      s=1                                    βd          σ d 2π      2
                                    −∞

a district with a larger fraction of voters in sector s experiences a relatively lower welfare loss and therefore the
politician d might ask for a lower level of contributions to partially compensate for the welfare loss. In order for these
forces to yield an hump-shaped pattern of contributions, this second eﬀect must get stronger as the voter groups
size vsd increases, i.e. the benefit from policy ys must be increasing more than linearly with group size vsd . It is
not obvious on which grounds to justify such a functional form assumption and our explanation, which relies on
a decreasing probability of larger defeat margins (i.e. a declining f (·)) might be easier to rationalize. To se why,
consider that a functional form assumption on diminishing welfare losses would be required to operate similarly for
sectors completely diﬀerent in terms of technology or market characteristics.
    We discuss and test in Appendix B a series competing hypothesis.
    50
     Notice that ML approach allows to incorporate this feature of the data in a natural way. In the reduced-form
analysis of the previous section we have opted for OLS as a simpler (and rougher) approximation.


                                                           23
where we employ the indicator function Zsd = I [Csd = 0] and denote by θd the vector of parameters
of interest to be estimated for each district d:

                                              θd = (αd , β d , γ d , ρd , σ d ) .

The argument of the logarithm in the first element of (9) is the Jacobian of the transformation51 .
Finally, in the estimation procedure we will impose certain inequality constraints requested by the
model (αd > 0, β d > 0, σ d > 0).
      In the next sections we first report the quantitative results obtained from estimating the bar-
gaining model. We then provide an interpretation of the structural parameters and we compare
them to previous politico-economic studies.


4.1     Results

This section presents the ML estimates of θd district by district, in a fashion similar to the analysis
in (1). Given the reassuring consistency of the reduced-form analysis across Congressional branches
and years, in the structural analysis we will focus on the set of incumbents of the 106th House,
specifically those running for reelection in November 2000.
      From a computational standpoint, the main issues in maximizing (9) involve the ratios of the
αd and β d parameters, the highly nonlinear (exponential) components in the Jacobian, and the
numerical computation of the integral in the last line of (9). The likelihood function turns out
to be relatively well behaved after opportune reparameterization. We confirm this through model-
specific Monte-Carlo simulations. Specifically, when performing simulations of the data from known
distributions and parameters, the maximum likelihood estimator of the model performs well in
delivering back the original parameters, even in samples of size 100 (the eﬀective per-district sample
sizes are 86 and 84 for 2000 and 1990 respectively). However, according to the Monte-Carlo evidence
the parameters αd and, especially, β d exhibit a certain degree of sensitivity to miss-specifications
in the underlying distribution52 . Finally, in the following analysis the maximization proceeds from
a set of initial values that is randomly sampled 1, 200 times, reassuring on the presence of a unique
maximum.
      Table 5 presents the distribution of the maximum likelihood parameters by Congressional dis-
trict race. Since the nonlinear model is unit-dependent, we perform the analysis employing con-
tributions in dollars for Csd and number of employees, vsd , adjusted for average voter turnout of
            ¯             ¯
 51         ¯        bsd ¯¯ .
    That is ¯∂εsd /∂ C
 52
    See the rest of this section for further discussion of this issue.



                                                             24
voting age population in the 2000 electoral cycle, 51.3% (FEC)53 . For the sake of exposition and for
consistency with much of the literature we report the inverse of the parameter αd , whose natural
interpretation is the amount of money necessary to buy one vote. This approach has the additional
implication of allowing us to employ $1 as the unit of analysis for all parameters with the exception
of β d (expressed in number of votes). A relatively coarse54 grid-search has to be applied to the
transformed parameter 1/αd . For completeness we also include in the bottom part of Table 5 the
distribution of the maximum likelihood parameters by Congressional district race including the
districts where we obtain a maximum on the bounds of the grid of 1/αd (i.e. at $0 and $1, 000).
These figures are less informative within the framework of our model, since it is problematic to
interpret the results on the bounds (at $0 the value of αd is not finite and at $1, 000 the maximum
of the likelihood function might not have been achieved). The upper part of Table 5 excludes these
districts.
       Overall both the SIG’s and the politician’s parameters are precisely estimated when looking
at the frequency of the z-test rejections at 0.05 confidence level (computed with robust standard
errors) across races. Only the parameter γ d is statistically zero in less than 1/3 of the districts,
indicating that policy benefits seem to be related to SIG’s size without any constant benefit. The
SIG’s policy benefit per worker ρd is on average $347.9, and its median is $113.2. Notice however
the substantial variation in the estimates of the per-worker benefit. The standard deviation across
Congressional races is $342.66. We observe higher figures for ρd when focusing on the districts where
the maximum likelihood estimates are not necessarily interior to the bounds of the grid for 1/αd .
Particularly, the mean benefit per worker increases to around $547.9 and the median to $703.8. The
standard deviation of the distribution of the idiosyncratic random component εsd , representing the
specific ability of a politician to support a particular sector, is precisely estimated. The mean value
of σ d is $22, 223.6 with a standard deviation across all districts of $11, 799.9. Including districts on
the bounds of 1/αd does not substantially aﬀect the moments of the estimates of σ d .
       Focusing on the politician’s parameters, the estimated monetary value of a vote, 1/αd , is on
average $339.33 with a median55 of $100. Similarly to the case of ρd , the variation across district is
substantial, with a standard deviation of $341. When focusing on the districts where the maximum
is not necessarily interior to the bounds of 1/αd (where the model does not perform accurately) we
  53
       Given the nonlinearity of the model, the use of the appropriate unit for votes and contributions is necessary in
order to obtain consistent estimates of the marginal eﬀect of contributions. In the linear regression models of the
reduced-form section the estimates of the peak are independent of the unit.
  54
     The grid search ranges on 1/αd ∈ {0, 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, 900, 1000}.
  55
     The median value of 1/αd falls on a point of the grid.of as a result of its discreteness.




                                                           25
find both higher mean and median ($536.8 and $700 respectively). Notice that 67 percent of the
sample falls within the bounds and only 8 observations out of 401 actually reach a maximum of
the likelihood at 1/αd = 0.
      The scale parameter of the ex ante distribution of adversary versus favorable voters to the
incumbent, β d , is significantly estimated in more than half the districts/races. The location para-
meter of the distribution, λd , is not identified in the model and not estimated. The mean number
of votes of the scale parameter is 334, 503.4, and 369, 048.3 when we include districts with estimates
on the boundary of the grid of 1/αd . More interestingly, the median number of votes of the scale
parameter is 121, 918.2, and 250, 189.0 when we include districts with estimates on the boundary of
the grid of 1/αd . To interpret the estimates recall that the mean and median of the distribution are
not identified without λd , but that the scale of an exponential distribution is its standard deviation
and, more informatively for an asymmetric distribution, approximates the size of the interquartile
range (i.e.β d ' β d (ln 4 − ln 4/3)). Therefore we can attribute to β d ’s estimates the interpretation
of ex ante electoral uncertainty. It is interesting to notice that the results obtained from estimating
ex ante electoral uncertainty from the money-votes curve compare in magnitude to the ex post
electoral margins observed in the data. In the 2000 electoral cycle the average vote margin was
87, 168 votes, with an aggregate standard deviation of 45, 996 votes. These figures confirm that β d ’s
fall within a reasonable quantitative range, albeit with the caveat of aggregating ex post electoral
uncertainty across Congressional races. Along this line of reasoning in the next section we go in
further depth in analyzing the predictive power of the model by comparing its estimates to data
not explicitly included in the empirical design. We will interpret such results as a validation of the
predictive capacity of the model.


4.2      Validation of the estimates employing information external to the model

The simplicity of the empirical approach that we follow (essentially based on SIG’s voters and
contributions only) should not sacrifice excessively to realism of prediction. In this section we
present validation exercises for the estimated parameters of the model. We confront the district-
level estimates of the parameters with out-of-sample information regarding the ex post tightness of
the electoral races and the specific characteristics of the constituency.
      Table 6 reports the results of regressing the district/politician-specific parameters on a set of
covariates. In columns (1) and (2) the vector of parameters 1/αd , proxying for the estimated cost
of swaying an additional voter, is regressed on the ex post vote margin56 of the electoral race (in
 56
      The ex post vote margin is defined as the diﬀerence between the votes accrued to the elected candidate minus



                                                        26
the first column) and on the population density (number of inhabitants per land square mile) in the
second column. In principle we would expect races that are ex ante electorally more uncertain to be
also more expensive. It is however challenging to measure ex ante electoral uncertainty. Poll surveys,
for instance, are extremely volatile and change radically (and endogenously to contributions) over
time. We therefore inversely approximate ex ante uncertainty with the ex post vote margins. On
a diﬀerent token, we would expect that more densely populated areas where media markets charge
higher advertisement fees to be also associated with higher 1/αd . In columns (3) the vector of
parameters β d (proxying for ex ante dispersion of electoral margins) is regressed on the ex post
vote margin of the electoral race. Estimated ex ante uncertain races should be negatively associated
with ex post vote margins. We verify that these three hypotheses seem confirmed by the data (in
sign and statistical significance for 1/αd and sign only for β d ).
    A check on the comparative statics of the model is reported in column (4). Proposition 6
predicts a positive correlation between the size of the SIG with largest contributions and the degree
of uncertainty of the race. The intuition is that more uncertain races should present a peak at a
larger lobby size since the marginal impact of a dollar of contributions is relatively more valuable
in tighter races. This is clearly embedded in the estimated parameters (higher β d ’s imply larger
v̂sd ). The data on ex post vote margins confirm this result as well. In column (4) we regress the
reduced-form estimates of v̂sd on the size of the vote margin and we find the expected negative sign
(statistically significant at 5 percent confidence level). This further supports the interpretation of
column (3) on electoral uncertainty.
    Considering that information about the specific electoral outcomes or geographic characteristics
of the constituency is not directly incorporated in our estimation, we find these results reassuring.


4.3     Previous estimates of the cost of an additional vote

Our estimates of 1/α can be compared to the results of previous studies on the impact of campaign
spending on electoral outcomes. In particular these studies have obtained estimates of campaign
spending by the incumbent and the main challenger on the realized vote shares. Levitt (1994)
presents estimates of the eﬀect of a $100, 000 (in 1990 dollars) increase in spending on the vote
share. The general conclusion of that study is that campaign spending has no statistically significant
eﬀect on the election outcome, when one controls for unobserved candidate quality and district
characteristics. At most those eﬀects are very small, implying that votes are very costly to obtain
those accrued to the second, divided by the sum of the two numbers. This measure is inversely proportional to the
tightness of the race.



                                                       27
though campaign spending. The estimates vary according to the specification, but we consider the
numbers reported in column (1) of Table 5 of Levitt (1994) as an example.57 Levitt finds that
an increase of $100, 000 gives the challenger 0.3% more of the vote, while it gives the incumbent
only roughly an extra 0.1% of the vote. In 2000 the number of U.S. citizens who had the right
to vote was about 186 millions, of whom 59.5% voted.58 A typical district would have therefore
about 427, 600 eligible voters, of whom only 256, 500 vote on average. This means that $100, 000
would buy about 770 extra votes using the challenger estimate, which amounts to a price of about
$130 per vote. The price would be $390 per vote using the incumbent estimate for the spending
coeﬃcient. These numbers are compatible with the estimates that we report for the 1/αd in our
model. The implied cost of a vote is on average $339.3 with a median of $100 according to our
estimates.
       Levitt (1994) also reports estimates by Jacobson (1980) and Green and Krasno (1988) of the
same eﬀect but employing diﬀerent empirical designs. In these studies the eﬀects are larger59 : the
2SLS estimates of Green and Krasno (1988)60 imply an eﬀect of 2.4% (for the challenger) and 2.2%
(for the incumbent), which imply a cost of $16.25 and $18 per vote.
       It is worth emphasizing that the estimate of 1/αd that we obtain reflects the ex-ante evaluation
by a politician of the cost of buying an extra certain vote. In the studies mentioned above, the
estimates refer to the ex-post realization of the eﬀect of votes on contributions. With this distinction
in mind, our estimates are more in line with the cost implied by Levitt (1994) results.


4.4       Estimating returns to political contributions: Tullock’s puzzle

In this section we present a calibration of the model’s results aiming at quantitatively addressing
what in the political economy literature is commonly referred to as the Tullock’s puzzle61 . Simply
stated, the puzzle is that the amount of political contributions is too low relative to the substantial
amount of public resources that special interests seem able to obtain through bargaining with politi-
  57
       The individual coeﬃcients in this column are not individually statistically significant, but we use the estimate to
illustrate the order of magnitude.
   58
      See Jamieson et al. (2002). This is the ratio between the number of voters and the the number of citizens who
have the right to vote aged 18 and over. Notice that this is diﬀerent from the ratio between the number of voters and
the number of individuals in the country aged 18 and over (51.3%) due to the presence of foreigners and individuals
who cannot vote. We use the latter percentage when assessing the percentage of voting workers in each sector.
 59
    See Table 3 in Levitt (1994).
 60
    These are the estimates that most closely compare to Levitt (1994) as they include an index of quality of the
challenger.
  61
     In Tullock (1972). See Ansolabehere, et al. (2003) for a detailed overview of the topic.




                                                             28
cians. This implies absurdly high rates of return from political investments that seem unjustifiable
in any other competitive market. Alternatively the puzzle can be restated as the politicians being
unreasonably cheap.
       A natural interpretation of our model is that politicians and special interest groups exchange
more than political contributions, they also bargain over votes. The “missing money” may be due
to the omission from the rate of return calculation of the votes that the lobby supplies the politician
at the moment of the election. In order to (roughly) gauge quantitatively the magnitude of such an
omission consider the following example (one of the most striking they present) from Ansolabehere,
de Figueiredo, Snyder (2003, p. 111). In 2000 total USDA subsidies to agriculture amounted
to $22.1 billion62 vis-a-vis total political contributions in the amount of $3.3 million. Taken at
face value these two numbers imply an astronomical rate of return. About $6, 665 for every $1 of
political contributions. However, this computation disregards the value of the about 2 million U.S.
working-age voting farmers and the implied value of one of their votes ($400). Consider now the
rate of return that correcting for this additional component would imply. The rate of return adjusts
to a still very high, but more reasonable figure, about $26 for every $1 of political contributions
($12 for an average year)63 . This correction produces a reduction of the estimate of more than
2 orders of magnitude, indicating that accounting for the substitution between contributions and
votes may substantially help in reducing the apparent paradox behind Tullock’s puzzle.
       The structural estimates of the model can also help shedding light on the quantitative rele-
vance of the votes/money interaction and their eﬀect on the estimates of the return to “political
investment”. In Table 7 we report the estimated average rates of return for political contributions
across SIGs (106th House) computed in two diﬀerent ways. The first line of the table computes the
district-SIG specific rate of return as the ratio of monetary benefit from the policy and political
contributions, that is
                                                         γ d + ρd vsd
                                              RRsd =                  − 1.                                           (10)
                                                             Csd
The average rate of return across all districts and lobbies is $431 for every $1 of political contri-
butions with a large standard deviation across districts of $1542. The mean value is surprisingly
close to estimates obtained using actual subsidy data. We can now compare the average RR to the
  62
       This amount is the highest figure of the all 1995-2004 decade of subsidies paid by the USDA. The average yearly
figure ranges around $11 billion.
   63
      Notice that although votes do not ‘cost’ anything to farming interest groups, it is nevertheless necessary to include
them in the calculations to find the correct marginal return to contributions, that is the return the next dollar of
contributions would earn the interest group.




                                                            29
measure implied by the model:
                                                  0        γ d + ρd vsd
                                                RRsd =                  − 1.                                          (11)
                                                           Csd + αd vsd
The results employing (11) appear on the second and third rows of Table 7. The model-implied
average rate of return RR0 across all districts and all lobbies is a reasonable $0.33 for every $1
of political contributions64 ($0.12 employing the same sample as row 1). The standard deviation
across districts reads around $12, a larger figure which may well encompass cases like the agricultural
example we have just presented.
         Table 8 reports all the moments of the lobby-specific estimated rates of return. Part (a) of the
table reports the statistics computed with the definition in (10), while part (b) of Table 8 employs
the definition in (11) for estimating returns. As expected, part (b) reports values of the rates of
return that are quantitatively reasonable.
         In synthesis we believe the inclusion of the electoral dimension to the bargaining problem over
political contributions sheds substantial light on the rationale behind the observed figures. The
level of political contributions in the data does not appear unreasonably low once the role of SIG’s
votes is also taken into account.


5         Conclusion

This paper models and empirically tests a series of predictions concerning the bargaining of politi-
cians and local special interest groups. We uncover a novel pattern in the data concerning the
relationship between votes and money in US congressional politics that follows an inverted-U re-
lationship. A simultaneous bilateral bargaining game with heterogenous special interest groups
rationalizes the data appropriately65 , emphasizing the pattern of substitution between votes and
money that emerges when lobbies tend to be large in terms of workers/voters. The estimates also
provide a valid alternative to present studies of the amount of money necessary to sway one voter
and of the rates of return of political contributions.
         An avenue of future research is to explore how the approach developed in this paper may be
extended to formal treatment of the coordination of local and national special interests. While the
pattern of contribution operates mostly at the level of local interactions, national coordination of
    64
         We restrict our attention to the sample with positive political benefit, as required by the model. About 5 percent
of the observations violate this constraint. However including such observations would have the eﬀect of reducing the
rate of return of political contributions even more, not increasing it.
  65
     In Appendix B we explore alternative hypotheses that might be consistent with the pattern observed and show
evidence that points toward an interpretation of the results that is closer to our model.



                                                              30
SIG’s is essential. Relatively few studies in political science and in political economy have tried to
address this issue systematically, mostly focusing on the SIG as a national entity.
       This paper contributes to the literature concerned with modeling the interaction between eco-
nomic and political interests from a rational choice perspective66 . Relative to standard reduced-form
approaches in the literature the more structured approach followed in the paper allows to simul-
taneously gauge the role of electoral uncertainty and politicians eﬀectiveness as perceived by the
interest groups.
  66
       The paper therefore is also related to a well established literature on how economic interests influence political
policy-making. See Peltzman (1984, 1985).




                                                            31
References

Ansolabehere, Stephen, John M. de Figueiredo, and James M. Snyder Jr. 2003 "Why is There so
Little Money in U.S. Politics?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 17: 105-130

Ansolabehere, Stephen, James M. Snyder, and Micky Tripathi. 2002. "Are PAC Contributions and
Lobbying Linked? New Evidence from the 1995 Lobby Disclosure Act", Business and Politics
(August), 4: 2, 131-155.

Austen-Smith, D. 1987. "Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions and Probabilistic Voting." Pub-
lic Choice, 54(2), 123—139.

Austen-Smith, D. 1995. “Campaign Contributions and Access.” The American Political Science
Review 89(3): 566-581.

Baron, David P. 1991. "Campaign Contributions and Party-Candidate Competition in Services
and Policies." In Political Economy: Institutions, Competition, and Representation, edited by
W.A. Barnett, M.J. Hinich, and N.J. Schoﬃeld. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baldwin, Robert E. and Christopher Magee. 2000. “Is Trade Policy for Sale? Congressional Voting
on Recent Trade Bills.” Public Choice 105: 79-101.

Chipty, Tasneem, and Christopher Snyder. 1999. “The Role of Firm Size in Bilateral Bargaining: A
Study of the Cable Television Industry.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 81(2): 326 —340.

Coate, Steven (2004). "Pareto Improving Campaign Finance Policy". American Economic Review,
94(3), 628—655.

Denzau, Arthur T. and Michael C. Munger. 1986. “Legislators and Interest Groups: How Unorga-
nized Interests Get Represented.” American Political Science Review. March, 80:1, 89 —106.

Drazen, Allan and Nuno Limâo. 2007 “A Bargaining Theory of Ineﬃcient Redistribution Policies”.
International Economic Review. Forthcoming.

Erikson, Robert S. and Thomas R. Palfrey. 1998. “Campaign Spending and Incumbency: An
Alternative Simultaneous Equations Approach.” Journal of Politics 60 (May): 355-73.

Filer, John E., Lawrence W. Kenny and Rebecca B. Morton, 1993 "Redistribution, Income, and
Voting" American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 37, No. 1. (Feb.), 63-87.



                                                32
Green, Donald P., and Jonathan S. Krasno. 1988. “Salvation for the Spendthrift Incumbent: Rees-
timating the Eﬀects of Campaign Spending in House Elections.” American Journal of Political
Science 32 (November): 884-907.

Grier, Kevin B. and Michael C. Munger. 1991. “Committee Assignments, Constituent Preferences,
and Campaign Contributions.” Economic Inquiry. January, 29, 24— 43.

Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale." American Economic Review
84: 833-850.

Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1996. "Electoral Competition and Special Interest Poli-
tics" Review of Economic Studies 63: 265-286.

Jacobson, Gary C. 1978. “The Eﬀects of Campaign Spending on Congressional Elections.” American
Political Science Review 72 (June): 469-91.

Jamieson, Amie, Hyon B. Shin and Jennifer Day. 2002.“Voting and Registration in the Election of
November 2000.” U.S. Census Bureau.

Levitt, Steven D. 1994. "Using Repeat Challengers to Estimate the Eﬀect of Campaign Spending
on Election Outcomes in the U.S. House." Journal of Political Economy 102:777-798.

Milyo, Jeﬀrey, David Primo, and Timothy Groseclose. 2000. "Corporate PAC Campaign Contribu-
tions in Perspective." Business and Politics 2: 75-88.

Morton, Rebecca B. 1987. "A Group Majority Voting Model of Public Good Provision." Social
Choice and Welfare 4 : 117- 31.

Morton, Rebecca B. 1991. "Groups in Rational Turnout Models." American Journal of Political
Science, Vol. 35, No. 3. (August), 758-776.

Morton, Rebecca B. and Roger Myerson. 1992. “Decisiveness of Contributors’ Perceptions in Elec-
tions.” Working Paper New York University.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Palda, F., and Palda, K. 1998 "The impact of campaign expenditures on political competition in
the French legislative elections of 1993." Public Choice, 94(1—2), 157—174.

Peltzman, Sam. 1984. "Constituent Interest and Congressional Voting." Journal of Law and Eco-
nomics 27: 181-210.

                                                 33
Peltzman, Sam. 1985. "An Economic Interpretation of the History of Congressional Voting in the
Twentieth Century," American Economic Review 75 (September), 656-75.

Poole, Keith T. and Thomas Romer. 1985. “Patterns of Political Action Committee Contributions
to the 1980 Campaigns for the U.S. House of Representatives.” Public Choice. 47:1, 63—112.

Poole, Keith T., Thomas Romer and Howard Rosenthal. 1987. “The Revealed Preferences of Po-
litical Action Committees.” American Economic Review. May, 77:2, 298—302.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call
Voting. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Raskovich, Alexander. 2003. “Pivotal Buyers and Bargaining Position.” The Journal of Industrial
Economics 60(4): 405-426.

Schram, Arthur J.H.C. 1990. "A Dynamic Model of Voter Behavior and the Demand for Public
Goods Among Social Groups in Great Britain" Journal of Public Economics 41: 147-82.

Shachar, Ron and Barry Nalebuﬀ, 1999. "Follow the Leader: Theory and Evidence on Political
Participation" American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3. (June), 525-547.

Stratmann, Thomas. 1991. “What Do Campaign Contributions Buy? Deciphering Causal Eﬀects
of Money and Votes.” Southern Economic Journal. January, 57: 606—20.

Stratmann, Thomas. 1992. "Are Contributors Rational? Untangling Strategies of Political Action
Committees." Journal of Political Economy 10: 647-664.

Stratmann, Thomas. 2004.“How Prices Matter in Politics: The Returns to Campaign Advertising.”
Working Paper. George Mason University.

Stratmann, Thomas. 2005. “Some Talk: Money in Politics. A (Partial) Review of the Literature.”
Public Choice 124: 135-156.

Tullock, Gordon. 1972. "The Purchase of Politicians." Western Economic Journal 10: 354-355.

Uhlaner, Carole J. 1989. "Rational Turnout: The Neglected Role of Groups." American Journal of
Political Science 33 :390-422.




                                              34
6    Appendix A

To simplify expressions we are going to drop the subscript d in the following proofs.
    Proof of Proposition 4
    Substituting the expression for the probability density function and the cumulative density
function in (4) and setting, WLOG, γ = 0 and εs = 0, delivers the following FOC:
                                       µ          ¶
                                  β      αCs + vs            β
                              Cs + exp              − ρvs − = 0
                                  α         β                α

We can rewrite this equation as g (Cs ) = 0. Function g (·) is continuous and diﬀerentiable on R.
Since limCs →−∞ = −∞ and limCs →∞ = ∞ then by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists
a real number Cs∗ , such that g (Cs∗ ) = 0
   In order to prove uniqueness let us assume that the root of g (·) is not unique, i.e. there are two
                                         ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢
roots Cs1 and Cs2 , Cs1 < Cs2 such that g Cs1 = g Cs2 = 0. Then by the Mean Value Theorem,
there must be a real number C 0 such that:
                                           ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢
                                   ¡ 0 ¢ g Cs2 − g Cs1
                                     0
                                 g C =                    =0
                                             Cs2 − Cs1
                         ³       ´
However g 0 (·) = 1 + exp αCsβ+vs > 0 so, by contradiction there must be only one real number
that solves g (Cs ) = 0. If such solution is negative then contributions are set to be equal to zero.
    Proof of Proposition 5
    We are interested in the behavior of the function Cs∗ . By applying the implicit function theorem
we can derive:                                         ³ ∗ ´
                                     dCs∗     ρ−   1
                                                   αexp αCsβ+vs
                                             =        ³ ∗ ´                                        (12)
                                         dvs   1 + exp αCsβ+vs

Substituting FOC (5) in (12) we find:
                                                                     β
                                 dCs∗   ρβ + Cs∗ − ρvs − γ − εs −    α
                                      =     ³         ³ ∗ ´´
                                 dvs      β 1 + exp αCsβ+vs

                                                                                    β
The slope of the contribution function is positive whenever Cs∗ > ρvs + γ + εs +    α   − ρβ, it is zero
when
                                                            β
                                     Cs∗ = ρvs + γ + εs +     − ρβ                                 (13)
                                                            α
and it is negative otherwise.
    It must be the case that contributions are not larger than total income of the lobby. In Figure
A1 this means that the contribution function must be always below the line Cs∗ = ρvs + γ + εs .


                                                   35
    At vs = 0 contributions Cs∗ (0) can be found by solving the following equation:
                                             µ          ¶
                                       β       αCs∗ (0)              β
                             Cs∗ (0) + exp                = γ + εs +
                                       α          β                  α

We need to show that Cs∗ (0) > γ + εs . Figure A2 shows that in order to prove this, we need to
                                  ³ ∗´
evaluate the function Cs∗ + αβ exp αC
                                    β
                                      s
                                        at γ + εs and show that it is larger than γ + εs + αβ :
                                                  µ                 ¶
                                     β                α (γ + εs )                    β
                             γ + εs + exp                               > γ + εs +                   (14)
                                     α                    β                          α

Inequality (14) is satisfied for εs > −γ, a condition that we assume holds (this means εs is not
“too” negative). Since we have established that under certain conditions at vs = 0 contributions
are strictly smaller than income, we only need to show that the contribution function increases at
a lower rate than income to complete the proof that the contribution function is in between the
                                                                                         dCs∗
two parallel lines in Figure A1 when it is increasing. This amounts to showing that      dvs    < ρ which
is satisfied since:                             ³ ∗ ´
                                       ρ−    exp αCsβ+vs
                                              1
                                              α
                                               ³ ∗ ´ <ρ
                                        1 + exp αCsβ+vs

    Proof of Proposition 6
    From the proof of Proposition 4 we know that the point (vsmax , Csmax ) is located at the intersec-
tion of the function describing the FOC in (5) and (13). By solving the system of two equations
in two unknowns, we find a unique solution as in (7) and (8). To prove (ii) we calculate the first
derivative:
                                       dvsmax   ln αρ + αρ − 1
                                              =
                                        dβ          1 + αρ
which is positive by Assumption 3. We do the same for contributions:

                                       max        1 − αρ + αρ ln αρ
                                      Csd  =
                                                     α (1 + αρ)

which is positive if and only if ln αρ > 1.


7    Appendix B: Alternative Hypotheses

The analysis so far has only briefly considered alternative explanations that might be consistent
with the pattern that we uncover in the data. Here we decide to discuss two interesting hypotheses
that could potentially explain the hump-shaped relationship between votes and contributions. We
find evidence that points against these explanations and leaves the hypothesis proposed in this
paper as the more convincing alternative.

                                                         36
   A first hypothesis, which we refer to as “free-riding”, finds an explanation for the declining
section of the relationship in the following observation, by Mancur Olson (1965) about larger
groups: “Though all of the members of the group therefore have a common interest in obtaining
this collective benefit, they have no common interest in paying the cost of providing that collective
good.” Free riding would imply that as the size of the group increases, the incentive to contribute
declines. Although we cannot formally test our model against this alternative we attempt to address
this issue in two ways.
   First, we employ data on number of establishments per sector in a district to control for the
extent of free-riding. If the Olsonian view were correct, then for a given number of employees in
a sector, we should observe that the smaller the number of firms (approximated by the number of
establishments), the larger each firm and the larger the incentive to contribute towards the common
favorable policy. So we should observe a negative relationship between the amount of contributions
and the number of firms/establishments, given the size of the sector (i.e. size of the labor force).
Denote number of establishments in sector s in district d by esd . The district-level regression results
reported in Table A3 refer to the following specification:

                                                            2
                              Csd = κd + δ d,1 vsd + δ d,2 vsd + ξ d esd + µsd

We find that in many districts, contrary to the free-riding hypothesis, for a given sector size,
the amount of political contributions rises the more dispersed the sector is, that is the larger the
number of establishments. In 403 districts out of 435 the coeﬃcient ξ d on establishment number is
positive and in 105 also significant, pointing to the fact that this data does not seem to indicate the
presence of free-riding and that, even controlling for this dimension, the district-level hump shape,
documented in Table 3 remains unchanged.
   The second piece of evidence suggesting that free-riding cannot explain certain features of the
data is found in Table 5 where we show that the hump moves to the right when election margins
are closer (i.e. less predictable). There is no unambiguous reason for why free-riding should
decrease when elections are more uncertain. This is in contrast with our intuitive interpretation
that contributions become more important in uncertain elections because their marginal impact
is higher. Although we cannot nest formally the collective action problem within our model, we
believe these two pieces of evidence point against an Olsonian interpretation of the pattern found
in this paper.
   A second hypothesis that we consider is summarized by the following simple example. Imagine
a politician cares equally about votes and contributions and bears a cost m when supporting a
policy favorable to interest group s (it might be because of the welfare loss or private eﬀort in

                                                    37
arguing in favor of a piece of legislation). Also assume that the interest group s benefits vs from
such legislation and makes a take-or-leave oﬀer in terms of contributions and electoral support (vs )
to the politician to solicit support of the policy. Such simple game yields the simple prediction that
contributions by sector s:                  ⎧
                                            ⎨  0 if vs ≤ m
                                     Cs =
                                            ⎩ m − vs if vs > m

This simple example would imply that contributions are negligible up to a certain size of the
interest group, they then increase discretely and then decline. Such pattern is not confirmed in the
data where we notice that the relationship between votes and contributions is characterized by a
significant increasing section and about 1 dollar out of 3 of political contributions within a district
are paid by the SIG’s below the median. This seems to suggest that the hypothesis is not suﬃcient
to explain the hump-shaped pattern.




                                                  38
                                         TABLE 1
   Definition of Special Interests and number of employees for 106th Congress (House).
OSID Definition                               Mean      Std. Dev. Min         Max
6      Forestry & Forest Products              1600.774 1890.797 18.3855 17640.01
7      Agricultural Services & Production      263.0234 418.6269            0 4565.465
8      Oil & Gas                               171.6477 424.3744            0 2530.822
9      Mining                                  806.4858 1501.08         2.622 12571.5
10     Coal Mining                             172.6079 852.6048            0 11258.5
11     Electric Utilities                      1288.346 842.5555       5.4245 5954.603
12     Natural Gas Pipelines                     281.465 305.3758           0    1928.5
13     Construction Services                   2988.811 2098.047 125.388 17816.61
14     General Contractors                     3790.737 1690.637       954.99 19602.02
15     Building Trade Unions                   3790.737 1690.637       954.99 19602.02
16     Home Builders                           1834.398 816.7879 373.984 6305.734
17     Special Trade Contractors               6644.215 2653.552 2120.248 20260.6
18     Food Processing & Sales                   10205.9 3698.206 3651.561 37717.5
19     Food Products Manufacturing               2306.02 1598.204         193 9917.988
20     Meat processing & products              1227.074 2393.117            0 24158.5
21     Tobacco                                 76.65347 439.246             0 6232.55
22     Textiles                                1388.488 3482.393       41.344 41151.9
23     Clothing Manufacturing                  1242.382 1909.777 22.5435 12138.29
24     Printing & Publishing                   3673.303 2303.484 356.967 25079.53
25     Chemical & Related Manufacturing          1640.49 1927.645      67.901 19408.71
26     Pharmaceuticals / Health Products       1289.976 1407.634        47.26 10972.17
27     Pharmaceutical Manufacturing            563.7434 1100.758            0 9732.198
28     Building Materials & Equipment          1298.678 1208.794       27.408      8409
30     Steel Production                        1098.956 1819.361            0 23669.44
31     Telecom Services & Equipment            638.6521 1180.519            0 15302.03
32     Defense Electronics                     1087.843 1572.09             0 11892.87
33     Transportation Unions                   11137.59 6338.314 841.752 42422.91
34     Automotive                              6194.012 5095.358       359.64 36013.28
35     Auto Manufacturers                      3050.275 4982.112        15.01 32731.62
36     Defense Aerospace                       1126.361 2995.349            0 40780.5
37     Medical Supplies                        726.2326 678.4132       42.282 4182.918
38     Car Dealers                             3143.737 868.8899 326.106 5843.848
39     Retail Sales                            17256.11 3776.982 5958.36 33773.91
40     Food Stores                             6672.805 1573.148 2784.362 13160.99
41     Beer, Wine & Liquor                     473.9975 497.6569 88.7165 7296.957
42     Air Transport Unions                    1511.263 2724.186            0 26866.83
43     Air Transport                           1511.263 2724.186            0 26866.83
45     Sea Transport                           116.6885 355.5107            0 4147.58
46     Trucking                                3315.628 1817.451 482.112 13248.5
48     Books, Magazines & Newspapers           1771.081 1556.84 169.456 20656.77
49     Computers/Internet                      3183.758 4891.093       13.851 51180.5
                                      TABLE 1 (cont.)
   Definition of Special Interests and number of employees for 106th Congress (House).
OSID Definition                               Mean      Std. Dev. Min          Max
50     Computer Software                       773.1745 1457.821        4.617 12025.71
51     TV / Movies / Music                     1890.093 1737.901 242.998 20868.35
52     Motion Picture Prod. & Distr.           664.0962 851.4915 91.8855 6584.293
53     TV Production & Distribution            1197.087 1145.744 194.987 9716.751
54     Recorded Music & Music Prod.            70.44736 181.7367             0 2343.38
55     Commercial TV & Radio Stations          622.5587 656.3843        4.617 8808.215
56     Cable & Satellite TV Prod. & Distr.     532.9909 519.0946       10.945 5123.996
57     Telephone Utilities                     2762.673 2399.578 476.4955 18075.83
58     Commercial Banks                          4493.89 2537.401 775.656 29970.92
59     Finance / Credit Companies              1455.047 1326.288        55.89       8998
60     Securities & Investment                 2053.609 5276.703       33.534 72306.61
61     Insurance                                 5335.83 4047.251 345.303 33270.47
62     Real Estate                               3545.89 2262.202 672.6205 22452.7
63     Lawyers / Law Firms                     2439.902 2193.965 484.056 27134.4
64     Accountants                             2680.414 2628.266 566.321 15356.94
65     Architectural Services                  2790.666 2041.217       84.078 17622.39
66     Business Services                       4364.555 3071.728          399 20300.56
67     Advertising/Public Relations              1371.45 1853.434      87.237      24603
68     Waste Management                        743.6629 368.9448       166.86 4836.013
69     Teachers Unions                         1682.749 796.674         258.5 5622.129
70     Education                               5920.725 4476.681        616.5 33856.88
71     Health Professionals                    7052.444 1734.837 2482.245 13481.56
72     Dentists                                1640.643 457.2083 538.974 3101.65
73     Health Services/HMOs                    3508.377 1967.299        796.5 19131.1
74     Hospitals & Nursing Homes               17926.79 5090.785 4536.234 43214.27
75     Recreation / Live Entertainment         783.5836 908.7351       80.693 11383.91
76     Pro. Sports, Arenas & Services          255.4357 294.7838          3.57      2950
77     Casinos / Gambling                      490.8453 1291.754             0 17499.5
78     Lodging / Tourism                       4243.569 8069.158 118.341 118111.2
79     Food & Beverage                         18871.83 5041.846 3970.863 41557.07
80     Restaurants & Drinking Estab.           17506.03 4821.89 3545.37            37134
81     Funeral Services                        406.5309 148.0021          86.5       965
82     Clergy & Religious Org.                 3604.952 1439.032 666.999 13692.06
85     Dairy                                   329.5306 465.9284             0 3360.06
86     Credit Unions                           473.7558 261.2535          9.72 1979.561
87     Chiropractors                           245.7761 94.97468       67.592       558.5
88     Alternative Energy Prod. & Serv.        38.96531 104.5054             0 978.723
89     Nutritional & Dietary Suppl.            73.85015 268.7844             0 3755.029
90     Miscellaneous Defense                     15.6081 97.49768            0    1749.5
91     Airlines                                1306.594 2540.237             0 26371.38
92     Cruise Ships & Lines                    29.58883 212.2318             0 2942.45
93     Savings & Loans                         589.7094 487.3434       8.8425 2755.505
94     Mortgage Bankers & Brokers              562.6269 526.3119       21.384 3998.392
95     Venture Capital                         94.85496 110.2757        2.261       1116
96     Nurses                                  5818.742 1991.377       2155.5      12931
                                                           TABLE 2 (House)
                                Political contributions and employment size of special interest group.
                                          (1)                      (2)                            (3)                   (4)
                                  Coef.       Std. Err.    Coef.       Std. Err.         Coef.        Std. Err.  Coef.      Std. Err.
         106th House                                         Dep. var.= Political contributions (thousands $)
Fraction Employed                287.895       14.691     361.462       28.317        1030.464          43.747  681.284      48.805
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                      -28245.750 1617.395 -11207.240 1590.591
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Adj. R2                           0.032                    0.467                         0.061                   0.469
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.018                   0.030
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                          2214                     668
         106th House                                        Dep. var.= Fraction of total contributions (*100)
Fraction Employed                 0.481         0.013      0.629        0.038            1.837          0.045    1.234       0.066
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                         -51.594         1.786   -21.173      2.017
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
       2
Adj. R                            0.037                    0.434                         0.078                   0.437
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.017                   0.029
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                          2257                     806
         101st House                                         Dep. var.= Political contributions (thousands $)
Fraction Employed                134.406        8.359     189.868       14.744         500.155          24.004  324.890      26.756
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                      -16742.460 1009.938 -5707.463          972.730
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Adj. R2                           0.017                    0.447                         0.037                   0.448
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.014                   0.028
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                          2241                     413
         101st House                                        Dep. var.= Fraction of total contributions (*100)
Fraction Employed                 0.431         0.018      0.631        0.041            1.618          0.057    1.084       0.083
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                         -54.350         2.675   -19.136      2.969
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                      Yes
Adj. R2                           0.020                    0.416                         0.045                   0.417
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.014                   0.028
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                          2254                     422
Note: The 106th Congress refers to the electoral cycle of year 2000, 101th to 1990. Fraction employed is the total number of
workers employed in a SIG divided by congressional district's (State's for the Senate) population. Total number of observations
for 106th House is 37410 (no. House seats 435 * no. SIG 86). Total number of observations for 106th Senate is 8600 (no.
Senate seats 100 * no. SIG 86). Total number of observations for 101st House is 36540 (no. seats 435 * no. SIG 84). Total
number of observations for 101st Senate is 8400 (no. seats 100 * no. SIG 84). Standard errors clustered at the electoral district
level (congressional district for House and State for Senate). All regressions include a constant, not reported.
                                                           TABLE 2 (Senate)
                                Political contributions and employment size of special interest group.
                                          (5)                      (6)                            (7)                    (8)
                                  Coef.       Std. Err.    Coef.       Std. Err.         Coef.        Std. Err.   Coef.      Std. Err.
         106th Senate                                        Dep. var.= Political contributions (thousands $)
Fraction Employed                450.076       71.632     987.190      169.554        1877.105         245.403  1893.516     299.606
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                      -55299.620 7487.957 -35816.140 7070.151
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Adj. R2                           0.014                    0.499                         0.034                    0.502
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.016                    0.026
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                           506                      296
         106th Senate                                       Dep. var.= Fraction of total contributions (*100)
Fraction Employed                 0.366         0.034      0.969        0.112            1.658          0.109     1.843       0.224
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                         -50.039         3.698    -34.528      7.195
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
       2
Adj. R                            0.016                    0.383                         0.043                    0.386
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.016                    0.026
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                           516                      288
         101st Senate                                        Dep. var.= Political contributions (thousands $)
Fraction Employed                322.960       53.730     760.431      129.252        1351.827         193.209   991.311     207.566
                      2
(Fraction Employed)                 --                       --                      -55066.850 8176.226 -12454.240 7963.837
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Adj. R2                           0.010                    0.496                         0.025                    0.497
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.012                    0.397
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                           492                       0
         101st Senate                                       Dep. var.= Fraction of total contributions (*100)
Fraction Employed                 0.436         0.052      1.264        0.173            2.061          0.128     1.960       0.277
(Fraction Employed)2                --                       --                         -86.938         6.431    -37.550      9.695
District F.E.                      No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                         No                       Yes                           No                       Yes
Adj. R2                           0.010                    0.411                         0.032                    0.412
Peak Fraction Employed              --                       --                          0.011                    0.260
# Obs. Above Peak                   --                       --                           522                       0
Note: The 106th Congress refers to the electoral cycle of year 2000, 101th to 1990. Fraction employed is the total number of
workers employed in a SIG divided by congressional district's (State's for the Senate) population. Total number of observations
for 106th House is 37410 (no. House seats 435 * no. SIG 86). Total number of observations for 106th Senate is 8600 (no.
Senate seats 100 * no. SIG 86). Total number of observations for 101st House is 36540 (no. seats 435 * no. SIG 84). Total
number of observations for 101st Senate is 8400 (no. seats 100 * no. SIG 84). Standard errors clustered at the electoral district
level (congressional district for House and State for Senate). All regressions include a constant, not reported.
                                              TABLE 2 (Senate - Class I and Class II)
                             Political contributions and employment size of special interest group.
                                       (9)                     (10)                           (11)                    (12)
                                Coef.      Std. Err.   Coef.       Std. Err.          Coef.        Std. Err.   Coef.       Std. Err.
    106th Senate Class I                                  Dep. var.= Political contributions (thousands $)
Fraction Employed             1086.119 148.988 1771.210 294.353                    4037.228         400.327  3637.811        0.464
                      2
(Fraction Employed)               --                      --                     -113540.700 11739.630 -70819.900 11187.770
District F.E.                    No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                       No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Adj. R2                         0.044                  0.624                          0.085                    0.628
Peak Fraction Employed            --                      --                          0.017                    0.025
# Obs. Above Peak                 --                      --                           142                      93
    106th Senate Class I                                 Dep. var.= Fraction of total contributions (*100)
Fraction Employed               0.449        0.045     0.965        0.176             1.873          0.151     2.066        0.324
                      2
(Fraction Employed)               --                      --                         -54.784         4.968    -39.891       9.508
District F.E.                    No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                       No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Adj. R2                         0.033                  0.561                          0.076                    0.567
Peak Fraction Employed            --                      --                          0.017                    0.025
# Obs. Above Peak                 --                      --                           144                      99
    101st Senate Class II                                 Dep. var.= Political contributions (thousands $)
Fraction Employed              769.101     111.141 1602.916 224.778                3236.441         368.586  2283.231      354.845
(Fraction Employed)2              --                      --                     -131506.000 16090.280 -36407.150 17042.020
District F.E.                    No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                       No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Adj. R2                         0.026                  0.666                          0.068                    0.667
Peak Fraction Employed            --                      --                          0.012                    0.313
# Obs. Above Peak                 --                      --                           158                       0
    101st Senate Class II                                Dep. var.= Fraction of total contributions (*100)
Fraction Employed               0.451        0.047     1.192        0.143             2.137          0.158     1.960        0.301
(Fraction Employed)2              --                      --                         -89.865         7.541    -41.105       11.470
District F.E.                    No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Lobby F.E.                       No                     Yes                            No                       Yes
Adj. R2                         0.016                  0.662                          0.049                    0.665
Peak Fraction Employed            --                      --                          0.011                    0.023
# Obs. Above Peak                 --                      --                           166                      27
Note: Class I senators were elected in Nov. 2000 (2408 observations) and Class II in Nov. 1990 (2688 observations).
                                                       TABLE 3 (a)
   Political contributions and Special Interest Group employment size: Number of district-specific tests supporting the
                                           inverse-U hypothesis in reduced form.
                                                         (1)                        (2)                        (3)
  C sd = κ d + δ d,1 v sd + δ d,2 v sd 2 + µ sd                            Controlling for value     Excluding OSID 39, 74,
                                                       All SIG
                                                                                added of s .                 79, 80.
Tests within district d :                             106th House               106th House                106th House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                               413        out of 435     420        out of 435      363        out of 435
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                      251        out of 435     312        out of 435      238        out of 435
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0              218        out of 435     251        out of 435      117        out of 435
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0              271        out of 435     309        out of 435      157        out of 435
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)               0.018         (0.013)     0.021        (0.055)       0.039         (0.179)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                    5.382         (2.169)     5.066        (1.745)       3.702         (4.493)
Tests within district d :                             101st House               101st House                101st House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                               402        out of 435     401        out of 435      374        out of 435
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                      188        out of 435     231        out of 435      179        out of 435
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0              161        out of 435     191        out of 435      122        out of 435
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0              220        out of 435     235        out of 435      175        out of 435
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)               0.045         (0.601)     0.017        (0.023)       0.018         (0.070)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                    6.248         (3.649)     5.431        (2.675)       4.363         (3.440)
Tests within district d :                            106th Senate              106th Senate               106th Senate
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                                89        out of 100      91        out of 100       89        out of 100
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                       53        out of 100      62        out of 100       46        out of 100
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0               40        out of 100      46        out of 100       36        out of 100
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0               53        out of 100      59        out of 100       44        out of 100
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)               0.016          (.004)     0.017        (0.004)       0.015         (0.017)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                    5.741         (1.921)     5.681        (3.428)       5.224         (4.179)
Tests within district d :                             101st Senate              101st Senate               101st Senate
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                                90        out of 100      90        out of 100       85        out of 100
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                       35        out of 100      49        out of 100       34        out of 100
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0               30        out of 100      40        out of 100       29        out of 100
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0               52        out of 100      53        out of 100       44        out of 100
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)               0.011         (0.003)     0.012        (0.005)       0.010         (0.011)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                    6.200         (3.295)     5.177        (2.216)       4.976         (3.387)

Note: Standard errors robust at the electoral district level (congressional district for House and for Senate). Number of
SIG for 101st Congress is 84. Number of SIG for 106th Congress is 86. The number of total regressions is equal to the
number of seats in the House or the Senate. Excluded OSID are: 39 (Retail Sales); 74 (Hospitals and Nursing Homes); 79
(Food and Beverage); 80 (Restaurants and Drinking Estab.). The numbers in parentheses next to the mean peak of the
fraction of population employed and the mean number of observations above the peak of the parabola are the
corresponding std. deviations.
                            TABLE 3 (b)
Political contributions and Special Interest Group employment size:
Number of SIG-specific tests supporting the inverse-U hypothesis
                          in reduced form.
                                                            (1)
   C sd = h s + δ d,1 v sd + δ d,2 v sd 2 + µ sd
                                                          All SIG
Tests within district d :                               106th House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                                  55         out of 86
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                         41         out of 86
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 16         out of 86
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 20         out of 86
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)                0.106*         (0.546)*
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                     18.636        (49.681)
Tests within district d :                               101st House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                                  59         out of 84
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                         38         out of 84
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 23         out of 84
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 26         out of 84
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)                 0.021          (0.034)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                     25.966        (61.238)
Tests within district d :                               106th Senate
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                                  62         out of 86
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                         23         out of 86
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 8          out of 86
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 12         out of 86
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)                 0.008          (0.012)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                     15.645        (23.632)
Tests within district d :                               101st Senate
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                                  41         out of 84
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                         15         out of 84
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 8          out of 84
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0                 12         out of 84
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)                 0.009          (0.011)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                     19.951        (25.916)
Note: Robust standard errors at the SIG level. Number of
observation for each within-SIG regression is 435 for the House
and 100 for the Senate. The number of total regressions is equal to
the number of SIGs (86 for 106th Congress and 84 for 101st
Congress). The numbers in parentheses next to the mean peak of
the fraction of population employed and the mean number of
observations above the peak of the parabola are the corresponding
std. deviations. *Excluding OSID 58 (commercial banks) the mean
peak fraction employed is 0.033 (0.107).
                                                          TABLE 4
       Special interest groups with largest number of employees do not pay the largest amount of political contributions.
                              106th House               101st House               106th Senate               101st Senate

       Samples:        Within each district (Congressional district or State)

Frac. largest          0.014      [6 out of 435]          0.016      [7 out of 435]   0.000   [0 out of 100]   0.010   [1 out of 100]
employer is top payer
Frac. largest 5
percentile of
                       0.039 [17 out of 435]              0.039     [17 out of 435]   0.020   [2 out of 100]   0.030   [3 out of 100]
employers are top
payers
        Samples:      Within each industry (OSID)

Frac. largest             0.000      [0 out of 86]    0.024     [2 out of 84]    0.058      [5 out of 86]  0.071     [6 out of 84]
employer is top payer
Frac. largest 5
percentile of
                          0.372     [32 out of 86]    0.298    [25 out of 84]    0.198 [17 out of 86] 0.179 [15 out of 84]
employers are top
payers
Note: The within-district analysis is performed in 435 districts for the House and 100 Senate races. The largest and largest 5
percent of employers in the district are considered. The largest 5 percent of employers' total amounts are averaged and
compared with the mean total contributions at all 5-centiles. In each district there are either 86 (106th Congress) or 84
industries (101st). The within-industry analysis is performed in each of the 86 (for 106th Congress) and 84 (for 101st Congress)
industries. The largest and the largest 5 percent of employers in the industry are considered. For each industry we consider 435
congressional districts or 100 Senate seats.
                                                     TABLE 5

   Distribution of Maximum Likelihood estimates of structural parameters by Congressional district race.

                                                                                  106th House
   Parameters               Interpretation                             All races by House incumbent on
                                                                                November 2000
                                                      Frac. p-value                             Standard
                                                                      Median          Mean
                                                         < 0.05                                 Deviation

      SIG
        γ         Const. pol. benefit to SIG ($)        14.81%        -1825.7        -1935.0       6659.5
        ρ         Per vote policy benefit ($)           48.89%         113.2          347.9         342.6
        σ         Std. dev. pol. benefit ($)            99.62%        20216.8        22223.6       11799.9
    Politician
      1/α         Value of a vote ($)                   48.88%         100.0          339.3         341.0
        β         Ex ante elect. uncert. (# votes)      49.62%        121918.2      334503.4      534490.4

 log Likelihood                                                        -632.1        -629.7         119.0
     Bounds                                            No. Obs.
     1/α = 0                                              8
   1/α = 1000                                            124
      Total                                              401

      SIG                                                             Including districts on bounds of 1/α
        γ         Const. pol. benefit to SIG ($)        20.15%        -3215.7         -3069.8       7846.8
        ρ         Per vote policy benefit ($)           58.96%         703.8           547.9         423.7
        σ         Std. dev. pol. benefit ($)            99.75%        22724.3         25464.5       13279.4
    Politician
      1/α         Value of a vote ($)                   59.20%         700.0          536.8         419.8
        β         Ex ante elect. uncert. (# votes)      62.69%        250189.0      369048.3      510938.7

  log Likelihood                                                       -655.1         -650.5        125.2
Note: Number of SIG for 106th Congress is 86. The number of total regressions is equal to the number of
seats in the House in which incumbent runs in the November 2000 elections, 401. P-values are constructed
from z-stats using robust standard errors. The range of the grid search includes values of α between 0 and
1000.
                                       TABLE 6

   Validation of estimates of model's parameters by Congressional district race.

                                                  106th House
                             All races by House incumbent on November 2000

                              (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)

                                                                      Estimated v
    Dependent variable        1/α           1/α                 β
                                                                        at peak

Ex post vote difference    -175.440                     -80136.580       -0.006
                           (82.219)                     (96477.73)      (0.0027)
  Population Density                        0.234
                                           (0.126)
        Constant            608.631       528.830       406102.000        0.021
                            (41.905)      (21.519)      (57079.83)        (0.02)

          Obs.                391           401             383            378

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regression in column (3)
excludes observations with 1/α = 0. The dependent variable in column (4) is the
estimated fraction of voters at the peak as estimated in the reduced form of Table
2. The regression in column (4) constrains the sample to the districts where the
reduced-form inverse-U relationship holds at least in sign. Reduced-form peak
and β correlate positively with p = 0.002.
                                                              TABLE 7
                       Estimated average rates of return for political contributions across SIG (106th House)
Variable                                                        Median        Mean      Std. Dev.    Max       Min       Obs
Contribution-only average
rate of return of political          (γd+ρdvsd)/Csd - 1          63.117      431.333 1542.233 38220.180 -0.995          22516
contributions
Model's generated average
rate of return of political      (γd+ρdvsd)/(Csd+vsd/αd) - 1      0.005       0.119       1.943    123.994    -0.999    22516
contributions (Csd > 0)
Model's generated average
rate of return of political
                                 (γd+ρdvsd)/(Csd+vsd/αd) - 1      0.005       0.337      12.666 1275.236 -0.999         31002
contributions (whole
sample)
Notes: Moments of the rates of return distribution are computed across all SIG/districts. Sample includes all observations
verifying the model's restriction (γd+ρdvds) > 0, 93.4 percent of the overall sample.
                                         TABLE 8 (a)
 Contributions-only estimated rates of return of Special Interests for incumbent races of 106th
                                      Congress (House).
OSID   Definition                            Median     Mean       Std. Dev.   Max        Min
6      Forestry & Forest Products            69.46621   453.8693   2383.075    36316.64   0.210778
7      Agricultural Services & Production    9.496587   50.99666   156.212     1843.249   -0.96136
8      Oil & Gas                             -0.21673   10.73857   79.73958    1221.669   -0.98812
9      Mining                                38.40978   199.153    667.3774    8204.909   -0.79511
10     Coal Mining                           12.78226   78.28989   239.4523    1636.127   -0.75832
11     Electric Utilities                    30.2248    117.45     286.8087    3324.877   -0.9068
12     Natural Gas Pipelines                 14.20873   83.91908   192.3033    1557.883   -0.8574
13     Construction Services                 168.9036   658.8242   1678.305    16269.25   -0.60993
14     General Contractors                   92.90437   597.1642   1663.384    13312.08   -0.79697
15     Building Trade Unions                 57.70707   194.1319   649.4268    7826.718   -0.88241
16     Home Builders                         80.82034   315.3867   740.2063    7096.734   -0.03668
17     Special Trade Contractors             432.3758   1973.299   4291.23     39354.91   -0.33609
18     Food Processing & Sales               512.0051   1670.271   2915.977    17513.38   1.318849
19     Food Products Manufacturing           262.6566   721.3017   1098.121    7183.199   -0.30274
20     Meat processing & products            118.0243   528.0966   1141.818    7229.768   -0.51141
21     Tobacco                               -0.15526   20.27398   138.0791    1453.143   -0.98779
22     Textiles                              105.449    341.5649   596.4384    3908.865   0.118846
23     Clothing Manufacturing                179.9449   868.8335   1957.984    11296.6    -0.76136
24     Printing & Publishing                 341.1616   1234.84    2365.281    17384.74   -0.16561
25     Chemical & Related Manufacturing      73.57719   373.199    971.6295    11805.29   -0.65575
26     Pharmaceuticals / Health Products     42.60455   193.1848   591.4776    8404.143   -0.94573
27     Pharmaceutical Manufacturing          13.49886   92.18169   225.4475    2539.451   -0.9872
28     Building Materials & Equipment        51.22651   192.8596   485.8517    7095.993   -0.06815
30     Steel Production                      93.37337   500.0529   1134.437    7492.563   0.47473
31     Telecom Services & Equipment          16.11716   197.6582   720.7256    9125.971   -0.99747
32     Defense Electronics                   47.48808   325.4713   840.4836    7584.881   -0.98734
33     Transportation Unions                 166.8247   1006.595   4688.982    76990.7    -0.74124
34     Automotive                            140.7527   472.9585   1195.004    10206.25   -0.44205
35     Auto Manufacturers                    142.4302   551.2143   995.6761    6399.827   -0.67491
36     Defense Aerospace                     11.42735   254.0812   1057.238    13048.08   -0.99486
37     Medical Supplies                      89.55594   311.3733   577.66      4183.752   -0.87175
38     Car Dealers                           133.2182   418.3943   971.7947    9687.272   -0.45888
39     Retail Sales                          805.1422   2520.978   4665.285    46538.04   1.11792
40     Food Stores                           758.6516   2049.16    3310.386    28956.47   5.602664
41     Beer, Wine & Liquor                   13.14069   90.17342   300.5895    3560.262   -0.91008
42     Air Transport Unions                  47.75562   427.6841   1293.236    15747.05   -0.81687
43     Air Transport                         10.22997   178.082    671.9977    7491.157   -0.95499
45     Sea Transport                         8.450643   47.21568   104.906     972.2959   -0.97508
46     Trucking                              238.9747   799.1642   1540.206    14230.61   0.516753
48     Books, Magazines & Newspapers         232.7946   757.7194   1328.634    8883.293   -0.68706
49     Computers/Internet                    70.15534   316.1216   741.8246    8235.989   -0.64065
                                     TABLE 8 (a) (cont.)
 Contributions-only estimated rates of return of Special Interests for incumbent races of 106th
                                      Congress (House).
OSID   Definition                            Median     Mean       Std. Dev.   Max        Min
50     Computer Software                     38.89904   222.041    713.5065    9165.441   -0.82763
51     TV / Movies / Music                   80.3492    313.5523   668.0061    6229.084   -0.94661
52     Motion Picture Prod. & Distr.         133.6984   521.3942   1976.397    17241.19   -0.64619
53     TV Production & Distribution          610.3671   1186.362   1634.773    9638.371   0.420149
54     Recorded Music & Music Prod.          14.349     59.50835   159.3225    1352.87    -0.92964
55     Commercial TV & Radio Stations        76.04497   251.2142   451.3586    2646.756   -0.32975
56     Cable & Satellite TV Prod. & Distr.   49.13436   173.2418   317.4409    2908.691   -0.74214
57     Telephone Utilities                   73.20511   231.4016   465.9969    4869.236   -0.86981
58     Commercial Banks                      82.41708   381.2558   1446.082    23686.1    -0.36678
59     Finance / Credit Companies            97.81245   500.2325   1338.404    14497.59   -0.85493
60     Securities & Investment               23.67031   154.8254   810.0807    14059.45   -0.95324
61     Insurance                             70.41142   467.1666   2160.954    33774.64   -0.64271
62     Real Estate                           40.57536   98.41199   271.6332    4163.127   -0.84685
63     Lawyers / Law Firms                   18.8536    39.66926   56.08577    368.8455   -0.91201
64     Accountants                           67.53531   450.77     1303.956    16010.73   -0.94806
65     Architectural Services                556.7852   1385.388   2870.658    35429.96   0.802569
66     Business Services                     146.6403   419.0515   1047.078    15776.4    -0.78808
67     Advertising/Public Relations          157.6044   584.105    1192.58     10893.24   -0.81832
68     Waste Management                      116.0646   375.1598   638.2673    4277.786   0.550825
69     Teachers Unions                       93.6469    194.3956   405.9865    3087.458   -0.80666
70     Education                             317.4011   1086.09    2510.305    24294.09   -0.12979
71     Health Professionals                  61.59924   159.1317   302.8274    3612.677   -0.76301
72     Dentists                              126.0545   300.414    697.0682    8680.082   -0.66499
73     Health Services/HMOs                  309.6185   1039.802   3069.483    46195.36   -0.94865
74     Hospitals & Nursing Homes             807.1793   2040.14    3737.314    40830.58   1.32598
75     Recreation / Live Entertainment       148.6769   475.9849   934.5978    7953.858   -0.83767
76     Pro. Sports, Arenas & Services        70.31291   161.1648   246.6464    1243.228   -0.39465
77     Casinos / Gambling                    24.99148   129.0252   281.6628    2511.563   -0.97414
78     Lodging / Tourism                     370.5891   1427.752   3026.602    20337.62   -0.67287
79     Food & Beverage                       852.5618   3888.731   9154.868    81250.91   5.8998
80     Restaurants & Drinking Estab.         1057.463   3733.099   7543.469    61947.9    6.40774
81     Funeral Services                      116.99     253.6301   387.0642    2604.662   -0.40937
82     Clergy & Religious Org.               1267.447   3020.99    4087.778    21775.92   2.118608
85     Dairy                                 21.63052   68.86308   117.7111    779.3773   -0.94286
86     Credit Unions                         36.32233   101.4991   201.34      2314.969   -0.63828
87     Chiropractors                         90.31703   142.6112   174.6534    1200.412   0.033784
88     Alternative Energy Prod. & Serv.      15.78063   80.3858    190.7887    926.6316   -0.52527
89     Nutritional & Dietary Suppl.          29.24471   90.25188   124.9661    381.242    0.026233
90     Miscellaneous Defense                 0.432111   4.110336   10.73269    68.69561   -0.96819
91     Airlines                              41.17789   435.1534   1200.766    9800.691   -0.88979
92     Cruise Ships & Lines                  4.21104    45.64794   85.6865     376.4198   -0.81159
93     Savings & Loans                       67.72684   225.9444   446.2162    4013.262   -0.71818
94     Mortgage Bankers & Brokers            67.91869   246.4069   561.7087    6482.101   -0.72403
95     Venture Capital                       10.22499   33.26382   80.29157    714.3822   -0.892
96     Nurses                                789.6308   2095.617   4148.486    32928.39   2.079814
                                        TABLE 8 (b)
  Model estimated rates of return of Special Interests for incumbent races of 106th Congress
                                           (House).
OSID   Definition                           Median     Mean       Std. Dev.   Max        Min
6      Forestry & Forest Products           0.000783   0.001179   0.342323    5.903375   -0.92143
7      Agricultural Services & Production   -0.08923   -0.12623   0.412095    3.282604   -0.99334
8      Oil & Gas                            -0.50251   -0.46178   0.344932    1.622594   -0.99181
9      Mining                               -0.01042   0.099619   1.645732    26.20708   -0.97703
10     Coal Mining                          0.052053   5.580978   26.9863     260.2688   -0.86422
11     Electric Utilities                   -0.02369   -0.10387   0.171128    0.373101   -0.93068
12     Natural Gas Pipelines                -0.03685   0.228985   3.597146    62.92948   -0.98393
13     Construction Services                0.006331   0.137617   1.373248    23.33605   -0.60993
14     General Contractors                  0.0042     0.037658   0.297339    4.16176    -0.79697
15     Building Trade Unions                0.003632   0.004703   0.157345    1.195145   -0.88241
16     Home Builders                        0.000935   0.037917   0.823348    16.18748   -0.73341
17     Special Trade Contractors            0.011523   0.254944   2.263721    37.07743   -0.33609
18     Food Processing & Sales              0.011699   0.241305   1.765248    21.43826   -0.01871
19     Food Products Manufacturing          0.006594   0.123698   1.181093    21.37253   -0.68408
20     Meat processing & products           0.003537   0.225605   2.087895    32.15586   -0.84829
21     Tobacco                              -0.28614   7.949999   86.4309     1021.937   -0.98779
22     Textiles                             -0.0001    0.105736   0.956037    13.56907   -0.95062
23     Clothing Manufacturing               0.004343   0.094038   0.801144    8.633419   -0.93199
24     Printing & Publishing                0.009326   0.141638   0.993152    14.07649   -0.16561
25     Chemical & Related Manufacturing     -0.00169   -0.00866   0.260895    4.02383    -0.81055
26     Pharmaceuticals / Health Products    -0.01553   -0.06543   0.332393    5.157692   -0.94573
27     Pharmaceutical Manufacturing         -0.05805   -0.09106   0.924078    15.29241   -0.99459
28     Building Materials & Equipment       -0.00512   -0.00799   0.26435     2.956425   -0.87546
30     Steel Production                     0.000323   0.2315     2.954573    53.07651   -0.98768
31     Telecom Services & Equipment         -0.0254    -0.06578   0.379865    2.40166    -0.99862
32     Defense Electronics                  -0.00269   0.199681   3.043492    57.3824    -0.99498
33     Transportation Unions                0.008895   0.079814   0.675873    9.637922   -0.81682
34     Automotive                           0.005951   0.049336   0.456579    8.528609   -0.44205
35     Auto Manufacturers                   0.005694   0.072626   0.811028    11.75462   -0.97395
36     Defense Aerospace                    -0.02719   0.009899   1.142638    12.58425   -0.99489
37     Medical Supplies                     -0.00135   0.122243   1.737848    32.83991   -0.98513
38     Car Dealers                          0.004915   0.233525   3.564881    69.98215   -0.45888
39     Retail Sales                         0.013228   0.221981   1.588019    25.28973   0.001675
40     Food Stores                          0.012679   0.239249   1.87505     26.66551   -0.03513
41     Beer, Wine & Liquor                  -0.05913   -0.14104   0.249383    1.232289   -0.92819
42     Air Transport Unions                 0.002764   0.435672   4.213728    73.7752    -0.99346
43     Air Transport                        -0.0677    -0.19024   0.375316    4.12642    -0.99346
45     Sea Transport                        -0.05649   1.079242   5.390622    62.92948   -0.99172
46     Trucking                             0.008952   0.093066   0.73325     12.27187   -0.72668
48     Books, Magazines & Newspapers        0.005716   0.339868   4.098285    70.54661   -0.68706
49     Computers/Internet                   0.00226    -0.01447   0.153995    1.149622   -0.6706
                                     TABLE 8 (b) (cont.)
  Model estimated rates of return of Special Interests for incumbent races of 106th Congress
                                           (House).
OSID   Definition                            Median     Mean       Std. Dev.   Max        Min
50     Computer Software                     -0.00583   0.03086    0.558439    6.437755   -0.9503
51     TV / Movies / Music                   -0.00058   0.012657   0.597521    11.33115   -0.94661
52     Motion Picture Prod. & Distr.         -0.00323   0.051488   0.482558    6.495958   -0.99125
53     TV Production & Distribution          0.006142   0.092904   0.815439    13.32496   -0.84709
54     Recorded Music & Music Prod.          -0.05839   1.285114   5.26448     46.78766   -0.97887
55     Commercial TV & Radio Stations        -0.0058    0.056157   0.799273    11.16988   -0.97515
56     Cable & Satellite TV Prod. & Distr.   -0.01331   0.01207    0.899595    16.01649   -0.97528
57     Telephone Utilities                   -0.00083   -0.03067   0.137429    1.243481   -0.86981
58     Commercial Banks                      0.002677   0.001151   0.092676    1.119453   -0.41331
59     Finance / Credit Companies            0.003188   0.026501   0.331694    5.394055   -0.86577
60     Securities & Investment               -0.02326   -0.10539   0.196043    0.680236   -0.95324
61     Insurance                             0.002155   -0.01532   0.098983    0.693106   -0.64271
62     Real Estate                           -0.00946   -0.06006   0.123471    0.105636   -0.84685
63     Lawyers / Law Firms                   -0.03418   -0.12447   0.185367    0.134634   -0.91201
64     Accountants                           -9.9E-05   -0.01564   0.193899    2.928047   -0.94806
65     Architectural Services                0.010207   0.172632   1.366102    22.61286   -0.40136
66     Business Services                     0.005684   0.018978   0.128005    1.23553    -0.78808
67     Advertising/Public Relations          0.003705   0.101549   0.847323    14.32794   -0.95756
68     Waste Management                      0.000877   0.067974   0.85569     16.21008   -0.87628
69     Teachers Unions                       0.002484   0.019014   0.177652    1.914057   -0.80666
70     Education                             0.010899   0.153151   1.205444    20.17204   -0.22696
71     Health Professionals                  0.002254   -0.002     0.091657    0.49664    -0.76301
72     Dentists                              0.0021     0.04042    0.401378    7.265724   -0.66499
73     Health Services/HMOs                  0.009239   0.05844    0.311722    5.130782   -0.94865
74     Hospitals & Nursing Homes             0.013065   0.143302   0.786524    12.84946   0.003027
75     Recreation / Live Entertainment       0.001076   0.227285   2.159787    33.67901   -0.96086
76     Pro. Sports, Arenas & Services        -0.01044   0.317798   1.6888      18.29463   -0.98352
77     Casinos / Gambling                    -0.01418   0.997428   6.230898    73.7752    -0.99182
78     Lodging / Tourism                     0.010332   0.120068   0.967639    18.06948   -0.67287
79     Food & Beverage                       0.013242   0.747813   7.556043    123.9897   -0.00915
80     Restaurants & Drinking Estab.         0.013072   0.572412   5.953539    109.9623   -0.01678
81     Funeral Services                      -0.00935   0.040275   0.558351    8.920427   -0.95182
82     Clergy & Religious Org.               0.012264   0.194785   2.239342    43.40306   -0.38699
85     Dairy                                 -0.05071   -0.02621   0.761762    7.915258   -0.95061
86     Credit Unions                         -0.02153   -0.02887   0.283135    2.524062   -0.93198
87     Chiropractors                         -0.02329   0.128114   1.055957    16.09229   -0.86591
88     Alternative Energy Prod. & Serv.      0.004994   5.081104   22.52629    252.5624   -0.92382
89     Nutritional & Dietary Suppl.          -0.00925   11.75602   88.1422     1142.806   -0.9906
90     Miscellaneous Defense                 -0.1663    3.234659   23.43151    257.0058   -0.99121
91     Airlines                              -0.00021   0.217039   1.317019    11.8743    -0.9523
92     Cruise Ships & Lines                  -0.05962   17.6573    115.008     1021.937   -0.86756
93     Savings & Loans                       -0.00504   0.068769   0.680088    11.04968   -0.89532
94     Mortgage Bankers & Brokers            -0.01088   0.063211   0.642486    7.040508   -0.9238
95     Venture Capital                       -0.06702   0.297896   1.650266    15.34071   -0.99829
96     Nurses                                0.012487   0.176465   1.220056    20.76419   -0.05182
                          TABLE A1
   Number of district-specific tests supporting the inverse-U
    hypothesis in reduced form using contributions to main
 candidate-contributions to challenger (net contributions, NC ).

NC sd = κ d + δ d,1 v sd + δ d,2 v sd 2 + µ sd
                                                      All SIG
Tests within district d :                           106th House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                              387      out of 435
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                     222      out of 435
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0             178      out of 435
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0             226      out of 435
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)              0.023      (0.060)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                   5.429      (3.493)

Note: Standard errors robust at the electoral district level
(congressional district for House). Number of SIG for 106th
Congress is 86. The number of total regressions is equal to the
number of seats in the House. The numbers in parentheses next
to the mean peak of the fraction of population employed and the
mean number of observations above the peak of the parabola are
the corresponding std. deviations.
                                TABLE A2
   Number of district-specific tests supporting the inverse-U
   hypothesis in reduced form controlling for vote splitting.

 C sd = κ d + δ d,1 x sd + δ d,2 x sd 2 + µ sd
                                                      All SIG
Tests within district d :                           106th House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                              420      out of 435
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0                     273      out of 435
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0             216      out of 435
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0             275      out of 435
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)              0.019      (0.016)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)                   5.026      (2.013)

Note: x = v deflated by fraction of contributions going to challenger.
Standard errors robust at the electoral district level
(congressional district for House). Number of SIG for 106th
Congress is 86. The number of total regressions is equal to the
number of seats in the House. The numbers in parentheses next
to the mean peak of the fraction of population employed and the
mean number of observations above the peak of the parabola are
the corresponding std. deviations.
                                    TABLE A3
    Number of district-specific tests supporting the inverse-U
      hypothesis in reduced form controlling for number of
                                  establishments.
                     C sd =
 κ d + δ d,1 v sd + δ d,2 v sd 2 + ξ d e sd + µ sd All SIG
Tests within district d :                     106th House
Sign: δ1 > 0; δ2 < 0                       374       out of 435
F-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = δ2 = 0              121       out of 435
t-test (0.05) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0       76       out of 435
t-test (0.10) Ho: δ1 = 0 & Ho: δ2 = 0      124       out of 435
Mean Peak Fraction Employed (st.d.)       0.016       (0.057)
Mean # Obs. Above Peak (st.d.)            11.125      (8.767)
Sign: ξ > 0                                403       out of 435
t-test (0.05) Ho: ξ = 0                    105       out of 435

Note: Standard errors robust at the electoral district level
(congressional district for House). Number of SIG for 106th
Congress is 86. The number of total regressions is equal to the
number of seats in the House. The numbers in parentheses next
to the mean peak of the fraction of population employed and the
mean number of observations above the peak of the parabola are
the corresponding std. deviations. Number of establishment data
are collected by the Economic Census and apportioned by
district employing population weights.
                                                                                                                               Figure 1 (a)

Largest employment size within district across all SIG's                              Location of largest contributors within district.
                                              .15                                                      106th House

                                                                              71
                                                                                                                    61
                                .1




                                                                           77                                                                           60

                                                               77                                                                        49
                                                                        60
                                                                        28             62            63
                                                                       8 71 63 71
                                                                       63                                                           61
                                                                                  15
                                                                                 33
                                                                                  15
                                                                                   15
                                                                                    33 7158                                    49
                 .05




                                                                43         15 63
                                                                             15
                                                                              69 71
                                                                                 63
                                                                                 62
                                                                                 1561
                                                                                   63
                                                                                   7171
                                                                                     33
                                                                                     6363
                                                                                       61
                                                                                       58       61                       33
                                                                      6063
                                                                        51
                                                                         63 15
                                                                            6315
                                                                              63  62
                                                                                   62
                                                                                  63  6271
                                                                                        58              33
                                                                                                         18               33
                                                               77
                                                               843  60 63  49
                                                                            8
                                                                             11
                                                                            63
                                                                             63
                                                                             6015
                                                                               63
                                                                              63
                                                                              61
                                                                             63
                                                                             11    61
                                                                                  15
                                                                                  61
                                                                                  58
                                                                                  33
                                                                                  71
                                                                                     71
                                                                                     63
                                                                                      71
                                                                                     58
                                                                                    62
                                                                                     71  33
                                                                                        71          33336133
                                                                                                   33               61
                                                                7
                                                                8   60
                                                                    43 33
                                                                      3263
                                                                        11
                                                                        6463
                                                                         6361
                                                                           63
                                                                           118
                                                                            6334
                                                                             63
                                                                             15
                                                                             8
                                                                            63
                                                                           6061
                                                                              63 63
                                                                                  71
                                                                                 58
                                                                                 9658
                                                                                   34
                                                                                   61
                                                                                  71
                                                                                  62
                                                                                 58  62
                                                                                      18
                                                                                     33
                                                                                     71
                                                                                     36
                                                                                     61
                                                                                      5971
                                                                                       71
                                                                                      71
                                                                                       7161
                                                                                        3361
                                                                                         71
                                                                                          58 71
                                                                                            33 33
                                                                                               61        34
                                                               3643
                                                               843
                                                                960
                                                                36
                                                               88   8
                                                                 88711  32
                                                                    18811
                                                                        43
                                                                        63
                                                                       36
                                                                       763
                                                                        57162
                                                                          60
                                                                          63
                                                                         636
                                                                         63  62
                                                                            60
                                                                            63
                                                                             58
                                                                             63
                                                                            63
                                                                            63
                                                                            36
                                                                           63
                                                                           61  61
                                                                              15
                                                                              64
                                                                              63
                                                                             62
                                                                             15
                                                                              63
                                                                              58
                                                                              58
                                                                             15   63
                                                                                 6371
                                                                                  71
                                                                                 58
                                                                                 58 71
                                                                                   62
                                                                                  43
                                                                                   58
                                                                                  15
                                                                                 61 71
                                                                                    4971
                                                                                     71
                                                                                    62
                                                                                   61
                                                                                   7133
                                                                                    33 58
                                                                                      49
                                                                                      61
                                                                                     71 71
                                                                                       58
                                                                                       71
                                                                                      61
                                                                                     71
                                                                                      62 61
                                                                                        71     33
                                                                                                3333
                                                               43
                                                               9036
                                                                41  60  236
                                                                        63
                                                                        51
                                                                        27
                                                                        851
                                                                        11
                                                                        62
                                                                        63
                                                                        36
                                                                        11
                                                                        60 26
                                                                            1
                                                                           63
                                                                           6
                                                                          63 43
                                                                             58
                                                                             61
                                                                             15
                                                                             15
                                                                            61
                                                                            62
                                                                             63
                                                                            58 62
                                                                               63
                                                                               61
                                                                              28
                                                                              9
                                                                              63
                                                                               6363
                                                                                 71
                                                                                61
                                                                                58 71
                                                                                   71
                                                                                  33
                                                                                  61
                                                                                   58
                                                                                  33 71
                                                                                      60
                                                                                     71
                                                                                    71 71
                                                                                      71
                                                                                       61
                                                                                      41 33
                                                                                        71
                                                                                         27
                                                                                         71
                                                                                        33 2
                                                                                           70633
                                                               36
                                                               4360 41
                                                                    11
                                                                 1162
                                                                  36    63
                                                                      763
                                                                       843
                                                                        11 863
                                                                        8186163
                                                                            62
                                                                            1515
                                                                              36
                                                                            562
                                                                              58
                                                                              6262
                                                                           605851
                                                                            1563
                                                                               71 62
                                                                                615
                                                                                  7171
                                                                                    33
                                                                                    5171
                                                                                 6371
                                                                                 63
                                                                                  271
                                                                                  71
                                                                                 62 71   7133
                                                                                        71
                                                                                        33
                                                                  49
                                                                 26 63
                                                                     63 41
                                                                        63  15
                                                                             63
                                                                              71
       0




                                                           0                                             .05                            .1                     .15
                                                                                                Employment size at which largest contributions are paid

                                                                                                    45 degree line
                                                                                                    Largest employment size within district across all SIG's



                                                                                      Location of largest contributors within district.
Largest employment size within district across all SIG's




                                                                                                       101st House
                                              .15




                                                                            71
                                .1




                                                                                               77
                                                                                                               61                                  60
                                                                  63
                                                                  58                                                                          22
                                                               36
                                                                69
                                                                    15
                                                                                        51 61
                                                                       62              60
                 .05




                                                                36 62
                                                                  4343 5771
                                                                         58
                                                                         61 63   58 1558   63
                                                                 4363
                                                                  85              61
                                                                                 15
                                                                                 61 15
                                                                                     7171 6361 61        63              61
                                                                  45   6063 3663
                                                                              1515
                                                                                6343
                                                                                 34
                                                                                 58 6315
                                                                                     1561   62                      71
                                                               885  43
                                                                    69 15
                                                                        763
                                                                         61 15
                                                                            61
                                                                            11
                                                                            7115
                                                                             15
                                                                             14
                                                                             715
                                                                            63 63
                                                                              62
                                                                              15 58
                                                                                 15
                                                                                  61
                                                                                 58  1571
                                                                                      7158   71
                                                                                            713661
                                                                43 36  15 6363
                                                                            5763
                                                                              63
                                                                              21
                                                                              60
                                                                              15  71
                                                                                 62
                                                                                 58
                                                                                 63  71
                                                                                    61
                                                                                    71
                                                                                     71
                                                                                      63
                                                                                     63
                                                                                     58
                                                                                     58
                                                                                      58 58
                                                                                        71
                                                                                      661
                                                                                       62
                                                                                       61  62
                                                                                            71
                                                                                         17161     43    61
                                                               3612
                                                               83660
                                                                 43
                                                                 643
                                                                85
                                                                3136
                                                                    21
                                                                    61
                                                                   85
                                                                    11
                                                                    36
                                                                    836
                                                                        63
                                                                       63
                                                                       63
                                                                       85
                                                                       45
                                                                         61
                                                                       843
                                                                       1157
                                                                          36
                                                                         15
                                                                        63
                                                                         13
                                                                             62
                                                                             61
                                                                            58
                                                                            51
                                                                             57
                                                                             15
                                                                            60 15
                                                                              36
                                                                               58
                                                                              15
                                                                              63
                                                                               6361
                                                                               861
                                                                               63
                                                                                71
                                                                                58
                                                                                 58
                                                                                15
                                                                                85
                                                                                871
                                                                                 71
                                                                              5161
                                                                               5862
                                                                                 858
                                                                                61
                                                                                63
                                                                                     62
                                                                                     71
                                                                                     61
                                                                                  8871
                                                                                  69
                                                                                  63
                                                                                  62 34
                                                                                    71
                                                                                    63
                                                                                    1571
                                                                                     71
                                                                                     51
                                                                                    61 71
                                                                                      61
                                                                                     6271
                                                                                     61
                                                                                         61
                                                                                         62  6218     806121
                                                                                                7958 79
                                                                                                80
                                                                21
                                                                36
                                                                860
                                                                36 863
                                                                 636
                                                                   60
                                                                  45
                                                                  11
                                                                  657
                                                                   63
                                                                    15
                                                                   36
                                                                    36
                                                                   61
                                                                       61
                                                                       57
                                                                        61
                                                                        63
                                                                       36
                                                                     6751
                                                                       63
                                                                       6162
                                                                       869
                                                                       57
                                                                       62
                                                                    587162
                                                                       61
                                                                       61
                                                                        63
                                                                        616357
                                                                          3863
                                                                            58
                                                                            63
                                                                            62
                                                                            57
                                                                            15
                                                                            58
                                                                            15
                                                                              57
                                                                              61
                                                                              58
                                                                              62
                                                                             1562
                                                                              60
                                                                              15
                                                                              58
                                                                              43
                                                                              62
                                                                              15
                                                                             62
                                                                              58
                                                                              63
                                                                             62
                                                                                 14
                                                                                15
                                                                                63
                                                                               58
                                                                              15
                                                                              71
                                                                             61 71
                                                                               61
                                                                                  15
                                                                                 15
                                                                                 63
                                                                                6114 71
                                                                                    71
                                                                                  6271
                                                                                  62
                                                                                  71
                                                                                 71
                                                                                15
                                                                                7171
                                                                                   1515
                                                                                    71
                                                                                     61
                                                                                     71
                                                                                    43
                                                                                     8
                                                                                       71
                                                                                      871
                                                                                      71
                                                                                      34
                                                                                     71
                                                                                     6127
                                                                                       71
                                                                                       25
                                                                                       71
                                                                                         15
                                                                                        861
                                                                                          836
                                                                                         71
                                                                                         43
                                                                                         15 7118 51
                                                                                              26   79 18
                                                                36 61
                                                                   69
                                                                365763  63
                                                                       8543   15
                                                                              15 71
                                                                                58
                                                                         857 71 8   7115    368
       0




                                                           0                                             .05                            .1                     .15
                                                                                                Employment size at which largest contributions are paid

                                                                                                    45 degree line
                                                                                                    Largest employment size within district across all SIG's
                                                                                                 Figure 1 (b)

                                                                          Location of largest contributors within SIG.
                                                                                          106th House
Largest employment size of SIG across all districts
                                           .15



                                                          78
                                                          60
                             .1




                                                                                                         49
                                                                             79 74                 33
                                                             36 61         80
                                                                 3470
               .05




                                                                 58      18      3522
                                                           4263
                                                          43      3024          39
                                                          91   67
                                                                62
                                                             512048
                                                                 66
                                                              62573
                                                                1577
                                                                 14
                                                                  13
                                                               57
                                                                6465
                                                                 9 96 17
                                                                       71
                                                           23
                                                            32
                                                           75  824650 26
                                                           28
                                                           55
                                                              31
                                                              10
                                                              19
                                                             53     2740
                                                             41
                                                             59
                                                            21
                                                            11
                                                            6916   52
                                                           89
                                                           37
                                                           7672 38
                                                            56
                                                            68
                                                           794
                                                            45
                                                            85
                                                          888
                                                            93
                                                           54
                                                           92
                                                           12
                                                            86
                                                           90
                                                           95
                                                           81
                                                           87
    0




                                                      0                               .05                            .1                   .15
                                                                             Employment size at which largest contributions are paid

                                                                                    45 degree line
                                                                                    Largest employment size of SIG across all districts



                                                                          Location of largest contributors within SIG.
                                                                                          101st House
Largest employment size of SIG across all districts
                                           .15




                                                                               78
                             .1




                                                          60
                                                               14 15                                            22
                                                               16583559
                                                                     34
                                                                            74
                                                                  2430 51 80
               .05




                                                                 63       18     79 70    49
                                                           666261
                                                          43
                                                          42
                                                          91
                                                          90 4819 25 71
                                                           50 923
                                                          36
                                                          10
                                                          32
                                                          20     50 17             21
                                                           11
                                                           67 75
                                                             13
                                                              46
                                                             26
                                                            65 57 28
                                                            82                77
                                                           64
                                                          27
                                                          89 54       3940
                                                                         52
                                                             37
                                                             45
                                                           853
                                                           55
                                                          31 73
                                                          8569
                                                            7
                                                           12
                                                          96
                                                           93
                                                          76724138
                                                          56
                                                          94
                                                           6
                                                          92
                                                          68
                                                          86
                                                          95
                                                           81
                                                          87
    0




                                                      0                               .05                            .1                   .15
                                                                             Employment size at which largest contributions are paid

                                                                                    45 degree line
                                                                                    Largest employment size of SIG across all districts
Contributions
                80000
                                                              α = 1/150, β = 60000, γ = 0

                60000
                                                                    ρ = 180, ε = 0


                40000



                20000



                    0
                        0                     10000                      20000
                                                                                     Votes

           Figure 2 : Inverse-U relationship between votes and contributions




         C Ds
                            C Ds = _v s + L + P s

                                                                   K
                                     C Ds = _v s + L + P s +       J   ? _K




      C Ds Ý0Þ

                             åv                                             vs
                                s




                                      Figure A1




                                          1
                                            K         JC Ds
                                   C Ds +   J   exp    K




                                                              C Ds




           K
L + Ps +   J

    L + Ps




               C Ds Ý0Þ                                              C Ds
                          L + Ps

                           Figure A2




                                   2
