NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RELIGIOUS CONVERSION IN 40 COUNTRIES
Robert J. Barro
Jason Hwang
Working Paper 13689
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13689

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

We have benefited from comments by Rachel McCleary and Abdallah Salam. This research was
supported in part by a grant from the John Templeton Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Robert J. Barro and Jason Hwang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Religious Conversion in 40 Countries
Robert J. Barro and Jason Hwang
NBER Working Paper No. 13689
December 2007
JEL No. Z1,Z12
ABSTRACT
Questions about current and prior religion adherence from the International Social Survey Program
and the World Values Survey allow us to calculate country-level religious-conversion rates for 40
countries. These conversion rates apply to religion adherence classified into eight major types. In
a theoretical model based on rational individual choice, the frequency of religious conversion depends
on factors that influence the cost of switching and the cost of having the "wrong" religion. Empirical
findings for a panel of countries accord with several hypotheses: religious-conversion rates are positively
related to religious pluralism, gauged by adherence shares; negatively related to government restrictions
on religious conversion; positively related to levels of education; and negatively related to a history
of Communism. Conversion rates are not much related to per capita GDP, the presence of state religion,
and the extent of religiosity. Effects from the type of religion adherence are minor, except for a negative
effect from Muslim adherence. The empirical results are robust to alternative specifications of the
religion groupings used to construct the conversion rates.

Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 218
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu
Jason Hwang
Cornerstone Research
1 Exeter Street
Boston MA 02116
jjhwang@post.harvard.edu

Some countries, such as the United States, Australia, South Korea, and many subSaharan African countries currently have a great diversity of religion adherence. (See
Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson [2001] for religion adherence data.) Others, such as Spain,
Italy, the Scandinavian countries, and many majority Muslim countries have a heavy
concentration within a single type. These concentrations are particularly striking if one
ignores persons with no religion and considers only major religion categories (such as
counting Muslim as one type). Aside from the within-country patterns, the data show
wide differences internationally. Countries differ greatly in their adherence rates to the
major world religions.
In the long run, the frequency distributions of religion types within and across
countries reflect religious-conversion rates, along with cross-religion patterns of fertility,
mortality, and migration. This study focuses on the conversion part of this relationship.
Historically, religious conversion often resulted involuntarily from conquest or
changing preferences of rulers who restricted personal religion choices. For example, in
central Europe, the rights of individuals to choose their own religion expanded greatly in
1648, when the Peace of Westphalia ended the Thirty Years’ War. In contrast, in modern
times, decisions to convert can usually be analyzed as an individual’s decision about
whether and when to switch. Conversion restrictions and other policies of governments
and organized religions still apply in some countries, and these constraints affect personal
choices. However, the most important influences on the conversion decision are the
benefits and costs as perceived by individuals. Therefore, we use a rational-choice
framework at the individual level to make predictions about the determinants of religiousconversion rates at the country level.

Empirical investigations of the determinants of religious conversion have
typically focused on persons within a single country, often the United States (Stark and
Glock [1968], Roof and McKinney [1987], Greeley [1989], Sandomirsky and Wilson
[1990], Sherkat and Wilson [1995], Sherkat [2001], and Loveland [2003]). Breen and
Hayes (1996) considered the United Kingdom, and Need and de Graaf (1996) analyzed
the Netherlands. These studies are useful for assessing effects on the propensity to
convert from variables such as age, gender, and race. However, given the context of a
single country over a relatively short time period, these analyses cannot assess the effects
of country-wide policies and characteristics, such as regulation of the religion market,
political regimes such as Communism, and the extent of religious pluralism at the country
level. Our panel of 40 countries allows us to examine in detail the effects of these kinds
of policies and characteristics.
Section I discusses our procedures for using international survey data from
International Social Survey Program (ISSP 1991 and 1998) and World Values Survey
(WVS 2001) to estimate country averages of religious-conversion rates. Section II
constructs a theoretical framework based on individual choice to consider determinants of
country-level religious-conversion rates. Section III describes the setup of our empirical
analysis. Section IV presents our empirical findings. Section V has summary
observations.

2

I. Survey Measures of Religious Conversion
The present analysis assesses the determinants of religious conversion across a
broad sample of countries.1 We use the waves on religion from the International Social
Survey Program (ISSP) for 1991 and 1998 and the World Values Survey (WVS) around
2001 to measure and analyze religious-conversion rates in 40 countries. Our analysis
focuses on country averages of conversion rates from the three surveys.
The underlying sample sizes for the two ISSP waves were typically between 1000
and 2000 persons per country, though larger samples applied in a few cases. The dating
of the field work for the ISSP 1991 survey was in 1990 or 1991, except for 1993 for
Australia. The ISSP 1998 survey applied mostly to 1996 or 1997, except for 1995 for
Slovenia and 1998 for Switzerland. The ISSP provides good background information
about the nature of the randomized sampling procedures used in the various country
surveys. The WVS 2001 wave was similar to the ISSP in sample sizes, but samples of
fewer than 1000 persons were collected in a few cases. The dating of the WVS surveys
was between 1999 and 2002. The nature of the randomized sampling procedures for the
WVS is less well documented than for the ISSP.
Iannaccone (2003) used the ISSP data to assess long-term trends in church
attendance for 32 countries. He constructed these trends from retrospective questions
concerning attendance rates for respondents and their parents when the respondents were
aged 11 or 12. Because the respondents were surveyed around 1991 and 1998 at various

1

One previous cross-country analysis of religious conversion is Duke, Johnson, and Duke (1993). This
study uses time series on religion adherence from Barrett (1982) to construct estimates of religiousconversion rates. The problem is that changes in the stock of adherents over time within a country reflect
demographic factors (births, deaths, and international migration by religion type), as well as net changes
due to religious conversion. It is not possible to use these data to get accurate estimates of gross flows due
to religious conversion.

3

ages 16 and over, the retrospective questions provided information on church attendance
for varying dates in the past.
Inspired by the Iannaccone approach, we use different retrospective questions
from ISSP 1991 and 1998 and WVS 2001 to calculate religious-conversion rates. We use
the questions that ask about a person’s current and former religion adherence. The ISSP
asks straightforwardly about a person’s form of religion adherence currently and when
being raised. The lists include an array of religion types as well as no religion.
The WVS questions are less well designed. People are first asked a yes-no
question about whether they belong currently to a religious denomination. We use this
question to determine the people who currently have no religion. Then the respondents
are asked a separate question where they are supposed to select the current religious
denomination, if any, from a list of types. A minor problem is that the total number
designating a religion type in the second question does not quite correspond to the
number saying that they belong to a religious denomination in the first question.
A more serious deficiency concerns former denomination. Persons who currently
have no religious denomination were asked whether they were ever a member of a
religious denomination. These answers allow us to match people who currently have no
religion with their former status. Persons who currently are a member of a religious
denomination were asked whether they were ever a member of another religious
denomination. This question allows us to match up the current and former denomination
for people who have two different denominations. The difficulty is that we cannot tell
whether persons who say “no” in the second case were previously in the same religious
denomination or had no religious denomination.

4

In any event, the ISSP and WVS information allows us to compute the number of
persons whose current and former religious affiliations differ, if we consider persons with
some religious adherence at both dates. Note that we observe only the religion at the
time of the survey and the former time. Thus, from ISSP, differences between current
and childhood religion imply that at least one religious conversion occurred between
childhood and the current age. For WVS, a person who indicated ever having a former
religion must have had at least one religious conversion at some point before the current
age. We cannot detect multiple conversions in these data.2
In addition to calculating religion changes, we computed flows from some
religion to none and no religion to some, subject to the difficulties already noted for the
WVS information. However, these data pertain to overall religiousness and, therefore, to
measures of religiosity considered in McCleary and Barro (2006) and other cross-country
studies. Our present empirical investigation relates not to changes in overall religiosity
but rather to shifts of affiliation among persons professing some kind of religion
adherence.
We focus on movements across major religion groups, rather than less drastic
switches of denomination within a major type, such as between forms of mainline
Protestantism. To get a consistent sample from our three data sources (the two waves of
the ISSP and the one wave of the WVS), we had to aggregate the underlying religion
types to an eight-way classification: Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, Hindu, Eastern
Religion (including Buddhist), Jewish, Orthodox, and Other Religion.

2

For the United States, the General Social Survey (GSS) religion module for 1988 asked questions about
multiple religious conversions. Among persons with at least one change (by the time of the survey), 67%
indicated one change, 25% two, and 8% three or more. These changes include movements into or out of no
religion, as well as shifts within a major group, such as Protestantism.

5

The main difficulty in implementing the eight-way breakdown of religions
consistently involves the Other Religion category. Depending on the level of detail used
in each survey, “Other Religion” includes different sets of residual groups. A particular
concern is that, in some of the underlying data, Other Christian includes independent
Christian churches, which are likely to be largely evangelical, whereas in other data, most
independent Christian churches are subsumed in the Protestant category. Since many
religion transitions in recent years involve movements into independent Christian
churches (from Protestant as well as other religions), this distinction is important for
obtaining consistent estimates of conversion rates across data sets. We address these
concerns by constructing alternative measures of conversion rates based on different
groupings of the underlying religion types. We also consider a seven-way breakdown
that excludes the Other Religion category entirely in the computation of conversions. We
find that our main results are robust to these alternative classifications.
The ISSP and WVS surveys indicate the current age of the respondent, where
persons aged 16 and over were included in the surveys. Therefore, if the current religious
affiliation differs from the former affiliation, we know that a person currently of age A
had a religious conversion sometime before age A. However, we do not know exactly
when the transition occurred.
Previous research and data provide some information on when in a life cycle
religious conversion typically takes place. Iannaccone (1990, pp. 301-302) finds that,
among converts to Catholicism in the United States, about 85% converted before age 30.3
The General Social Survey (GSS) religion module for 1988 indicates that, among persons
3

One difficulty is that the surveys include persons of various ages—converts who were young when
surveyed could not possibly have converted when old. In addition, the conversions include shifts from no
religion.

6

with at least one religion change, the breakdown of ages for a person’s first change was
76% before age 30, 15% between 30 and 39, and 9% at 40 or over.4 Need and de Graaf
(1996, p. 93) find for the Netherlands that most people who leave the church act before
age 30. However, this evidence applies to apostasy, not to conversion among types of
religion.
The concentration of religious conversions at ages less than 30 is consistent with
an important role for inter-marriage in the conversion process, as emphasized by Lehrer
(1998) and Sherkat (2004). According to the GSS 1988 religion module for the United
States, the reasons given for a person’s first religion change break down into 37%
mentioning marriage or family, 25% indicating friends or location, 18% citing issues of
theology, and 19% giving other reasons. Thus, inter-marriage is likely to be an important
but not overriding element in religious conversion at least in the United States.
To accord with the observed patterns by age, we focus our empirical analysis on
religious-conversion rates applicable to persons aged 30 and over at the time of each
survey. Thus, we concentrate on estimates of completed lifetime conversion rates; that is,
rates that apply over the typical person’s lifetime. However, our results are not very
different if we look instead at the broader group of persons aged 16 and over at the
sampling dates.
The total number of persons, T, surveyed in a given wave break down into those
who, at an earlier time, adhered to various types of religions, R1, R2, …, and those
expressing no religion adherence, N. For illustrative purposes, suppose that there are just
two types of religions, so that
4

These data have the same issue of age sampling as that described in n. 3. Also, these GSS transitions
include movements into or out of no religion, as well as switches within a major group, such as
Protestantism.

7

(1)

T = R1 + R2 + N.

In comparing with current (survey-date) adherence, denoted by asterisks, nine
transitions are possible: R1→R1*, R1→R2*, R1→N*, R2→R2*, R2→R1*, R2→N*,
N→N*, N→R1*, and N→R2*. We view religious conversion as comprising R1→R2*
and R2→R1*. We look at the total of these two changes and do not distinguish between
them. The tables that we construct provide information on apostasy, R1→N* and
R2→N*, and religious rebirth, N→R1* and N→R2*, but we do not study these types of
transitions in our statistical analysis.
Let ΔR be the sum of the two types of religious conversions, R1→R2* and
R2→R1*. Then the religious-conversion rate is the ratio of ΔR to the total number of
persons who began with some religion adherence, R1+R2:
(2)

religious-conversion rate = ΔR/(R1 + R2).

In our analysis we use Eq. (2) to measure religious-conversion rates. However, we
consider the eight categories of religion mentioned before, rather than two.5
Tables 1 and 2 describe the sample. The statistics pertain to respondents aged 30
and over for the countries in which the questions were asked that allow computation of
religious-conversion rates. Table 1 has the breakdown of current religion adherence for
the three survey waves into the eight religion types and no religion. The ISSP samples
5

We can implement Eq. (2) directly with the information given in the two ISSP waves. For the WVS
wave, the wording of the questions allows us to determine the number of religion switchers, ΔR, but, as
noted before, not the breakdown of the total population between some and no religion at the earlier times.
To estimate how the sample, T, breaks down into religiously adhering, R1+R2, and not adhering, N, at the
earlier times, we need to know the fraction of the population with no religion adherence, N/T, during the
various prior years. We estimated the N/T values by using population non-religion fractions from Barrett,
Kurian, and Johnson (2001) for 2000 and 1970. First, we related the Barrett values for 2000 to those
observed for the current survey date from the 2001 WVS. The correlation was high (0.75), but the WVS
values for N/T were systematically higher than the Barrett values, by 0.12 on average. We therefore added
0.12 to the Barrett N/T data for 1970 to estimate the WVS non-religion fraction for the earlier dates. With
these estimates, we can compute religious-conversion rates for WVS data from Eq. (2). Since the N/T
values are much less than one, alternative estimates for these ratios tend not to have a large impact on
computed religious-convergence rates.

8

are dominated by Christians—Catholic, Protestant, and Orthodox—but the 1998 survey
has substantial Jewish representation. The WVS sample has relatively more Orthodox but
still has little representation among Muslim, Hindu, and Eastern Religion. The Other
Religion category is around 3% of the adhering population for all three surveys. The noreligion percentages are high, ranging from 21% for ISSP 1998 to 30% for WVS 2001.
Table 2 shows matrices of religion transitions for respondents aged 30 and over
for the aggregate of countries included in each survey. Each row corresponds to a
particular former religion, as shown in the left-most column. The next nine columns
correspond to eight current religions or to no current religion. As an example, for ISSP
1998, among the 13,620 persons who had Catholic as their former religion (while being
raised), 11,663 were still Catholic at the time of the survey, 264 were Protestant, 2 were
Muslim, 1 was Hindu, 9 had Eastern Religion (including Buddhist), 10 were Jewish, 2
were Orthodox, 143 were in Other Religion, and 1526 had no religion adherence.
Table 2 also includes analogous information for ISSP 1991 and WVS 2001.
However, as already noted (n.5), the wording of the WVS questions makes it difficult to
fill-in all of the cells in the WVS religion-transition matrix. The notes to the table
describe our procedures for estimating the numbers that cannot be computed directly
from the survey answers.
Our cross-country analysis focuses on the country-wide religious-conversion rates
shown by country and survey wave for persons aged 30 and over in columns 1-3 of
Table 3. Among the 40 countries covered, 13 are in ISSP 1991, 29 in ISSP 1998, and 22
in WVS 2001. The conversion rates shown correspond to the structure of religion
categories indicated by the transition matrices in Table 2.

9

Because of the ambiguities mentioned before in the categories “Protestant” and
“Other Religion,” we also computed religious-conversion rates in two alternative ways.
The first alternative re-labels any Christian groups contained in the other-religion
category as Protestant. For example, for the WVS survey for Sweden, the alternative
procedure classifies “Free Church/non-conformist/Evangelical” as Protestant, rather than
Other Religion. This change eliminates most of the conversions recorded for Sweden in
the WVS 2001 survey—the religious-conversion rate falls from 0.076, shown in Table 3,
column 3, to 0.016. The principal other changes from the alternative method are for two
cases in ISSP 1998: for Norway, the conversion rate falls from 0.031 to 0.002, and for
New Zealand, the rate falls from 0.145 to 0.096.
The second alternative excludes the Other Religion category entirely, thereby
labeling as religious conversions only transitions that involve the remaining seven
religion types. That is, we excluded transitions that had Other Religion as the former or
current affiliation. (In this alternative classification, we retained the Protestant category
as defined in the original specification.) This second approach likely goes much too far
in limiting changes recorded as conversions. As can be seen from Table 2, the total
number of conversions falls from 1788 to 854—that is, 52% of the conversions are
eliminated. In terms of conversion rates, the mean falls from 0.045 to 0.024 for ISSP
1991, from 0.050 to 0.024 for ISSP 1998, and from 0.023 to 0.009 for WVS 2001.
Despite the large changes in levels of conversion rates, the patterns of religious
conversion across countries remain similar—the correlation of the log of the revised
conversion rates (with Other Religion excluded) with the original ones is 0.93 for ISSP
1991, 0.71 for ISSP 1998, and 0.62 for WVS 2001.

10

For the data in Table 3, the correlations of the logs of religious-conversion rates
among countries sampled more than once are 0.81 between ISSP 1991 and ISSP 1998
(12 countries) and 0.63 between ISSP 1998 and WVS 2001 (also 12 countries). For ISSP
1991 and WVS 2001, the correlation is 0.96, but only 5 countries appear in both surveys.
We have concerns about the reliability of the WVS information on religious conversion,
partly because of shortcomings in the questions related to religion adherence (see n. 5 and
notes to Table 2) and, more generally, because of ambiguities in the sampling procedures
employed by the WVS.
For the 12 countries represented in ISSP 1998 and WVS 2001, the average
conversion rates are 0.034 from ISSP 1998 and 0.022 from WVS 2001, with respective
standard deviations of 0.033 and 0.022. Since we view the ISSP surveys as more
accurate, we think that the WVS 2001 data systematically understate the extent and
variability of conversion rates. Despite the problems with the WVS data, we are reluctant
to drop these observations, because we think they provide incremental information. To
retain all the data while addressing concerns about varying data quality across the
surveys, we allow in the regression analysis for differences in intercepts and error-term
variances for observations from the different survey waves.
The average religious-conversion rates, shown in Table 3, are 0.045 for ISSP
1991 (N=13), 0.050 for ISSP 1998 (N=29), and 0.023 for WVS 2001 (N=22). There is a
substantial range of conversion rates across countries, as indicated by the respective
standard deviations of 0.033, 0.050, and 0.019. The countries with conversion rates above
10% are Canada (17% in ISSP 1998), the United States (16% in ISSP 1998 and 12% in
ISSP 1991), New Zealand (14% in ISSP 1998), and Chile (13% in ISSP 1998). Those

11

with conversion rates below 1% are Finland (0.2% in WVS), Romania (0.2% in WVS),
Slovenia (0.3% in WVS, 0.6% in ISSP 1991, 0.7% in ISSP 1998), Bulgaria (0.2% in
WVS and 0.4% in ISSP 1998), Spain (0.4% in ISSP 1998 and 0.6% in WVS), Italy (0.5%
in WVS and 0.6% in ISSP 1991), Hungary (0.5% in ISSP 1991), Slovak Republic (0.6%
in ISSP 1998), Cyprus (0.7% in ISSP 1998), and Poland (0.8% in ISSP 1998).

II. Theoretical Framework
This section works out a simple theoretical model to provide a framework for the
subsequent empirical analysis. We focus on hypotheses about the determinants of
religious-conversion rates at the country level.
Suppose that m religion types exist in a country. If the religions can be ordered
by a single characteristic, such as strictness, we can array the types zi along a line at
positions z1, …, zm, where one of these types can represent no religion. Differences
between religion types are then represented by horizontal distances. Alternatively, the
types could be arranged around a circle. In this case, the arc-distances measure
differences between religions, but there is no sense in which any particular religion
exhibits the lowest or highest amount of something like strictness. (We could also
generalize to multiple religion characteristics.)
Individual j is “born” (corresponding, perhaps, to the end of dependent childhood
at age 16) with religion adherence of type xj. This type corresponds to one of the zi. Let
(xj)* represent person j’s ideal type of religion at a point in time. Because religion
preferences are shaped by family and neighborhood upbringing, xj will typically be close
to (xj)* at the time of “birth.” However, religion preferences, (xj)*, can change over time.

12

We assume that they evolve randomly, following a process with positive variance but no
systematic trend. The variance of the random process is important for determining the
frequency of religious conversion, but we assume in applications of the model that this
variance is the same across time and place. Given this variance, the optimally determined
frequency of religion switching will depend on two factors: the cost of switching and the
cost of having xj deviate from (xj)*. A higher switching cost results in a lower frequency
of conversion, whereas a larger cost of deviation results in a higher frequency of
conversion.
In the simplest setting, the cost of changing religion for person j is the lump-sum
amount γj, independently of which religion pairs enter into the change. More
realistically, this cost would depend on which pair of religions applies. For example,
switches to neighboring religions will typically be less costly than movements to faraway
religions. Moreover, some religions may have higher or lower costs of entering or
leaving. In any case, the cost γj depends on individual and country-wide variables. At
the individual level, one determinant of γj is education. More educated people likely find
it easier to change religions because they are better at learning and adjusting to new ways
of thinking. The better educated likely also have more information about alternative
religions and more contact with people of other religions. At the country level, the
switching cost depends on government regulations; for example, legal or religious
restrictions on conversion raise γj for all persons j within the affected country.
The cost of having xj deviate from (xj)* depends on the location of other available
religions. For example, if xj is a given distance from (xj)*, the benefit from switching
will be greater the closer an alternative religion, one of the zi, to (xj)*. The suitability of

13

alternative religions to the preferences of the typical individual tends to be greater the
higher the density of the available religions in a country. The idea, as in Gruber (2005),
is that the greater the concentration of the nearby population in a particular religion, the
smaller the costs for each member to participate in that religion. Thus, the more
pluralistic a country’s religion market, the higher the typical benefit from making a
switch—or, equivalently, the higher the cost of allowing one’s current religion, xj, to
deviate from (xj)*.
The available religions in a country need not be fixed over time. For example, the
rise of Evangelicalism in many places made it less costly for persons to belong to that
faith. In the model, we could represent this change by introducing at some point in time a
shift to a more pluralistic religion market. This kind of change would induce a large
amount of religious conversion as a temporary response to the market innovation.
Formally, we would predict that religious conversion would depend not only on the
current level of religious pluralism (a steady-state effect) but also on past changes in the
extent of this pluralism.
The cost of deviation from one’s ideal religion type depends on how important
formal religion is overall. That is, for given locations of available religions, the cost of a
deviation of xj from (xj)* will be greater the more important formal religion is to people.
For example, our sample of 40 countries includes 14 that were formerly Communist (but
none that were Communist at the time of the surveys). Communist governments sought
to diminish the overall value attached to religious participation and beliefs (see, for
example, Froese and Pfaff [2001]). To the extent that this political influence remains
effective after the demise of Communism, the value of religion would be smaller and the

14

cost of deviations of xj from (xj)* would be lower. In contrast, education has been argued
to raise the benefits of religion through its networking role (Sacerdote and Glaeser
[2001]). This effect implies that more education would raise the cost of a given deviation
of xj from (xj)*.
The secularization hypothesis argues that higher per capita income, which we
gauge at the country level by real per capita GDP, lowers the demand for religion,
measured by participation in formal services and religious beliefs. (See McCleary and
Barro [2006] for an overview and cross-country empirical evidence.) From this
perspective, higher per capita income would reduce the cost of a given deviation of xj
from (xj)*. However, although the evidence suggests that higher per capita income
lowers religious participation and beliefs, an increase in per capita income need not
reduce amounts spent per person on religion, and this spending variable is the relevant
measure of the value placed on formal religion. Therefore, the predicted impact of per
capita GDP on the cost of a given deviation of xj from (xj)* is ambiguous.
Our theoretical framework is analogous to (S,s) models of inventory
accumulation, as applied previously in many contexts. An individual who optimizes
religion choices would allow (xj)* to evolve to some extent away from xj. However, a
sufficient deviation—that is, the attainment of a critical gap—triggers the payment of the
lump-sum adjustment cost, γj, and the choice of a new religion, xj, that is closer than the
former one to the current (xj)*. The frequency of these changes in a country’s overall
population will be greater the lower the typical γj and the higher the typical cost of
deviations of xj from (xj)*. In our empirical analysis, we gauge the frequency of religion
change by the fraction of the adhering population that undergoes a religious conversion

15

by age 30. Given the previous discussion, the model predicts that this conversion rate
will be higher if:6
•

a country has a higher level of religious pluralism,

•

a country shifted recently toward greater religious pluralism,

•

a country lacks religious and legal restrictions on conversion,

•

a country lacks a history of Communism,

•

a country has higher average educational attainment.

Higher per capita GDP has an ambiguous effect on the frequency of religious conversion.
We can augment the basic model to allow for inter-marriage. Marriage to a
partner of a different religion tends to generate a jump in ideal religion type, (xj)*, at the
time of marriage. That is, a spouse’s strong incentive to match the partner’s religion
generates a lot of religious conversion around the time of inter-marriage. A deeper
analysis would treat inter-marriage as endogenous, along the lines of Lehrer (1998),
taking account of the costs of having different religions and of making shifts in religion
adherence. For present purposes, an important point is that the incorporation of intermarriage leaves intact the predictions worked out before for the determinants of the
frequency of religious conversion.

6

An increase in the variance of the religion-preference shock raises the frequency of conversion for a given
setting of the critical gap. However, a higher variance also motivates people to increase the size of the
critical gap. This last response reduces the frequency of conversion. Typically, this second effect will only
partially offset the first effect; that is, a higher variance of preferences results, on net, in a higher frequency
of conversion. For a derivation in an analogous context (the frequency of price change when these changes
entail lump-sum adjustment costs), see Barro (1972, Eq. [22]). This finding would add additional
hypotheses to our list if we could identify variables that influence the variance of the religion-preference
shock. However, we have not made progress in this direction.

16

III. Setup of the Empirical Analysis
We use a regression system with three equations. The dependent variables are the
logs of religious-conversion rates computed from ISSP 1991, ISSP 1998, and WVS 2001,
as shown in Table 3.7 Estimates are by the seemingly-unrelated technique, which allows
the error variances to differ for the three samples and for the residuals to be correlated
across survey waves for a given country. Each equation also has its own intercept,
thereby allowing for differences across surveys in measured levels of conversion rates.
Aside from the different intercepts, the coefficients of the explanatory variables are
constrained to be the same across the three survey waves.
Table 4 shows means and standard deviations for the variables used in the
regression systems. The first three columns apply to the regression samples, which are
dictated mainly by the availability of the religious-conversion data. For comparison, the
last three columns give means and standard deviations for much broader samples of
countries. All means apply to unweighted samples; that is, each country receives the
same weight irrespective of population, GDP, and so on.
The independent variables correspond to the hypotheses from the framework
described before. The religious-pluralism variable is based on a breakdown of religion
adherence for 1970 from Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001); henceforth, referred to as
Barrett. We use an eight-way breakdown of religion types, corresponding to the one we

7

The log form appropriately restricts the conversion rate to non-negative values. (No zero values occur in
our main sample but do arise in several cases when we exclude Other Religion in the calculation of
conversion rates. For the regressions with this alternative religious-conversion rate, we used the log of the
conversion rate plus 0.001.) We could use a logistic form, log[x/(1-x)], where x is the conversion rate, to
restrict the conversion rate not to exceed one. However, since all observed values of x are much less than
one, the logistic form is nearly the same as the simpler log form that we use.

17

used for the ISSP and WVS surveys.8 Barrett also provides information on the fraction
of the population having no religion adherence.
The form of the pluralism variable is suggested by a religion-matching model,
specifically a model of marriage between persons with differing religions. The variable
corresponds to the probability that a randomly selected person with some religion
adherence will, in a random encounter, meet a person with some, but differing, religion
adherence. The first concept that we employ is one minus the usual Herfindahl index of
religion shares among persons with some religion adherence. This Herfindahl measure—
the sum of the squares of the religion-adherence shares—is appropriate if we think of
persons with some religion randomly encountering other persons with some, but not
necessarily the same, religion.
We also consider an alternative pluralism measure that takes account of persons
with no religion. This measure applies if people with some religion randomly encounter
other persons with some religion (either the same or different) or no religion. This
measure depends partly on the composition of the adhering population across religions
and partly on the fraction of persons with no religion. Given the distribution across
religion types, the second variable is smaller than the first if the share of the population
with no religion is positive.9
If we take account of assortative mating—persons of the same religion being
more likely to match with each other—the probability of a religion mismatch could be
8

Some previous uses of the Barrett adherence data, such as McCleary and Barro (2006), included the
category “other Christian,” which combines the Barrett categories of independent Christian churches,
unaffiliated Christians, and “marginal Christians.” To approximate the ISSP-WVS eight-way scheme, we
merged this other Christian category with Protestant and Anglican in the Barrett numbers.
9
Let H be the Herfindahl index of religion concentration among persons with some religion adherence—
that is, the sum of the squares of the religion population shares in the adhering population. Let n be the
ratio of persons with no religion to the total adhering population. Then the alternative pluralism variable is
given by (1-H)/(1+n), which is declining with H and n.

18

substantially smaller than the number given by either of the religious-pluralism variables.
However, the mismatch probability would still tend to be increasing with the pluralism
variables that we use. The religious-conversion rate would, in turn, be increasing in the
mismatch probability and, hence, with the pluralism variables. Although we motivated
this linkage from inter-marriage, we would get the same result for other reasons. That is,
aside from marriage considerations, a greater variety of religions available in a country
would raise the rate of religious conversion—by making it less costly for persons to
switch to alternative religions.
The theory suggests that religious conversion depends on past changes in
religious pluralism, as well as the current level of pluralism. Based on the data from
Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001), we calculated the pluralism values for 1900, 1970,
and 2000. Unfortunately, we lack information between 1900 and 1970. We can compute
the change in pluralism between 1900 and 1970 but this change likely gives little
information about the dynamics of pluralism that matter for our religious-conversion
data—which pertain to conversions not too much prior to the survey dates around 1991,
1998, and 2001. We can also compute from the Barrett data changes in religious
pluralism between 1970 and 2000 (or between 1970 and 1990), but these changes cannot
be satisfactorily regarded as exogenous with respect to the religious-conversion rates that
we calculated. Therefore, at this stage, we are not optimistic about our ability to isolate
effects from past changes in religious pluralism on the observed conversion rates.
The dummy variable for legal restrictions on religious conversion comes from the
Religion & State Data Set compiled by Fox and Sandler (2008). We use the information
for 1990, the first year of their data, or for the earliest date available. Since their data

19

show strong persistence over time in these kinds of legal restrictions, the precise date is
not critical.
Fox and Sandler provide four relevant indicators for legal restrictions that relate to
religious conversion: those applying to conversion into minority religions, conversion
out of the majority religion, proselytizing, and inter-faith marriage. However, none of the
40 countries in our religious-conversion sample have legal restrictions of the first two
types. These direct restrictions on conversion tend to exist in predominantly Muslim
countries.10 Although the WVS 2001 wave contains many predominantly Muslim
countries, the questions that allow calculation of the religious-conversion rate were not
asked in any of these countries. We think this omission applies because residents of these
countries would likely view a question about having a different religion earlier in life as
insulting, especially when it pertains to an activity that is unlawful, as well as sinful. For
the present analysis, we define our restrictions variable as a dummy that takes on the
value one if the country had in place in 1990 (or a nearby date) restrictions on
proselytizing or inter-faith marriage. (See Table 3 for the data.)
Real per capita GDP in 1990 is the value in 2000 U.S. dollars from version 6.2 of
the Penn-World Tables (available online).11 These data feature purchasing-power
adjustments to compare standards of living across countries. Average years of school
attainment in 1990 for the adult population aged 25 and over come from Barro and Lee
(2001).12 The dummy variables for Communist regime in 1970, having a state religion in
1970, and having government regulation of the religion market in the 1970s come from
10

Among 39 countries with Muslim adherence of at least 50%, 25 have conversion restrictions either out of
the majority religion or into a minority religion. 18 have both types of restrictions.
11
For Bulgaria and Lithuania, 1990 data were unavailable, and we used the values for 1995.
12
For Croatia, we used the 1990 value for the former Yugoslavia. For Belarus and Ukraine, we used the
1990 value for Russia (which we took as representative of the former Soviet Union).

20

Barro and McCleary (2005). The regulation variable, an extension of Chaves and Cann
(1992), was based on whether the government appointed or approved religious leaders.
The results in McCleary and Barro (2006) showed that religious participation and beliefs
were deterred by current and former Communism, encouraged by the presence of state
religion (interpreted as a subsidy effect), and discouraged by government regulation of
the religion market.
Data on monthly attendance at formal religious services, holding various religious
beliefs, and self-classifying as a religious person come from the survey information given
in various waves of the WVS, ISSP, and the Gallup Millennium Survey. These data are
discussed in McCleary and Barro (2006). We use here the values from the 1990 WVS if
these are available. Then we fill in, as available, numbers (adjusted for differences in
average levels across surveys) from WVS 1981, ISSP 1991, WVS 1995, ISSP 1998,
Gallup, and WVS 2001.
Table 4 makes clear some of the selection issues related to the availability of the
religious-conversion data. The regression sample for religious conversion comprises
countries that are substantially richer and more educated than the broad sample of
countries. The regression sample is over-weighted toward former Communist countries.
In terms of religion adherence, the regression sample is slanted toward Catholic,
Protestant, Orthodox, and Jewish, and away from Muslim, Hindu, Eastern Religion
(including Buddhist), and Other Religion. The regression sample also has overrepresentation of persons with no religion.

21

IV. Empirical Findings
Table 5, column 1 shows a baseline regression system for logs of religiousconversion rates from the three survey waves. Each of the three equations includes its
own intercept. However, the estimated intercepts turn out not to differ significantly from
each other (p-value = 0.24). The last two lines of the table show the fits of each equation,
gauged by R-squared values and standard errors of estimation. The fits for the ISSP
waves are similar, with R-squared values in excess of 0.7. That for the WVS wave is
only 0.24; we think, again, because of the relatively poor quality of the data. Similarly,
the standard error for the WVS equation is much higher than those for the ISSP
equations.
As expected, the religious-pluralism variable for 1970 (calculated from adherence
shares among the adhering population) has a significantly positive impact on the log of
the conversion rate; the coefficient in Table 5, column 1 is 2.9 (s.e. = 0.5). This
coefficient means that a one-standard-deviation increase in the religious-pluralism
variable (by 0.19 in Table 4) raises the estimated log of the religious-convergence rate by
0.55. That is, at the sample mean conversion rate of 0.050 (for ISSP 1998), the estimated
convergence rate would rise by about 70% to 0.087. Looking at Table 3, column 4, we
see that low degrees of religious pluralism can explain why religious-conversion rates are
particularly low in Spain, Finland, Italy, Poland, and Slovenia. In contrast, the high
values of the pluralism variable in Canada and the United States help to explain high
conversion rates.
If we add the change in the religious-pluralism variable from 1900 to 1970 to the
regression system, this new variable has an estimated coefficient near zero. We think this

22

result applies because the measured change in pluralism is too far in the past to matter for
our measured religious-conversion rates. Thus, at present, our results pertain to the longterm relation between the structure of religion adherence and religious-convergence rates,
not to effects from changes in the adherence structure.
As expected, legal restrictions that deter religious conversion (involving
proselytizing and inter-faith marriage) have a significantly negative effect on the log of
the conversion rate, with a coefficient in Table 5, column 1 of -0.84 (s.e. = 0.21). The
estimated coefficient implies that the implementation of a legal restriction (moving the
dummy variable from zero to one) reduces the estimated conversion rate by nearly
60%—from 0.05 to 0.02 at the sample mean for ISSP 1998. The conversion restrictions
that we recorded apply to 25% of the regression sample (see Tables 3 and 4). As noted
before, the sample includes no predominantly Muslim countries, many of which have
legal restrictions on religious conversion.
Religious conversion is significantly negatively related to former Communism,
with a coefficient in Table 5, column 1 of -1.52 (s.e. = 0.20). Thus, the estimated effect
is even larger in magnitude than that from conversion restrictions. The regression sample
has 35% of the observations as former Communist (Table 4). Previous findings
(McCleary and Barro [2006]) indicated that the influence of past Communism on
religious participation and belief decayed over time but continued to be significantly
negative after 10-15 years. (See also Inglehart and Baker [2000].) Our interpretation is
that past Communism has a depressing influence on the value attached currently to
formal religion and, thereby, diminishes the propensity for religious conversion.

23

The log of per capita GDP in 1990 has a negative but small and statistically
insignificant effect on religious-conversion rates. The estimated coefficient in Table 5,
column 1 is -0.09 (s.e. = 0.19). This result accords with the ambiguous effect noted
before for the effect of higher per capita income on the value attached to formal religion.
In contrast, the variable for average years of school attainment of the adult
population in 1990 has a significantly positive effect on religious-conversion rates, with a
coefficient of 0.21 (s.e. = 0.05).13 This coefficient implies that a one-standard-deviation
increase in educational attainment (by 1.6 years in the regression sample, see Table 4)
raises the estimated religious-conversion rate by about 40% (from 0.05 to 0.07 at the
sample mean for ISSP 1998). Our interpretation of the education effect from the
perspective of the theoretical framework is that more education reduces the cost of
religious conversion and raises the benefit from formal religion—thereby, raising the
propensity to convert on both counts.
Although per capita GDP and education are highly positively correlated, the
results show that the sample has sufficient independent movement in these variables to
distinguish the effects. The estimated positive impact of education on a country’s
religious-conversion rate accords with Loveland (2003, Table 2), who found a
significantly positive effect from years of education on the probability of switching
religions in U.S. data from the 1988 GSS religion module. As a related matter, Lehrer
(1998, p. 255) and Sherkat (2004, p. 618) report positive effects of education on
individual probabilities of inter-marriage in the United States.

13

If we break down total years of schooling into primary, secondary, and higher, the estimated coefficients
in the system for religious-conversion rates are 0.19 (s.e. = 0.08) on primary, 0.23 (0.12) on secondary, and
0.28 (0.39) on higher. These results accord with the hypothesis that only total years of schooling matter
(p-value = 0.92).

24

The results are not very different if we use the alternative definition of religious
pluralism—the one discussed before that brings in an effect from the no-religion
population. These results are in Table 6, column 1. The pattern of coefficient estimates
is similar to that in Table 5, column 1, but the fits are somewhat poorer. We focus,
henceforth, on the findings with the initial form of the pluralism variable.
Table 5, column 2 adds to the regression system two dummy variables concerning
institutional aspects of religion—the presence of a state religion in 1970 and the presence
of government regulation of religion in the 1970s. Although these variables were
important in an earlier study for explaining religious participation and beliefs (McCleary
and Barro [2006]), the two variables are individually and jointly statistically insignificant
in the system for religious conversion (p-value = 0.20 for joint significance). This result
makes sense because the system already includes a more directly relevant institutional
measure, the presence of legal restrictions related to conversion.
We next added measures of religious participation and beliefs (applying typically
around 1990). Conceptually, the effects of these variables on religious conversion are
ambiguous. Greater participation and belief signify that formal religion is more
important to a person, thereby suggesting a higher frequency of religious conversion.
However, greater participation and belief also indicate a higher degree of satisfaction
with and attachment to a person’s incumbent religion and, thereby, predict a lower
frequency of religious conversion. In any event, the estimated coefficients were
insignificant when we used the extent of monthly or more attendance at formal religious
services along with the extent of belief in hell, heaven, or an after-life, or whether people
viewed themselves as religious. (Some of these variables were statistically significant for

25

explaining economic growth in Barro and McCleary [2003].) A representative finding
appears in Table 5, column 3, which includes monthly attendance along with the extent of
religiousness. The p-value for joint significance of these two variables is 0.70.
We also consider whether religious-conversion rates bear some relation to the
composition of religion adherence (in 1970). Effects might arise here if religions differed
by costs of joining or leaving or if religions differed by the degree of attachment of their
members. Among the religion categories shown in Table 4, the only one that has
significant explanatory power for religious-conversion rates is the fraction of the
adhering population Muslim. Table 5, column 4 shows a marginally significant negative
effect from the Muslim adherence share. The inclusion of this variable has little impact
on the other results, except that the coefficient on the conversion-restriction variable
becomes smaller in magnitude (but remains significant).
Table 6, columns 2 and 3, assesses the robustness of the results to alternative
definitions of religious conversion. As noted before, we use alternative approaches
concerning the treatments of the categories “Protestant” and “Other Religion” in the
computation of religious-conversion rates.
Table 6, column 2 corresponds to the first alternative definition, in which all other
Christian types are classified as Protestant, rather than Other Religion. The overall
pattern of coefficient estimates is similar to that in the original specification (Table 5,
column 1). The main change is the reduction in the coefficient for school attainment.
The fits are also notably poorer than those in the initial specification. Thus, our
preference is for the original specification, but the main inferences are robust to this
alternative definition of conversion.

26

Table 6, column 3 corresponds to the second alternative definition, which
eliminates all conversions associated with “Other Religion.” As noted before, this
alternative roughly halves the religious-conversion rates, but the estimated rates remain
substantially correlated with the original values. The regression coefficients show more
differences from the original form (Table 5, column 1), but religious pluralism and school
attainment remain significantly positive and Communism remains significantly negative.
Two differences are that the conversion-restrictions variable is no longer statistically
significant, whereas the log of per capita GDP becomes significantly negative at the 5%
level. The fits of the equations—particularly for the ISSP waves—are notably poorer
than those for the original specification. Thus, we prefer the original specification but
nevertheless find it informative that the overall pattern of empirical estimates is robust to
this drastic change in definition of religious conversion.

V. Summary observations
We used retrospective questions about religion adherence from three international
survey waves to construct country averages of religious-conversion rates. Our concept of
conversion considers only shifts across major religion types, using a breakdown of
religions into eight broad groups. The conversion rates for the population aged 30 and
over vary substantially across countries, ranging from near zero for Spain, Italy, and
many former Communist countries in Eastern Europe to over 10% in the United States,
Canada, Chile, and New Zealand. Although our analysis focuses on switches among
types of religions, the data also cover movements from religion to no religion and vice
versa.

27

In a theoretical model, the frequency of religious conversion depends on factors
that influence the cost of switching and the cost of having the “wrong” religion. These
theoretical concepts suggested explanatory variables to use in our empirical analysis of
country-level religious-conversion rates. We report several empirical findings that
accord with the underlying theory: the religious-conversion rate is positively related to
the extent of religious pluralism, gauged by the composition of adherence shares;
negatively related to government restrictions that inhibit religious conversion; positively
related to levels of education; and negatively related to a history of Communism. Given
these variables, conversion rates were not much related to per capita GDP, the presence
of state religion, and the extent of religiosity. The composition of religion adherence was
mostly unimportant, except for a small negative effect from the Muslim adherence share.
The empirical results were robust to alternative specifications of the religious-pluralism
variable and to changes in the religion groupings used to construct the conversion rates.
In planning extensions of this research, we start with our view of religious
conversion as one dimension of the fluidity of the religion market. Opportunities for
conversion affect the degree of religious pluralism and the extent of competition among
religion providers. Through these channels, religious-conversion rates should influence
levels of religiosity, along the lines analyzed in McCleary and Barro (2006). In carrying
out this extension, we will also use our data on switches between religion and no religion,
as well as the movements between religions that we studied in this paper.

28

References
Barrett, D.B. (1982). World Christian Encyclopedia, 1st ed., Oxford, Oxford University
Press.
Barrett, D.B., G.T. Kurian, and T.M. Johnson (2001). World Christian Encyclopedia, 2nd
ed., Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Barro, R.J. (1972). “A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment,” Review of Economic
Studies, 39, January, 17-26.
Barro, R.J. and J.W. Lee (2001). “International Data on Educational Attainment:
Updates and Implications,” Oxford Economic Papers, 53, July, 541-563.
Barro, R.J. and R.M. McCleary (2003). “Religion and Economic Growth,” American
Sociological Review, 68, October, 760-781.
Barro, R.J. and R.M. McCleary (2005). “Which Countries Have State Religions?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, November, 1331-1370.
Breen, R. and B.C. Hayes (1996). “Religious Mobility in the U.K.,” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, 159, 493-504.
Chaves, M. and D.E. Cann (1992). “Regulation, Pluralism, and Religious Market
Structure,” Rationality and Society, July, 272-290.
Duke, J.T., B.L. Johnson, and J.B. Duke (1993). “Rates of Religious Conversion: A
Macrosociological Study,” Research in the Social Scientific Study of Religion, 5,
89-121.
Fox, J. and S. Sandler (2008). Religion and the State: A World Survey of Government
Involvement in Religion, New York, Cambridge University Press.

29

Froese, P. and S. Pfaff (2001). “Replete and Desolate Markets: Poland, East Germany,
and the New Religious Paradigm,” Social Forces, 80, December, 481-507.
Greeley, A. (1989). Religious Change in America, Cambridge MA, Harvard University
Press.
Gruber, J. (2005). “Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and Outcomes:
Is Religion Good for You?” National Bureau of Economic Research, working
paper no. 11377, May.
Iannaccone, L. (1990). “Religious Practice: A Human Capital Approach,” Journal for
the Scientific Study of Religion, 29, September, 297-314.
Iannaccone, L. (2003). “Looking Backward: A Cross-National Study of Religious
Trends,” unpublished, George Mason University, July.
Inglehart, R. and W.E. Baker (2000). “Modernization, Cultural Change, and the
Persistence of Traditional Values,” American Sociological Review, 65, February,
19-51.
Lehrer, E.L. (1998). “Religious Intermarriage in the United States: Determinants and
Trends,” Social Science Research, 27, September, 245-263.
Loveland, M.T. (2003). “Religious Switching: Preference Development, Maintenance,
and Change,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 42, March, 147-157.
McCleary, R.M. and R.J. Barro (2006). “Religion and Political Economy in an
International Panel,“ Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion,” 45, June,
149-175.

30

Need, A. and N.D. de Graaf (1996). “Losing my Religion: A Dynamic Analysis of
Leaving the Church in the Netherlands,” European Sociological Review, 12,
87-99.
Roof, W.C. and W.C. McKinney (1987). American Mainline Religion: Its Changing
Shape and Future, New Brunswick NJ, Rutgers University Press.
Sacerdote, B. and E.L. Glaeser (2001). “Education and Religion,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, working paper no. 8080, January.
Sandomirsky, S. and J. Wilson (1990). “Processes of Disaffiliation: Religious Mobility
Among Men and Women,” Social Forces, 68, June, 1211-1229.
Sherkat, D.E. (2001). “Tracking the Restructuring of American Religions: Religious
Affiliation and Patterns of Religious Mobility, 1973-1998,” Social Forces, 79,
June, 1459-1493.
Sherkat, D.E. (2004). “Religious Intermarriage in the United States: Trends, Patterns,
and Predictors,” Social Science Research, 33, December, 606-625.
Sherkat, D.E. and J. Wilson (1995). “Preferences, Constraints, and Choices in Religious
Markets: An Examination of Religious Switching and Apostasy,” Social Forces,
73, March, 993-1026.
Stark, R. and C.Y. Glock (1968). American Piety: The Nature of Religious Commitment,
Berkeley, University of California Press.

31

Table 1
Current Religion Adherence in Religious-Conversion Sample (ages 30 and over)
ISSP 1991
ISSP 1998
WVS 2001
Religion
Number
Percent of
Number
Percent of
Number
Percent of
adhering
adhering
adhering
5716
47.5
11958
52.1
9192
54.3
Catholic
5198
43.2
6700
29.2
2998
17.7
Protestant
58
0.5
222
1.0
205
1.2
Muslim
10
0.1
11
0.0
6
0.0
Hindu
6
0.1
393
1.7
8
0.0
Eastern
36
0.3
755
3.3
29
0.2
Jewish
699
5.8
2191
9.5
3936
23.3
Orthodox
310
2.6
720
3.1
544
3.2
Other
12033
100.0
22950
100.0
16918
100.0
Total adhering
4156
-6130
-7310*
-No religion
16189
-29080
-24228
-Total pop.
-25.7
-21.1
-30.2
No religion %
Notes: ISSP is International Social Survey Program (1991 covers 1990-1993, 1998
covers 1998-2000). WVS 2001 is World Values Survey (covering 1999-2003). Eastern
Religion has Buddhist and other eastern religions. Adhering percentages are relative to
the adhering population. No religion percent is relative to the total population.
*WVS 2001 has 24,390 respondents aged 30 and over, of which 7359 indicated no
religion adherence and 17,031 indicated some religion adherence. In a separate question,
only 16,918 persons (less than the 17,031) responded when asked which particular
religion they adhered to. The number 7359 was scaled downward accordingly to 7310 in
order to maintain the ratio of no to some religion indicated by the first question. This
number, when added to 16918 gives the total population of 24,288, as shown in the table.

32

Former religion

Catholic
Protestant
Muslim
Hindu
Eastern
Jewish
Orthodox
Other
None
Total Current

Catholic
Protestant
Muslim
Hindu
Eastern
Jewish
Orthodox
Other
None
Total Current

Table 2 Matrices of Religious Conversions, aged 30 and over, all countries
Current religion
Catholic Protestant Muslim Hindu Eastern Jewish Orthodox Other
ISSP 1991
5560
116
0
0
2
0
0
33
121
4941
2
0
0
3
1
127
0
1
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
32
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
269
10
7
47
1
0
0
0
1
120
25
90
4
0
0
1
428
19
5716
5198
58
10
6
36
699
310
11663
117
2
0
0
6
11
22
137
11958

264
6091
0
0
0
3
3
58
281
6700

2
5
205
0
0
1
0
0
9
222

ISSP 1998
1
9
1
2
0
0
5
0
0
312
0
0
0
0
4
10
0
60
11
393

33

10
5
0
0
0
701
3
4
32
755

2
8
5
0
0
1
1556
0
619
2191

143
235
1
0
5
0
17
209
110
720

None

Total Former

568
1307
1
0
4
8
37
53
2178
4156

6279
6502
47
11
11
46
319
229
2745
16189

1526
1311
10
4
37
9
65
124
3044
6130

13620
7775
223
9
354
721
1655
431
4292
29080

Former religion

Catholic
Protestant
Muslim
Hindu
Eastern
Jewish
Orthodox
Other
None
Total Current

Catholic

Protestant

8131*
32
1
0
1
0
13
28
986*
9192

41
2585*
0
1
0
0
10
47
314*
2998

Table 2, continued
Current religion
Muslim Hindu Eastern Jewish
WVS 2001
2
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
180*
0
0
0
0
4*
0
0
0
0
6*
0
0
0
0
23*
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
22*
1*
1*
3*
205
6
8
29

Orthodox

Other

None

Total Former

20
5
0
0
1
3
3480*
5
422*
3936

69
43
0
0
0
0
15
367*
50*
544

1292
598
7
1
0
3
66
75
5128
7310

9557*
3264*
188*
6*
8*
29*
3586*
523*
7066*
24228

Notes: Cells show numbers of each type of religion transition for persons currently aged 30 and over in the aggregate of the sampled
countries for each of three survey waves: International Social Survey Program (ISSP) 1991 and 1998 and World Values Survey
(WVS) 2001. The rows have former religions, as indicated in the left-most column, and the next nine columns show current religions.
The breakdown is for eight religion groups plus no religion. The diagonals show numbers of persons who remained in their initial
category. The text discusses why the questions in the WVS wave do not allow us to ascertain directly whether a person with a current
religious affiliation had formerly the same or no religious affiliation. The affected cells are the ones indicated by asterisks. The text,
n.5, describes how we estimated the total number of persons with no former religious affiliation (7066 in the right-most column). To
approximate the remaining cells, we made a number of assumptions. To illustrate, for the Catholic column, we know from WVS the
sum of the rows corresponding to formerly Catholic plus formerly none (9117 = 8131 + 986). Our key assumption is that the ratio of
those coming from none (estimated at 986) to the known total (9117) is the same for Catholic as it is for each other current religion
(column for Protestant, etc.). These assumptions, together with our procedure for estimating the total former number for none (7066),
allow us to fill in all the cells.

34

Table 3 Religious-Conversion Rates and other Variables
Conversion rate
ISSP ISSP WVS Religious Religious Conversion Communist
1991 1998 2001 Pluralism Pluralism Restrictions
1970
1970
1970 (alt.)
1990
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Belarus
Canada
Switzerland
Chile
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Spain
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (west)
U.K. (Britain)
Greece
Croatia
Hungary
Ireland
Iceland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Lithuania
Latvia
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Sweden
Ukraine
United States

0.054
0.034
-------------0.031
0.070
--0.005
---0.006
---0.077
0.032
0.070
0.040
---0.036
-0.006
--0.120

-0.019
-0.004
-0.171
0.055
0.130
0.007
0.024
0.019
0.004
--0.018
0.044
0.089
--0.026
0.019
-0.017
0.027
0.021
-0.084
0.092
0.031
0.145
0.094
0.008
0.024
-0.085
0.006
0.007
0.015
-0.159

-0.020
0.043
0.002
0.020
----0.013
-0.006
0.024
0.005
0.020
--0.038
0.010
--0.039
-0.005
-0.018
0.039
0.044
----0.020
0.002
0.012
-0.003
0.076
0.043
--

0.43
0.17
0.09
0.28
0.29
0.53
0.52
0.31
0.40
0.40
0.03
0.02
0.53
0.03
0.14
0.52
0.26
0.11
0.22
0.44
0.17
0.02
0.25
0.08
0.07
0.14
0.67
0.51
0.00
0.29
0.39
0.06
0.10
0.31
0.60
0.32
0.09
0.04
0.36
0.45

35

0.41
0.16
0.09
0.21
0.17
0.52
0.52
0.30
0.39
0.33
0.03
0.02
0.25
0.03
0.13
0.51
0.24
0.11
0.21
0.38
0.17
0.02
0.25
0.07
0.06
0.10
0.35
0.46
0.00
0.28
0.39
0.05
0.09
0.26
0.29
0.28
0.08
0.03
0.22
0.43

0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0

Note to Table 3
Religious-conversion rates are computed, as described in the text, from International
Social Survey Program (ISSP) 1991 and 1998 and World Values Survey (WVS) 2001. Sources
of other variables are in the notes to Table 4. The religious-pluralism variable in column 4 is 1-H,
where H is the sum of squares of religion-adherence shares among persons who adhere to some
religion. This pluralism variable corresponds to the probability that a person meets a person with
a different religion in a random encounter among persons with some religion. The alternative
pluralism variable in column 5 takes account of non-religion. The formula is (1-H)/(1+n),
where 1-H is the pluralism variable from column 4 and n is the ratio of persons with no religion
to persons with some religion. This alternative variable gives the probability that a person with
some religion meets a person with a different religion in a random encounter among persons
selected from the entire population.

36

Table 4 Means and Standard Deviations of Variables
regression sample
overall sample
Variable
N
mean
s.d.
N
mean
s.d.
13
0.045 0.033
---Religious-conversion rate, ISSP 1991
29
0.050 0.050
---Religious-conversion rate, ISSP 1998
22
0.023 0.019
---Religious-conversion rate, WVS 2001
13
-3.48
1.05
---log(conversion rate, ISSP 1991)
29
-3.55
1.13
---log(conversion rate, ISSP 1998)
22
-4.20
1.06
---log(conversion rate, WVS 2001)
40
0.27
0.19
192
0.32
0.22
Religious-pluralism indicator, 1970
40
0.22
0.15
192
0.29
0.22
Alternative pluralism indicator, 1970
40
0.25
-171
0.41
-Restrictions on conversion, 1990
40
9.56
0.49
176
8.46
1.12
Log (per capita GDP), 1990
40
8.83
1.58
119
5.63
2.98
Years of School Attainment, 1990
40
0.35
-190
0.18
-Communist, 1970
40
0.30
-189
0.39
-State religion, 1970
40
0.40
-171
0.34
-Regulation of religion, 1970s
40
0.31
0.21
87
0.40
0.25
Monthly church attendance, 1990, …
40
0.29
0.17
81
0.43
0.27
Belief in hell, 1990, …
40
0.47
0.22
81
0.59
0.27
Belief in heaven, 1990, …
40
0.51
0.19
82
0.58
0.23
Belief in after-life, 1990, …
40
0.63
0.18
79
0.69
0.19
Religious person, 1990, …
Barrett religion shares, 1970:
40
0.433 0.397
192
0.309 0.365
Catholic
40
0.323 0.355
192
0.216 0.291
Protestant
40
0.168 0.308
192
0.070 0.201
Orthodox
40
0.027 0.136
192
0.007 0.062
Jewish
40
0.020 0.046
192
0.232 0.358
Muslim
40
0.000 0.001
192
0.022 0.104
Hindu
40
0.025
0.153
192
0.067 0.214
Eastern Religion (including Buddhist)
40
0.004 0.006
192
0.079 0.159
Other Religion
40
0.123 0.148
192
0.074 0.155
Non-religion share of total population

37

Notes to Table 4
These variables are used in the regressions shown in Tables 5 and 6. The sample
of 40 countries comprises those, aside from East Germany (which is missing other data),
with religious-conversion data. Means are unweighted averages across the countries.
The religion shares are fractions of the adhering population in each country. The
Protestant category includes Anglican, independent Christian churches, unaffiliated
Christians, and “marginal Christians.”
Sources: Religious-conversion rates, shown in Table 3 and discussed in the text, are from
ISSP 1991, ISSP 1998, and WVS 2001. Religion-adherence shares among the adhering
population and non-religion fractions are from Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001).
Pluralism indicators are calculated from these shares, as described in the notes to Table 3
and the text. The dummy variable for restrictions on religious conversion (restrictions on
proselytizing or inter-faith marriage) is from Fox and Sandler (2008). Real per capita
GDP is from Penn-World Tables version 6.2 (available online). School attainment is
from Barro and Lee (2001). Dummy variables for Communism, state religion, and
regulation of religion are from Barro and McCleary (2005). Church-attendance rates (for
monthly or greater attendance) and frequencies of religious beliefs and religiousness are
from various waves of ISSP, WVS, and the Gallup Millennium Survey (see the text).

38

Table 5 Regressions for Logs of Religious-Conversion Rates
(persons aged 30 and over, 40 countries, 3 survey waves)
Independent variables
Coefficients (standard errors in parentheses)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
2.91**
2.68**
2.92**
3.17**
Religious pluralism, 1970
(0.46)
(0.54)
(0.46)
(0.47)
-0.84**
-0.87**
-0.88**
-0.66**
Restrictions on conversion, 1990
(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.22)
(0.22)
-1.52**
-1.76**
-1.61**
-1.47**
Communist, 1970
(0.20)
(0.25)
(0.23)
(0.21)
-0.09
-0.14
-0.20
-0.20
log (per capita GDP), 1990
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.22)
(0.20)
0.208**
0.185**
0.200**
0.211**
School attainment, 1990
(0.052)
(0.053)
(0.053)
(0.053)
--0.34
--State religion, 1970
(0.28)
-0.35
--Regulation of religion, 1970s
(0.20)
---0.52
-Monthly church attendance,
(0.71)
1990 …
--0.19
-Religious person, 1990 …
(0.77)
----4.0*
Muslim adherence share,
(1.9)
Barrett, 1970
.80, .72,
.75, .75,
.80, .72,
.74, .75,
R-squared
.24
.31
.23
.33
.45, .58,
.50, .55
.44, .58,
.52, .55,
standard error of residuals
.90
.86
.90
.85
*p-value < 0.05, **p-value < 0.01
Notes: The system of three equations is for logs of religious-conversion rates from ISSP
1991 (N=13), ISSP 1998 (N=29), and WVS 2001 (N=22). 40 countries appear at least
once. Estimation is by the seemingly-unrelated (SUR) technique. Separate constant
terms, not shown, enter into each equation. For the variables shown, the coefficients
were constrained to be the same in each equation. The religious-conversion rates are the
ones in Table 3, columns 1-3. The religious-pluralism variable is the one in Table 3,
column 4.

39

Table 6 Regressions for Logs of Religious-Conversion Rates: Robustness Checks
(1)
(2)
(3)
alternate pluralism conversion rate conversion rate
variable
with all other
with other
Christian as
religion
Protestant
excluded
2.96**
3.48**
4.10**
Religious pluralism, 1970
(0.61)
(0.53)
(0.60)
-0.86**
-0.78**
-0.09
Restrictions on conversion, 1990
(0.23)
(0.24)
(0.26)
-1.23**
-1.43**
-1.68**
Communist, 1970
(0.22)
(0.23)
(0.27)
-0.09
-0.10
-0.59*
log (per capita GDP), 1990
(0.21)
(0.22)
(0.25)
0.242**
0.126*
0.209**
School attainment, 1990
(0.056)
(0.060)
(0.069)
.76, .64,
.70, .65,
.74, .60,
R-squared
.23
.14
.17
.49, .66,
.57, .70,
.77, .79
standard error of residuals
.91
.94
.89

Notes: Column (1) differs from Table 5, column 1, in the definition of the religiouspluralism variable as the one in Table 3, column 5, rather than column 4. Column (2)
differs from Table 5, column 1, in the change of the dependent variable to calculate
religious-conversion rates by treating all Other Christian as Protestant, rather than Other
Religion. Column (3) differs from Table 5, column 1, in the change of the dependent
variable to calculate religious-conversion rates by omitting all conversions that involve
the category Other Religion. The flow ΔR then omits changes in which the origin or
destination was Other Religion. In this case, the denominator, the total of persons
starting with some religious adherence, also omits persons categorized as Other Religion.

40

