NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RULING OUT PRODUCTIVITY?
LABOR CONTRACT PAGES AND PLANT PERFORMANCE

Casey

Ichniowski

Working Paper No. 1368

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

June 1984

The author would like to thank Richard Freeman and Thomas Kochan
for their comments on this paper. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies and project in
Productivity (World Econonjy). Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #1368
June 198)4

Ruling Out Productivity?:

Labor Contract Pages and Plant Performance

ABSTRACT

This study documents a strong inverse relationship between number of pages
of labor contracts in effect and the productivity observed in a sample of ten

unionized plants. It is argued that this relationship reflects the
productivity—inhibiting effects of increases in the number and complexity of

work rules. The study also argues that subsequent research should try to
improve the nasurement of work rules by considering the substance of the rules
and which parameters of a production function the rules are likely to affect.

Casey Ichniowski
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
02138
Cambridge, MA

—2—

I. Introduction
Despite a growing number of studies that document a significant positive
relationship between union status and productivity,- a number of criticisms

remain unanswered. Among these complaints, one of the most frequently voiced by
managers is that unionized establishments operate under more restrictive work
rules and practices and that other potential gains of unionization, lower turnover rates or formal grievance machinery, for example, could not outweigh the

inefficiency associated with these added restrictions. Despite the frequency
with which this complaint is raised, no direct empirical studies on the rela-

tionship between work rules and productivity have been made. The few studies
that have been conducted, address this issue indirectly by focusing on differences in substitution parameters obtained from equivalent union and nonunion pro-

duction functions.2 This study takes a first step in analyzing the relationship
between work rules and productivity in a more direct fashion.
In this study, monthly data from January 1916 to September 1982 on the

operations of eleven paper mills are analyzed. The number of pages in collective bargaining agreements is taken as a directly measurable proxy for the

number and complexity of work rules. This proxy for the extent of work rule
regulation is then considered within the framework of a detailed, plant—level
production function to gauge the differences in productivity associated with
changes in the contract page measure.

The analysis is developed in the following five sections. The next section presents the production function framework and describes the contract pages

—3—

variable. Section III presents estimates of the productivity—contract pages
relationship obtained from this production equation. Section IV considers
several other variables that might also indicate differences or changes in work

rules and practices within the production equation. The empirical analysis is

expanded in Section V by considering data for a nonunion miii. In this section,
an average productivity difference between this mill and the ten unionized mills

is calculated. While this miii has no collective bargaining agreements,
contract pages values are predicted from the basic equation estimated in Section

III and input—output data for the nonunion mill. Finally, the conclusion sum—
marizes the results and argues for two improvements on the design of this study:

improvements in the measurement of work rules; and suggestions for improving the
model of how different types of work rules might affect the production process,
thereby altering the parameters of the production function.

By way of preview, a significant inverse relationship between plant pro-

ductivity and contract pages is documented. The estimated "output—contract
pages elasticity" is —.068. Additionally, several periods when work rules
are likely to be changing or in dispute are shown to be extremely unproductive

periods of plant operation. Specifically, around the time of contract negotiations, and around the time that new machinery is installed, the plants produce significantly less output than one would expect given the stated level of

inputs. Finally, by using input-output data for a nonunion mill, an implicit
number of contract pages is predicted for a mill that has no collective

bargaining agreements. On average, this mill's productivity is 9.5% below that
of the unionized mills in the sample.

II. SPECIFICATION OF THE PRODUCTION PROCESS AND INPUT-OUTPUT DATA
With the aid of on—site investigations of each mill's production process,
the production function given by equation 1 ias developed to account for
variations in productivity in these mills:3
3

in Q =

+

9

E(11 KDj) + (B2i Ky1) + E(B3
i=1

1=1

4

3

PMD1) +

1=1

PMV) + (5 • L) + (6 • E) + c

i=1

(Equation 1)

Where: Q = tons of physical output;
KD1_3 =

three

plant dummies to control for two major product differences

(white paper vs. newsprint; sheeted vs. not sheeted) and one

major process difference (make vs. buy pulp) across the eleven
mills;

=

total

depreciated, deflated value of assets in nine distinct cate-

gories of assets;

PMD13 = a set of three related dumniy variables to describe whether a plant
is operating two, three, four, or five or ircre paper machines (the
two paper machine category is omitted);

PMV total depreciated, deflated value of the two, three, four or five
plus paper machines;
L =

labor

input

E = energy input

The KD variables provide a direct control for major product and process

differences observed in these mills. The nxre conventional method of

—5—

constructing

a value added index is particularly difficult in these milis.1 The

PMD variables provide some control over scale of operations. The KV and PMV
variables are fashioned to recognize the principles of input aggregation for a

heterogeneous capital stock.5 For example, three categories involving energy
generation capital, certain land and buildings, and pollution and recycling
capital are not a direct part of the machinery that acts upon the raw materials

flowing through the process. These categories of capital, then, are kept
separate from other categories of capital that is part of the production pro-

cess. The capital value variables are constructed from each mill's monthly
asset inventory which contains information on the current value of each asset.
In any month, there are some 15,000 assets that were allocated to these dif-

ferent categories of capital. L is defined as the natural logarithim of hourly
manhours. E is the natural logarithm of BTU's used in production.
This unconventional specification is developed to provide an accurate
model of the production processes in these mills.

Equation 1 accounts for

over 95% of the total variation in production in this sample. More conventional functional forms produce several nonsensical coefficients. For example,
in a Cobb_Douglas function, with capital inputs specified as one net investment

variable, the coefficient on capital is in fact negative for this set of plants
in which capital plays the central role in transforming raw materials into final

goods. More conventional forms explain a much smaller proportion of the total
variation in output.6
In this study, total pages of collective bargaining contracts in effect,

—6—

CONPAG, will serve as the proxy for the extent and

complexity

of workrule regu-

lation in the mills. This is not an entirely satisfactory measure for several
reasons. It's most noticeable shortcoming is that it does not capture the
substance of the rules and practices in effect. Even setting aside this concern, longer contracts may not necessarily mean more rules. Sidebar agreements
not incorporated in the contracts, rules set forth in arbitration decisions, or

unwritten shop floor practices will not be captured by this meausure. These
other sources of work rules may not necessarily increase with contract pages.

Still

CONPAG is a direct measure and should provide information on work rules

since labor contracts are a major source of work rules.
each

During 1916 to 1982,

of the ten unionized had either three or four contract cycles. The average

number of pages in effect across all ten unionized mills over the seven year

period is 195 pages. The fewest number of pages ever in effect

is

in these mills

68 pages; the maximum )-65 pages. The lowest mill average is 18 pages; the

largest mill average is 319 pages.

While

the

format and layout of the collective bargaining agreements is

similar from mill to miii, there are slight layout variations across mills. To
parcel out these plant—specific differences in the plants' contract formats, a
complete set of plant dummies, will replace the dummy variables described in

Equation 1, (KDi_3 and PMiJ) that control for differences in products and

processes across plants. With this modification and the addition of the CONPAG
variable, the final specification becomes:
9

9

in Q =

+

i=l

(ii PLMT) +
i=l

(=i

•

KVj)

+ (
i=l

PMV) +

—7-.

L) +

(5 E)

+ 6(CONPAG)

(Equation 2)

where CONPAG will also be entered in logarithmic form.
Even if CONPAG does measure the extent and complexity of work rule regulation, the relationship between productivtiy and the extent of work rule regula-

tion might not be described by the log—linear model of Equation 2. For example,
some degree of work rule regulation may promote efficient operations, while an

overabundance of rules might hinder efficiency. Therefore, the equation 2 model
will be expanded to include the square of the natural logarithim of CONPAG.

—8-.

III.

Empirical Results: The Contract Pages—Productivity Relationship
When the equation 2 specification is estimated, the results in Table 1 are

obtained. From the column 1 model, one sees that the overall relationship bet-

ween contract pages and

output,

controlling for variations in the levels of pro-

ductive inputs, is negative and significant. The estimated "output—contract
pages elasticity" is —.068. However, from the coefficients in column 2, one
observes that there appears to be some curvature in the contract pages—

productivity relationship. These coefficients suggest that output at first
decreases with additional contract pages; after some inflection point, output

increases with additional contract pages. To solve for the value of this
inflection point in units of contract pages, one can use the column 3 specification and solve the following equation for CONPAG:
=
3CONPAG

E—3) +

2(5.1

E—6)

•

(C0NPAG) = 0

The inflection point occurs at 321t contract pages. The vast majority of values
of the contract page variable are below 321.i pages. Those that do exceed 321

pages (only five of the thirty—five values of the contract page variable) tend
to cluster near the inflection point of 32i pages.
To illustrate the nature of the relationship between contract pages and
productivity in this sample, the results in Table 1 are presented graphically.

Figure 1 uses the coefficients in the column 3 specification to evaluate
aQ/aCONPAG for each value of the contract page variable in the sample (as indi-

cated by the open dots). Except for the two largest contract pages values
(CONPAG = 390, 165),

the

inverse relationship between contract pages and produc—

Table 1: Contract Pages Coeffiecients in Production Functiona
[Dependent Variable: in Tons of Paper; N = 626]

(1)

1. in contract pages

.:08

(3)

_:**
.276***

2.

(in contract pages)2

3.

contract pages

ii.

(contract pages)2

5.

plant dummies and other
input controls in
equation 2 Specification

(.o12)

_3.3 E3
(0.6

yes

.959

a — standard

(2)

yes

.962

errors in parentheses

significant at the .01—level,one—tailed test
** — significant at the .05—level, one—tailed test
—

* — significant

at the •10—level,

one—tailed test

E—3)

yes

.961

—9—

tivity

holds for virtually the entire range of contract page values. Given the

small number of observations to the right of the inflection point in Figure 1,

and the imperfect nature of contract pages

as

a measure of work rules, it would

seem unreasonable to extend the positive contract page—productivity relationship

beyond the range of observed values. Again, the simple linear "output—contract
pages elasticity" is significant and negative (—.068). Probably the most reasonable conclusion one should draw from these data is that contract pages provides
some information on the extent of work rule regulations and that there exists an
inverse relationship between work rules and productivity, holding fixed the
levels of other productive inputs.

—

.20

26

a(CONPAG)

—

.50

.38

-32

—

100

200

4gure 1
_________

300

324

CONTRACT PAGES

400

—10—

IV.

Changing Work Rules: New Contracts and New Machinery
While the results of the previous section provide some support for the

claim that increased work rule regulation inhibits productivity, it may be
that the process of changing work rules also affects a plant's efficiency.
Two sets of variables are constructed to measure periods when work rules come

under pressure to change. First, a set of four dummy variables is created to
describe each plant's contract cycle: the quarter before negotiations without a
strike; the quarter after negotiations without a strike; the quarter before a
strike; the quarter after a strike; and the omitted group of months from the

central period of contract administration. Second, there is a set of variables
to describe the periods when four major machines were installed in these mills

during this seven year period. One variable is created for the six month
installation period; a second for the first six months of operating the new
machinery.

A number of different forces may be operating during these periods to

influence how efficiently the plants are operating. Before negotiations, managers may try to speed up production to build inventories of standard products
thereby dampening the economic power of the union during a possible strike;

employees may try to reduce output for the opposite reasons. After negotiations, particularly if a strike occurred, the plant may not be operating
efficiently as it tries to adapt to the new agreements put in place during nego-

tiations. Conversely, after negotiations without a strike, there may be a
honeymoon period in which employees operate the plant at higher efficiency

—11—

levels.

For the new machinery variables, the installation of a major piece of

capital may disrupt existing plaot operations. After the capitalization date,
the plant's capital variables are increased by the full purchase price. This
may overstate the value of the capital in its early stages of operations for

several reasons. First, a learning curve effect may exist as operators learn

how to operate the machine. Second, and directly related to the work practices
in the plant, the jurisdiction over any new work may be in dispute as old work

rules fail to cover the new situation in the plant. As these issues are sorted
out, the machinery may not be operating fully. Finally, it may simply take
several months to integrate new machinery into the existing production process.
When the new variables are added to the previously estimated equations,

the results in Table 2 are obtained. The addition of these new sets of
variables leave the contract pages coefficients virtually unaffected. The
simple output——contract pages elasticity is still —.068 (column 1). The addition of the squared contract pages term improves the specification and the same
pattern of curvature in the output—contract pages relationship seen in Table 1
still exists (column 2).

The coefficients in lines 3a—3d, describe the relative levels of productivity during the periods when the number and substance of the contract pages

are changing. These coefficients reveal that the periods around the time
of negotiations are relatively productive periods given the stated levels of

inputs. The most significant among these positive coefficients is the period

Table 2: Contract Page, Contract Cycle, and
New Machinery Coefficients in Production Equationa
[Dependent Variable: in Tons of Paper; N = 626

1. in contract pages

(i)

(2)

_.068*

.2.153***
(.)4514)

(.0)4)4)

2.

.252***

(ln contract pages)2

(.0)42)

3. Contract cycle variables
a. quarter before
negotiations

b.

quarter after
negotiations

c. quarter before a strike

.028*
(.020)

.059
(.022)

.0)46

**

(.021)

.0)4l**

.010
(.019)

.015
(.019)

a. six—month installation
period

_.103***

_.088***

(.032)

(.031)

b. six—month after

_.066**
(.036)

_.058**

d. quarter after a strike

-i..

.023
(.021)

New machinery variables

5. Plant dummies and other
input controls in Equation
2 specification

yes

.961

a —

standard errors in parentheses

significant

at the .01—level, one—tailed test

**

— significant

at the .05—level, one—tailed test

*

— significant

at the .10—level, one—tailed test

—

(.035)

yes

.963

—12—

after negotiations without a strike (line 3b) —

possibly

period; and the quarter before strike — possibly signalling
of management to build up inventories before the strike.

honeymoon
efforts

signalling some

the

The coefficients in lines a and 13b, on the other hand, show the periods
around the introduction of new machinery

installation

to

be

quite unproductive periods. The

period (line a) is from 8.8% to 10.3% less productive than normal

given the stated level of inputs. After installations (line 4b), productivity
is 5.8% to 6.6% below what would be expected given the level of inputs in

place. While the installation of major pieces of machinery is likely to
disrupt the existing production process, the post—capitalization period may be

relatively unproductive for a combination of reasons. Work practices may need
to be adjusted in the face of the new operating needs of

the plant; employees

may need several nnths to learn how to operate the equipment effectively; the
capital itself may not be well integrated with the production process.
Despite the significant effects of these sets of variables on production,

the contract pages —

productivity

relationship remains unaffected: for most

of the range of values for the contract page variable, output declines with

more contract pages. The simple output—contract pages elasticity remains
significantly negative at -.068.

—13—

V.

Estimating Contract Pages for a Non—Union Firm.

Monthly data for one nonunion mill were also available in this sample.
However, without negotiated agreements, it could not he incorporated in the

preceding analysis. Still, these data can be incorporated in another way.

First, by estimating the equation 1 specification without plant dummies, and
only one additional dunuir for the nonunion miii, the average difference between

mill and the ten unionized mills can be gauged. This analysis reveals that
the nonunion mill is on average 9.5% less productive than the union mills for
this

the

stated level of productive inputs. The coefficient is significant at con-

ventional levels and in keeping with the union productivity effects estimated in
other studies.

Second, the coefficients obtained in the model in column 1 of Table 1 can

be used to estimate an implicit number of contract pages for each month for the
nonunion mill.7 Simply, by evaluating that equation for the input—output values
observed in the nonunion miii, the predicted contract page values are obtained:
+

in
=
CONPAGnU

— (a +

1Inu)

CONPAG

(Equation

3)

where CONPAG = predicted nonunion contract pages
+

'flu

=

output

=

input

data from nonunion mill
data from nonunion mill

coefficients obtained in Table 1, column 1 specifi'CONPAG = estimated
cation using data from sample of unionized firms.
Since the nonunion mill is 9.5% less productive than the union mills, the

—l4—

estimated contract page values for the nonunion miii

will

tend to exceed the

contract page values observed in the union mills. That is, this —9.5% nonunion
differential will be attributed entirely to increased nambers of contract

pages. While it may be more reasonable to suspect that a number of other factors omitted from the basic production model are partly responsible for the
observed productivity differential between the nonunion mill and its unionized

counterparts, the analysis provides a useful illustration. It illustrates how
much one would have to exaggerate the effect of contract pages on productivity
to account for the entire union productivity differential.
When this analysis is performed, and the nonunion productivity differential is attributed solely to a greater number of contract pages, an implicit

number of contract pages for each month is estimated for the nonunion mill. The
average

value for the estimated in contract pages variable is 15.21. The

average value for in contract pages among the union mills is only 5.08. For the

entire

nonunion productivity differential to be accounted for by the effect of

contract pages, the implicit number of "nonunion contract pages" would have to
far exceed the number of contract pages in the unionized mills.
The size of this differential in contract pages indicates that other fac-

tors would also seem to be responsible for the observed union productivity dif-

ferential. Still, it may not be unreasonable to consider the nonunion mill
as having a much less efficient set of work rules than the union mills.

Specifically, 1r

not

having rules well specified in explicit negotiated

agreements, more confusion about operations may in fact exist in the plant.

—15—

Furthermore, there is some evidence that work rules

proliferate

as a plant

ages.8 The nonunion mill is one of the oldest establishments in the sample.
The combination of proliferation of informal work practices as the mill ages
coupled with an inability to use one principal source (a labor contract) as an
official statement of those practices may be a serious obstacle to efficient
operations.

—16—

VI.

Conclusion

This study documents a significant inverse relationship between contract

pages and productivity for a sample of unionized plants. While the introduction of a squared contract pages term in the production equation indicates a
positive output—contract pages relationship among the few large contract page
values, the negative relationship holds for most of the range of contract page
values.

The absence of a uniformly negative relationship between contract pages
and productivity is likely due to several shortcomings of this study that future

research on this topic should attempt to remedy. First, contract pages, while a
directly measureable proxy for work rules, is far from the ideal measure. Other
sources of work rules (arbitration rulings, sidebar agreements, and informal
practices) need to be considered.
More importantly, the substance of work rules and how they interact with

other inputs in the production function need to be modelled directly. Many work
rules probably alter substitution parameters; for example; limitations on
introducing labor—saving devices, limit capital—labor substitution. Other rules

may increase the number of inputs that need to be specificed. For example, if
there are jurisdictional boundaries between operating and maintenance jobs,

one would want to specify the labor input as two components with substitution
limited according to how often the jurisdictional boundaries can be crossed.

Finally, it seems reasonable to expect that management supervision is a

critical variable omitted from the above analysis. With low levels of super—

vision, nre work rule regulation would probably be beneficial to efficient
plant operations. For increased levels of supervision, rules would inhibit
managers ability to deploy resources as it sees fit.
While providing some direct evidence of a inverse relationship between
contract pages and productivity with analysis of unique plant—level data set,

the results highlight a long list of questions that can only be addressed with
an even more detailed set of data on plant operations and the nature and
substance of the work rules that govern those operations.

—18—

FOOTNOTES

1. For a review of these studies, see Freeman, Richard B. and J.L. Medoff,
"Trade Unions and Productivity: Some New Evidence on an Old Issue," NBER
Working Paper No. 12)49, Cambridge, Massachusetts, (December 1983).

2. Allen, Steven G., "Union Work Rules and Efficiency in the Building
Trades," Mimeograph, North Carolina State Univeristy, Department of
Economics, (August 1983); Freeman, R.B. and J.L. Medoff, "Substitution
Between Production Labor and Other Factors in Unionized and Nonunionized
Manufacturing," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 614, no.2 (May,
1982), pp. 220 — 233.
3. Ichniowski, Casey, "Micro Production Functions Aren't Pretty: Firm—Level
and Industry—Level Specification for Inputs and Outputs," NBER Working Paper
No. 1365, Cambridge, Massachusetts, (June, 19814), pp 6 — 16.
14.

Ibid., pp. 8—11.

5. Ibid., pp. 11—13.

6. Ibid., pp. 19—21.
7'. The coefficients from the column 2 specification were also used to estimate
the implicit number of contract pages in the nonunion mill by solving for
the roots of the quadratic equation. However, for every observation, the
b
b2— )4ac
value under the square root in the quadratic formula, ——--k—
is always negative.

8. McKersie, Robert B. and Janice Klein, "Productivity: The Industrial
Relation Connection," M.I.T. Sloan School of Management Working Paper No.
137'6—82, Cambridge, Massachusetts (Novercriber, 1982), Appendix pp. 7—li.

