                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MORTGAGE BROKER REGULATIONS THAT MATTER:
    ANALYZING EARNINGS, EMPLOYMENT, AND OUTCOMES FOR CONSUMERS

                                          Morris M. Kleiner
                                          Richard M. Todd

                                        Working Paper 13684
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13684


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




We thank Hwikwon Ham, Patricia Haswell, Matthew Hendricks, Thomas LaMalfa, Alexander Lefter,
Heidi Liu, Cynthia Pahl, Dan Rozycki, Michael Weisbrot and JW Bond Consultants for their assistance
with the paper and staff at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for providing much
of our data. We also thank David Autor, Richard Freeman, Alexandre Mas, and two referees for comments
that greatly improved the paper. In addition, we benefited from suggestions from Susan Woodward
and participants at seminars hosted by the Aarhus School of Business, the Federal Reserve Board,
the Federal Trade Commission, the London School of Economics, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and the University of Minnesota. The views expressed here are those of the authors, and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Morris M. Kleiner and Richard M. Todd. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Mortgage Broker Regulations That Matter: Analyzing Earnings, Employment, and Outcomes
for Consumers
Morris M. Kleiner and Richard M. Todd
NBER Working Paper No. 13684
December 2007, Revised September 2008
JEL No. H77,J18,J4,J44,J8,K2,K31,L22,L38,L51,L84

                                              ABSTRACT

As the role of mortgage brokers in mortgage origination grew from insignificant in the 1980s to dominant
in recent years, questions have arisen about whether its services help or harm consumers. In response,
states have increasingly regulated the business, largely by creating and tightening occupational licensing
requirements for mortgage brokers. The question of whether increased occupational licensing of mortgage
brokers improves consumer outcomes is theoretically ambiguous and has been little studied empirically.
This study introduces a new database of mortgage broker licensing requirements and assesses the relationships
between these requirements and outcomes in both the labor market for brokers and the consumer market
for mortgages. We find that one typical regulation—the requirement in many states that mortgage
brokers maintain a surety bond or minimum net worth—has a significant and fairly consistent statistical
relationship with both labor and consumer market outcomes. In particular, we find that tighter bonding/net
worth requirements are associated with slightly higher broker earnings, fewer brokers, fewer subprime
mortgages, higher foreclosure rates, and a greater percentage of high-interest-rate mortgages. Although
we do not provide a full causal interpretation of these results, we take seriously the possibility that
restrictive bonding requirements for mortgage brokers have unintended negative consequences for
many consumers. On balance, our results also seem to support the relevance of theories of occupational
licensing that stress the importance of financial entry and exit barriers.


Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey Institute
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu

Richard M. Todd
Federal Reserve Board of Minneapolis
dick.todd@mpls.frb.org
I. Introduction

         Mortgage brokers are intermediaries who both match potential mortgage borrowers and

lenders and assist them in completing the loan origination process. Brokers have typically operated

as independent service providers, not as agents or employees of either borrowers or lenders, and

they are compensated by fees paid by the borrower and sometimes the lender as well.1 Their role in

the U.S. mortgage market has mushroomed from insignificant in 1980 to predominant in recent

years. By 2004, about 53,000 mortgage broker firms were operating in the United States and were

directly or indirectly involved in the origination of as many as 68% of all mortgages that year

(Wholesale Access 2005).2 As the mortgage broker business grew, so did questions about the

industry’s role and its effects on consumer welfare.

         From one perspective, the rise of mortgage brokering was just one part of a broader vertical

disintegration of the lending business that is widely thought to have made mortgage credit more

widely and cheaply available to many households (Jacobides 2005; Gerardi, Rosen, and Willen

2007). According to both the general theory of brokers (Yavas 1994) and mortgage market scholars

(El Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005; U.S. Department of Housing and Urban

Development 2002, Guttentag 2000), mortgage brokers have played a role in the evolution of the

highly specialized and efficient mortgage market. In particular, brokers can make the complicated

task of shopping and applying for the increasingly wide array of mortgage products more

manageable and efficient for borrowers and lenders alike. Millions of households, including many

affluent and sophisticated consumers, have arranged mortgages through brokers, frequently more




1
  Some states have recently moved to enact or more strictly enforce laws that make the broker an agent of the borrower,
but this was not a factor during our study period.
2
  By 2006, the number of firms had changed little but their share of originations was estimated to have declined to about
58% (Wholesale Access 2007). With the volume of subprime lending apparently falling significantly in 2007, mortgage
broker numbers may be declining further, as the brokers had originated the majority of subprime mortgages (Olson
2007).

                                                            2
than once. It seems likely that many if not most of them found value in the brokers’ services, which

is what we would expect in honest, competitive markets.

       On the other hand, critics have argued that too many mortgage brokers are not honest or,

more broadly, that market failures prevent competition from effectively disciplining brokers’ profits

and quality of service. According to these critics (Guttentag 2000, LaCour-Little and Chun 1999,

Alexander et al. 2002, Kim-Sung and Hermanson 2003, Jackson and Burlingame 2007), market

failures (chiefly in the form of information asymmetries) allow mortgage brokers to profit unduly at

the expense of mortgage borrowers as well as lenders. These issues are said to be especially

problematic in the subprime mortgage market, where mortgage brokers have dominated originations

in recent years (Schloemer 2006).

       In response to these concerns, a range of policy measures have been discussed. One of the

most common responses has been to increase the occupational licensing standards for mortgage

brokers. Pahl (2007) documents how state licensing of mortgage brokers increased at both the

extensive (more states) and intensive (more restrictions per state) margins between 1996 and 2006,

and since then a surge in mortgage foreclosures has provided political momentum for the enactment

of further regulation. Policymakers seem to have concluded that a lack of market discipline and

regulatory oversight has allowed many mortgage brokers to originate excessively expensive and

risky mortgages (Gramlich 2007), and a more comprehensive system of mortgage broker licensing

is often viewed as part of the solution (Kroszner 2007, Conference of State Bank Supervisors 2007,

Shumer 2007).

       Despite the growing attractiveness of mortgage broker licensing to policymakers, both

theory and empirical evidence suggest that licensing will not necessarily improve outcomes for

consumers (Kleiner 2006). Even theories that emphasize the role of occupational licensing in

enhancing the quality of services provided find that licensing tends to also raise the average price of

                                                   3
the occupation’s services, possibly to the detriment of consumers who prefer low prices to high

quality. Some theories that focus on other aspects of licensing, such as its potential to serve as a

vehicle for current practitioners to collusively impede the entry of new firms, may imply lower

quality as well as higher prices. Empirical assessments of the effects of occupational licensing have

often confirmed its potential to raise prices, sometimes with little or no gain in quality. However,

the results differ widely by occupation, and we are not aware of any comprehensive assessments of

mortgage broker licensing.

        In order to fill this gap, we examine the relationships between mortgage broker licensing and

market outcomes. We provide some background on the occupation and review theories of how

licensing can affect outcomes in both the labor market for mortgage brokers and the consumer

product market for mortgages. We introduce and summarize Pahl’s recent compilation of mortgage

broker licensing requirements from the 50 states and the District of Columbia for the period 1996–

2006. We then use Pahl’s data to analyze whether mortgage broker licensing or any of its

components have significant relationships with labor or product market outcomes. We attempt to

construct overall indices of the tightness of mortgage broker licensing but find that they are not

significantly related to market outcomes. We then examine many of the separate components of

state mortgage broker regulation and find that one component—the requirement in many states that

mortgage brokers maintain a surety bond or maintain a minimum net worth — has a significant and

fairly robust statistical association with fewer brokers, fewer subprime mortgages, higher

foreclosure rates on subprime mortgages, and a higher percentage of mortgages carrying high

interest rates.3

II. The Rise of Mortgage Brokering and the Issues It Raised


3
  Some of the other components of mortgage broker regulation also are significant in some of our specifications and
may deserve further research (see Appendix 4), but here we focus on the bonding and net worth requirements because
they were more broadly and consistently significant.

                                                          4
        The evolution of mortgage brokering in the United States and the policy issues that arose

with it have been well described in other sources;4 we summarize them here to motivate and provide

background for our analysis of mortgage broker licensing. In particular, we note that mortgage

brokering has become an economically significant industry surrounded by controversy about the

extent of benefits it provides to consumers and lenders, and we describe some of the key pricing and

quality issues that policymakers try to address with licensing programs.

        The National Association of Mortgage Brokers (NAMB) delineates the roles of the

mortgage lender and the mortgage broker as follows:5

                The wholesale lender underwrites and funds the home loan, may service the loan
        payments, and ensures the loan’s compliance with underwriting guidelines. The broker, on
        the other hand, originates the loan. A detailed application process, financial and credit
        worthiness investigation, and extensive disclosure requirements must be completed in order
        for a wholesale lender to evaluate a consumer’s home loan request. The broker simplifies
        this process for the borrower and the wholesale lender, by conducting this research,
        counseling consumers on their loan package choices, and enabling them to select the right
        loan for their home buying needs. The mortgage loan process can be arduous, costly, and
        seemingly impossible to the consumer. The broker works as the liaison between the
        borrower and the lender to create a cost effective and efficient loan process.
                As an independent contractor, the broker allows wholesaler lenders to cut origination
        costs by providing such services as preparing the borrower's loan package, loan application,
        funding process, and counseling the borrower.

        The services of mortgage brokers were not in great demand thirty years ago. At that time,

the mortgage industry was made up almost entirely of large, integrated firms (banks and savings

and loans) that managed the entire process of bringing borrowers and investors together. They

located investors (depositors, in this case) and borrowers, recommended the appropriate type of

4
  For example, see U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2002; Essene and Apgar 2007; Apgar,
Bendimerad, and Essene 2007; Engel and McCoy 2002; El Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005; LaCour-Little
2007b; Jackson and Burlingame 2007; Guttentag 2000; and Woodward 2003.
5
  The quotation, from the NAMB’s FAQ webpage www.namb.org/namb/FAQs1.asp?SnID=1916912282, was
downloaded on November 8, 2007. The term “broker” is generally used to refer to a firm offering mortgage brokerage
services, while the term “loan officer” is commonly used to refer to an employee of a mortgage broker who actually
performs these services. We adopt this common usage. However, terminology in the industry is not uniform (HUD
2002) and can be confusing, not least because the actual roles of brokers, loan officers, lenders, and others are not
rigidly bounded and often blur. For a wry but useful summary of the overlapping roles and confusing jargon in the
mortgage origination business, see “Mortgage Origination for UberNerds,” a September 7, 2007, posting on the
Calculate Risk blog, at http://calculatedrisk.blogspot.com/2007/09/mortgage-origination-channels-for.html.

                                                           5
mortgage (typically from a small set of options), analyzed borrowers’ creditworthiness and the

value of their collateral, closed the loans, serviced the loans, and made payments to the investors.

       By 2000, the mortgage market had changed radically (Jacobides 2005, U.S. Department of

Housing and Urban Development 2002). Technological change (fax machines, the Internet, etc.),

financial innovation (credit scoring, automated underwriting, securitization of mortgages, etc.), and

deregulation (e.g., repeal of state usury limits) abetted extensive specialization and vertical

disintegration in the industry, so that separate firms could focus on particular steps in the process,

such as loan marketing and closing (the brokers’ origination specialties), underwriting, initial

funding, servicing, pooling (for sale in the secondary market), and long-term funding. At the same

time, the range of potential participants within each such niche broadened; for example,

nondepository mortgage banks competed with depository institutions to originate and sometimes

service, pool, or fund mortgages. In addition, new types of mortgages (e.g., adjustable rate

mortgages, or ARMs) and differentiated products aimed at a wider array of consumers (e.g., a

variety of subprime mortgages with risk-based interest rates for high-risk borrowers) took

significant market shares.

       These developments both affected and were affected by the rapid growth of mortgage

brokering. As the decision to grant credit became less based on subjective assessments of the loan

applicant and more based on credit scores and other objective underwriting standards, underwriting

moved to the back office, and loan officers employed by depository institutions focused

increasingly on sales and loan closing services. Improved communications technology—fax

machines and later the Internet—fostered the physical separation of the sales function from the

underwriting function, and this in turn made it possible to outsource either or both. Mortgage

brokers take outsourcing one step further, in that they work for themselves, as independent

contractors dealing with multiple lenders. As such, brokers allowed both established mortgage

                                                    6
lenders (the depository institutions) and new competitors (nondepository mortgage banks) to

specialize and to rapidly scale up or down their sales efforts and loan origination volumes in

response to market cycles and competitive opportunities (Apgar, Bendimerad, and Essene 2007;

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2002).

       Low overheads and the resulting ability to efficiently market within residential

neighborhoods also helped brokers penetrate the emerging subprime market, which included many

households who were somewhat unfamiliar with traditional mortgage lending institutions. The

number of mortgage broker numbers and the number of subprime mortgage originations grew in

tandem (Figure 1), and mortgage brokers came to dominate the origination of subprime mortgages

(Schloemer 2006). Much of the growth of the mortgage broker industry took place on the extensive

margin, by the addition of new firms, as the average size of firms remained small, about 10

individuals, during most of our study period (Sichelman 2003).

       On the consumer side of the market, the much wider array of lenders and mortgage contracts

to choose from made mortgage shopping much more challenging (Guttentag 2000). Mortgage

brokers, by consolidating information on multiple products from multiple lenders, offered

consumers a convenient way to examine a variety of home loans for which they were financially

qualified. The result was the creation of a viable intermediary role and rapid growth in the mortgage

broker industry.

       The transformation of the U.S. mortgage market after 1980 created significant benefits for

U.S. consumers by increasing homeownership and improving the efficiency of mortgage processing

(Gerardi, Rosen, and Willen 2007; U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2002), and

mortgage brokers can claim a share of the credit. They serve millions of customers from all parts of

society, and their repeat business and the multiyear growth in their market share through 2006

suggest that many of their customers have been pleased with their services. Brokers have helped to

                                                  7
shorten the loan closing process and to make it cheaper, and they have enabled the mortgage

industry to meet enormous fluctuations in demand. However, the transformation of the mortgage

industry created some new problems, and mortgage brokers are also blamed for some of these.

         Critics of mortgage brokers generally focus on incentive problems stemming from the fact

that the broker is a intermediary whose pay depends directly on the size and number of loans

originated and only indirectly on whether the borrower got a good deal and also makes payments as

expected (Schloemer et al. 2006). The incentive issues arise because of information asymmetries

among the borrower, lender, and broker. Studies have repeatedly shown, for example, that

borrowers are very confused by the language and terms of mortgage contracts and related

documentation (Pappalardo and Lacko 2007, Woodward 2003, Guttentag 2000). Borrowers

frequently fail to understand basic facts about the mortgages they have signed and are even more

confused about the other mortgage options available to them. Many are willing to follow the advice

of a professional, such as a mortgage broker, even though they may be unable to verify the quality

of the advice even after the fact (Pappalardo and Lacko 2007, Kim-Sung and Hermanson 2003).

This creates an opportunity for professionals, including mortgage brokers,6 to abuse that trust by,

for example, recommending a mortgage that has a higher interest rate than the customer actually

qualifies for, in order to obtain a higher fee. The following are among the most frequently cited

consumer issues regarding mortgage brokers (and others with the same incentives):


    1. Brokers steer borrowers “to mortgages that provide higher compensation to the broker but

         are not necessarily the lowest cost or most advantageous to the consumer” (El Anshasy,

         Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005, p. 4; also Apgar, Bendimerad, and Essene 2007; Essene

         and Apgar 2007;; and Schloemer et al. 2006), and they do so deliberately and


6
  This potential is not limited to mortgage brokers, however. It extends to loan officers at mortgage lending banks when
they are paid incentives based on the size and interest rate of the loans they originate.

                                                           8
       disproportionately with subprime, minority, elderly, or poorly informed customers (Kim-

       Sung and Hermanson 2003; Jackson and Burlingame 2007; Ernst, Bocian, and Li 2008;

       Woodward 2008).

   2. They market aggressively to maximize origination fees, in particular by persuading

       borrowers to take loans they can not afford or to refinance too frequently (Kim-Sung and

       Hermanson 2003; El Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005).

   3. They receive fees from borrowers and lenders that are more than commensurate with

       services rendered (Apgar, Bendimerad, and Essene 2007; Essene and Apgar 2007,

       Schloemer et al. 2006), especially from minority (Jackson and Burlingame 2007) or

       unsophisticated (Guttentag 2000) borrowers.


       Asymmetric information also makes lenders concerned about the quality of mortgage

brokers’ services. Brokers’ fees are usually paid only if and when loans are closed. Thus brokers’

immediate incentives are to earn their fees by getting lenders to approve and close loans, and they

do not have a direct stake in subsequent loan performance. These incentives have been seen as

raising the following major issues for lenders regarding brokers:

   1. Brokers may corrupt the information about the borrower that is submitted for underwriting

       in order to increase the chances that the lender will approve the loan (Apgar, Bendimerad,

       and Essene 2007; El Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005), with the result that loans

       handled by brokers are more likely to default than loans processed by the lender’s own loan

       officers (Alexander et al. 2002). The incomplete or inaccurate information can arise from

       either carelessness or deliberate misrepresentation or fraud (Schloemer et al. 2006).

   2. Contrary to contractual agreements with their lender clients, they encourage the client’s

       existing borrowers to refinance, so that prepayment rates on the lender’s broker-originated



                                                  9
       mortgages are higher than on mortgages originated by the lender’s own loan officers

       (LaCour-Little and Chun 1999).

       In principle, private actions within the marketplace can mitigate these consumer and lender

information and incentive problems and correct or alleviate the market failures that have been

alleged. For example, over time lenders can monitor the quality of the loans submitted by a given

broker and either stop dealing with or pay lower fees to inferior brokers. Although some lenders

began monitoring in this way, industry experts assert that, at least until recently, these efforts have

not been sufficiently strict or widespread to significantly change aggregate outcomes (Alexander et

al. 2002; Apgar, Bendimerad, and Essene 2007). Some lenders mitigated losses by pricing broker-

originated loans differently, using higher interest rates on these loans to offset default risk or

imposing prepayment penalties to offset higher prepayment risk (Alexander et al. 2002), but

prepayment penalties became controversial in their own right. On the consumer side, confusion

about mortgages contributed to enhanced efforts at homebuyer financial education, but with only

limited results. Guttentag (2000) suggested a new contractual arrangement, the Upfront Mortgage

Broker, under which mortgage brokers would serve as the borrower’s agent in return for fixed, fully

disclosed fees. So far only a small fraction of brokers work under this arrangement. In short, as of

2007 it appears that market responses have not eliminated concerns about bad outcomes caused by

asymmetric information and incentive conflicts in the mortgage broker market. Partly as a result,

many mortgage lenders have cut back on or ceased accepting broker-originated loans, exacerbating

the steep decline in mortgage brokering since 2006.

III. Theory and Previous Studies of Licensing

       With private responses not eliminating concerns about mortgage broker incentives and

actions, public policymakers have entered the fray. The federal financial regulatory agencies have

promulgated new guidelines and requirements regarding mortgage information disclosures and

                                                    10
subprime loan underwriting and pricing. Many states and local governments have enacted so-called

anti-predatory-lending laws that restrict mortgage interest rates, fees, and contract terms. In

addition, state legislators and regulators, often with the support and help of mortgage broker trade

associations, have broadened and tightened the requirements for mortgage broker firms and

individual loan officers to obtain the licenses that they need to operate legally. Then, in the Housing

and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, Congress established new minimum requirements for state

mortgage broker registration and regulation. In this section, we review theories and previous

empirical studies of occupational licensing. In the following sections, we summarize the specifics of

mortgage broker licensing in the United States and assess how state differences in mortgage broker

licensing are associated with outcomes in the labor and mortgage markets.

Theories of occupational licensing.

       The simplest theory of occupational licensing draws more on principles of mechanics or

administrative procedure than on economics. It envisions an essentially costless supply of unbiased,

capable gatekeepers and enforcers. The gatekeepers screen entrants to the profession, barring those

whose skills or character suggests a tendency toward low-quality output. The enforcers monitor

incumbents and discipline those whose performance is below standards, with punishments that may

include revocation of the license needed to practice. Assuming that entry and ongoing performance

are controlled in these ways, the quality of service in the profession will almost automatically be

maintained at or above standards.

       We can add some economics to this otherwise mechanical model by noting that a key

discipline on incumbents—the threat of loss of license—may not mean much if incumbents can

easily reenter the profession, such as by moving to a new firm or state, or shift to an alternative

occupation with little loss of income. For example, if sales skills are the key to both mortgage

brokering and selling cars, then individuals may shift between these lines of work with little loss of

                                                   11
income.7 Under these circumstances, meaningful discipline may require deliberate steps to ensure

that loss of license entails significant financial loss. Such additional steps could include imposition

of fines, improved screening to prevent expelled practitioners from reentering the occupation, or

requiring all incumbents to put up capital that would be forfeited upon loss of license.8 To offset the

possibility that incumbents could shift to other occupations with little loss of income, entry

requirements could be tightened to limit supply and create monopoly rents within the licensed

occupation. The threat of losing these monopoly rents could, in principle, give incentives to

incumbents to maintain standards. The rents also could motivate potential entrants to invest in high

levels of training in order to gain admittance. This suggests that licensing can raise quality within an

industry by restricting supply and raising prices.

        Friedman (1962) questioned the assumption of unbiased gatekeepers and enforcers and

viewed licensing’s entry restrictions and monopoly rents as purely negative. He argued that

licensing systems are almost always run by and for incumbents, so that gatekeepers and enforcers

are in reality self-interested. Their vested interests lead them to not only create monopoly rents

through restrictions on entry but also to stifle complaints and disciplinary procedures against most

incumbents. Weak discipline on incumbents, along with artificially high client-provider ratios, lead

to a decrease in the overall quality of service that consumers receive. In other words, Friedman

predicts that licensing reduces the size of an occupation and leads to a combination of higher fees

for providers and lower quality for consumers. Friedman also stresses that the proper measure of


7
  An experienced mortgage broker, quoted in McGarity 2001 (p. 41), complains about “brokers who pop in and out of
the market,” claiming that they are often the ones who abuse borrowers and noting, “People think they can make a quick
buck, but they’re not in it for the long haul. We’ll see every shoe salesman and photocopier salesman will all of a
sudden be a mortgage broker, but come next year they’ll all be gone.”
8
  Steps along these lines have been or are being taken by mortgage broker licensing authorities. Financial regulators
from about forty states are currently cooperating on a new software application that will make it easier to track
individual mortgage brokers and loan officers as they seek to change the firms or states in which they work (Conference
of State Bank Supervisors 2007). Many states already require mortgage brokers to maintain a physical presence in each
state in which they operate or to maintain a commercial surety bond. Potential loss of professional esteem may also be a
deterrent (Kandel and Lazear 1992).

                                                          12
quality is the overall quality of services received by consumers, not the average quality of services

provided by licensed providers, because licensing, by raising prices within the licensed occupation,

may cause consumers to seek substitute services from nonlicensed occupations that provide lower-

quality output. Friedman’s analysis led him to conclude that licensing had no useful role, except

possibly in very limited circumstances involving externalities.9

         In the 1980s, Akerlof’s (1970) analysis of how information asymmetries about the quality of

goods could lead to adverse selection and the predominance of low-quality goods in unregulated

markets spurred the development of new theories of occupational licensing. The new models ignore

Friedman’s concerns about self-interest and also largely disregard the disciplining of incumbents in

order to focus on more realistic modeling of the capabilities of gatekeepers.10 In particular, they

assume that neither regulators nor consumers can directly observe the quality of producers ex ante.

These models then explore how the theory of licensing changes when entry barriers depend only on

information that might realistically be observed. The new models include not only unobserved

heterogeneity in quality among producers but also heterogeneous tastes for quality among

consumers. The new models yield a mixed perspective on the effects of licensing: licensing can

increase the average quality of service within the occupation, but this change benefits some

consumers, such as those with high preferences for quality, and harms others.

         In some of the new models, licensing requirements take the form of unspecified fixed costs

controlled by the licensing authority, broadly similar to typical licensing requirements such as

payment of an annual licensing fee or maintenance of a surety bond. In one highly cited model

(Shapiro 1986), skill affects the relative cost of producing high-quality services, and licensing takes

the more specific form of a minimal human capital requirement, similar to actual requirements that
9
  It is arguable that mortgage markets are subject to material externalities, to the extent that foreclosures impose
significant costs on third parties and these costs are not considered by the parties directly involved in originating risky
mortgages (Apgar, Duda, and Nawrocki Gorey 2005; Gramlich 2007).
10
   In fact, a common assumption of these models, as in Shapiro 1986 or Rogerson 1986, is that quality is chosen at the
time of entry and cannot be changed thereafter, so that enforcement of standards on incumbents is meaningless.

                                                             13
entrants and sometimes incumbents take certain training programs or pass an exam. Apart from

these special fixed costs, entry into and exit out of the occupation are unrestricted, which ensures

that providers earn zero profits in equilibrium.

        The basic idea is as illustrated in Figure 2, which is loosely based on Shapiro (1986). The

horizontal axis represents a fixed unit mass of consumers uniformly distributed from lowest

preference for quality services, corresponding to zero, to highest, corresponding to one. Each

consumer consumes one unit of service per period.11 Consumers can choose among three markets: a

market for mature producers known to sell high-quality services, a market for mature producers

known to produce low-quality services, and a market for young producers whose quality of service

(low or high) is not known by the consumer at time of purchase. The figure shows the aggregate

demand curve for services in the low-quality-only market relative to the left vertical axis (with

number of units demanded measured to the right of the origin on the horizontal axis) and for

services in the high-quality-only market in mirror-image form relative to the right vertical axis (with

units of demand measured to the left of the point (1,0) on the horizontal axis). In the initial steady-

state equilibrium, a quantity QL is sold in the low-quality-only market for price PL, a quantity QH is

sold in the high-quality-only market for price PH, and a quantity 1-QL-QH is sold in the mixed-

quality market at the blended price [QL/(QL + QH)]* PL + [QH/(QL + QH)]* PH (whose weights

reflect the proportions of low- and high-quality producers in the economy, which also prevail

among the new practitioners in the mixed market in steady state).

        Suppose an increased fixed cost (which might be a human capital requirement) is imposed

by the licensing authority. This makes low-quality production unprofitable at the initially prevailing

prices. In the new steady state, there are fewer mature low-quality producers, represented by Q′L,

and a higher price in the low-quality-only market, or P′L. With no other changes, this would raise

11
 Other models allow the total number of consumers and thus aggregate demand to vary; see Garcia-Fontes and
Hopenhayn (2000).

                                                       14
the blended price in the mixed-quality market and cause lifetime profits for high-quality producers

to exceed zero. Hence more producers choose to be high quality, raising output in the high-quality-

only market to Q′H and lowering price there to P′H. Consumers in the interval between QH and 1 are

clearly better off in the new steady state, because they consume the same high-quality service as in

the initial steady state but at a lower price. By similar logic, consumers in the interval between 0

and Q′L are clearly worse off. This illustrates how, in asymmetric models, licensing tends to

generate Pareto-noncomparable outcomes. However, the new models resemble the simple model

above in predicting, typically, that both the average quality and the average price of services within

the regulated industry will rise as licensing requirements are tightened. Thus, compared to the

simple model, the asymmetric-information models add more realistic assumptions about what

licensing gatekeepers can see or control and yield deeper insights into the welfare effects of

licensing, but their predictions regarding quality and price are similar.12

         In applying any of these theories to mortgage broker licensing, it is important to consider

what would be observed in the credit market if mortgage brokers provided higher quality services.

The nature of the service is to match a borrower and lender efficiently, so that loans are made with a

favorable combination of greater gains from trade and/or lower search-plus-processing costs than if

a broker had not been involved (Yavas 1994; Li 1998). However, because credit markets are also

subject to information asymmetries, the credit market results of high-quality brokering are

potentially counterintuitive. For example, higher quality might include that the broker provides the

lender with more complete and accurate information about the borrower, so that loans are

underwritten and priced more accurately. If so, it is conceivable that better brokers could be
12
  A possible effect not explicitly illustrated here is that the passage of tougher regulations not only raises providers’
costs but also shifts out the demand for their services, by enhancing consumers’ confidence that these services are of
good quality. In the model underlying Figure 2, this effect would operate in the market for young providers whose
quality is not yet known. An outward shift in demand would accentuate the increase in the price of services, boosting
provider incomes. In more general models where the total number of providers is endogenous, this effect can offset the
direct effect of higher production costs, so that the overall effect of tighter regulation on the number of providers
becomes ambiguous.

                                                            15
associated with a higher proportion of high-priced loans in the credit market, because lenders would

be more willing to price risk rather than ration credit if they had more trust in the information

brokers were submitting. In other words, the quality of mortgage brokering can affect the breadth of

the credit market and thus the range of creditworthiness among loan applicants and recipients, and

this can complicate the impact of higher quality brokering on some credit market outcomes.

       However, if we control for the creditworthiness of loan applicants, better brokering would

presumably be associated with lower search- and processing-related costs, such as a lower

percentage of loan applications being denied, a lower rate of bad matches that lead to delinquency

or foreclosure, and a shorter time between loan application and loan closing or denial. The effects of

better brokering on interest rates, controlling for creditworthiness, are less clear. Borrowers might

be willing to accept higher interest rates in a brokered transaction, compared to a nonbrokered

transaction, if there were more than offsetting reductions in search costs, just as lenders might be

willing to accept lower interest rates if there were more than offsetting reductions in marketing and

processing costs.

Previous evaluations of the effects of occupational licensing.

       Most studies of the influence of occupational licensing policies on the price of the

occupation’s service find a positive relationship (Cox and Foster, 1990), sometimes with no

improvement in quality. These studies cover policies ranging from restrictions on interstate

mobility, such as by limiting reciprocity, to restrictions on advertising and other commercial

practices (Shepard 1978; Feldman and Begun 1978; Bond et al. 1980; Kleiner, Gay, and Greene

1982). A review of empirical research on licensing found that licensing is associated with consumer

prices that are 4–35% higher, depending on the type of commercial practice and location (Kleiner

2006). In cross-sectional studies, the overall impact of occupational licensing on wages in licensed

relative to unlicensed occupations was found to be about 10–12%, with some estimates as high as

                                                   16
17% (Kleiner 2006; Kleiner and Krueger, 2008). Kleiner and Kudrle (2000), for example, found

that tougher state-level restrictions and more rigorous pass rates for dentists were associated with

hourly wage rates that were 15% higher than in states with few restrictions, with no measurable

increase in observable quality. Similarly, Barker (2007) found that higher state educational

standards for real estate brokers “raise broker income without improving the quality of service.”

       Although some general patterns can be seen, the range of outcomes described in existing

studies suggests that the effects of occupational licensing are sensitive to the form and strictness of

regulations as well as to the nature of the occupation. Thus, the effects of mortgage broker licensing

need to be directly measured. We are aware of only two studies that attempt to do this (El Anshasy,

Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005; Backley et al. 2006), and both are inconclusive, in part due to

limits in their data on mortgage broker licensing.

IV. Measurement of Mortgage Broker Licensing

       To associate mortgage broker licensing with market outcomes, we need measurements of the

extent of mortgage broker licensing. We rely heavily on Pahl’s (2007) compilation of these

regulations in the fifty states and the District of Columbia for the period 1996–2006. Pahl shows

that a wide range of licensing provisions may apply to mortgage brokerage firms (typically

partnerships, LLCs, or corporations) and sole proprietors, such as:

   1. The entity’s controlling individual(s) may be required to be of minimum age; maintain in-

       state residency; meet minimums for professional prelicensing education, experience, or

       examination results; provide evidence of ethical fitness and absence of criminal background;

       and/or complete required continuing education.

   2. The entity may be required to name an individual as managing principal, and the managing

       principal may be subject to requirements similar to those for controlling individuals as well




                                                     17
       as to requirements to maintain a minimum net worth or surety bond or to obtain a license as

       an individual mortgage broker or loan officer.

   3. The entity itself may be required to maintain a minimum net worth or a surety bond.

       Entities, sole proprietors, controlling individuals, and managing principals may be required

       to pay fees for licensing, application processing, application investigation, or license

       renewal.

   4. Entities and sole proprietors may be required to meet minimum physical office

       requirements, such as maintaining a physical office in states where they operate.

       To open a branch office, entities and sole proprietors may be required to provide

       notification, obtain a license or certificate, pay various fees, maintain branch-specific

       amounts of net worth and/or surety bonds, and/or name a branch manager who may be

       required to meet provisions similar to those above for managing principals. In some states,

       the loan officers who work for mortgage brokerage firms may also be required to meet

       standards of the same type as those listed above for managing principals, but often at a lower

       level. Additional provisions may specify that a loan officer can only work for one firm at a

       time. However, some states allow certain other professionals, such as real estate agents or

       attorneys, to engage in some aspects of mortgage brokering without obtaining a specific

       mortgage broker license; these exemptions may be subject to limits on the maximum

       number or volume of loans brokered.

       For each state and the District of Columbia for each year from 1996 through 2006, Pahl

assigns an integer value for the intensity of each of twenty-four regulatory components. Most of the

components deal with human capital requirements. For example, regarding the controlling

individuals in mortgage broker firms, Pahl codes separate intensities for prelicensing education,

prelicensing experience, prelicensing examinations, and continuing education requirements. She

                                                  18
codes the same four variables for managing principals, branch managers, and the firms’ employees,

for a total of sixteen human capital components. Three components reflect, respectively, the degree

of individual licensing required of managing principals, branch managers, and employees. At the

firm level, Pahl codes the intensity of both net worth and surety bonding requirements and

separately codes the intensity of surety bonding required for branches. Finally, she codes whether

an in-state office is required and the extent of exemptions that allow other professions to engage in

mortgage brokering activities.

         We use two overall indices of the intensity of mortgage broker regulation in a state: a simple

sum of all twenty-four of Pahl’s individual intensity values (the summated rating scale) and a

statistically weighted index (Rasch index).13 In a reduced-form sense, we can capture the major

regulatory provisions affecting the occupation using both linear (summated rating scale) and

nonlinear (Rasch index) measures of the system.

         In addition to these composite indices, we also examine subsets of Pahl’s twenty-four

regulatory components.14 Much of our analysis includes a dollar-valued measure of the bonding and

net worth regulations, which we created by examining the details of each state’s requirements and

selecting what we judged to be the smallest dollar option by which new entrants could meet the

bonding and net worth requirements.15 We sometimes pair this measure with an index of all other

requirements, constructed by subtracting the bonding and net worth indices from the composite

indices. We have also examined other sub-indices and individual components, such as for the
13
   This index is from a Rasch-type model (Andrich 1988) that places each of the variables within a logical structure
based on frequency of outcome and an integer scale. The empirical measure of the Rasch model we use is known as a
partial credit model, a nonlinear model that assigns weights that are consistent with an implicit structure to the
regulatory system. This approach assumes that the distance between parameters is equal and that the categories are
equal integers. The development of the Rasch scale uses maximum likelihood estimation to calculate a unique index for
each state.
14
   The anatomy of the regulatory system for brokers by state is generally consistent. Simple correlations among the
individual items in our index were mostly positive, and a large number were statistically significant. None of the
negative correlations among the components of the index were statistically significant.
15
   The values we chose are listed in Appendix 1. Our focus on the barriers facing small entrants aligns with the evidence
noted above that during most of our study period the industry grew on the extensive margin while the average mortgage
brokerage remained small.

                                                           19
provisions regarding training and examinations, provisions that apply only to the management of

brokerage firms, provisions that limit brokerage firm branches, and provisions that apply only to

employees of brokerage firms. As discussed in Appendix 4, some of these other regulatory variables

were significant in regressions with one or more of our labor and mortgage market dependent

variables, and in a few cases their presence materially weakened the significance of the bonding and

net worth variable. Further research on some of them seems warranted, but we focus on the bonding

and networth provisions because we judged them to show the broadest and most consistent pattern

of significant relationships with market outcomes.

       Table 1 shows the top and bottom five states ranked by the restrictiveness of their summated

scale of mortgage broker licensing. Florida has the most statutory provisions regulating mortgage

brokers. The five states with the least restrictive statutes in 2004, such as Alaska and Wyoming, are

less populous. Texas and Montana had the greatest increase in the regulation of mortgage brokers

during the period 1999–2004. In general, larger industrial states were more likely to impose

regulatory provisions on mortgage brokers.

       Figure 3 shows the more general growth and variation of regulation over time from 1996 to

2006, using a box-and-whisker plot. The mean value of the summated rating scale for all states was

3.2 in 1996 and increased to almost 8 by 2005. The variations in state practices also rose. As the

membership in the occupation expanded in response to growth in the demand for broker services,

more states began regulating the members of the occupation. This may have occurred because

members in the occupation sought regulation or because of public concern about brokers allegedly

charging excessive fees or leading customers into overly risky loans.

       Because of their significance for our analysis, it is important to understand the nature of




                                                  20
bonding requirements.16 When brokers are required to have a bond of say, $50,000, this typically

means that they pay an annual premium, ranging from several hundred to a few thousand dollars, to

a surety bond company. It does not mean that the broker must own and place in trust a fixed-income

security with a market value of $50,000. Under specified conditions of broker nonperformance of

duties spelled out in the governing laws and regulations, third parties, such as the broker’s

customers, may collect up to the amount of the bond from the surety company. The role of the

surety company is to ensure that a valid claim will be promptly paid.17 If this occurs, the surety

company will seek full compensation from the broker for the amount it paid out to the third party,

plus expenses. The broker’s annual premium is thus a fee paid to guarantee a line of contingent

credit up to a legally required amount. In setting the annual premium it charges a broker, a surety

company considers both the expected value of claims against the broker and the probability of

collecting from the broker for any amounts paid out. Consequently, the bond company may conduct

detailed screening of applicants, similar to credit underwriting, before issuing the bond.

         We speculate that this screening could make bonding one of the most significant barriers to

entry in states requiring bonds of $50,000 and more, especially given that the educational

requirements for mortgage brokers may not be very demanding. Some support for this view comes

from Barker’s (2007) finding that state bonding requirements mattered in a related occupation—real

estate brokerage—where they were associated with higher quality service, as measured by a lower

rate of consumer complaints. An industry expert, David Olson (2007), provides additional support.

He notes that one factor that kept mortgage brokers from originating many Federal Housing

Administration (FHA) mortgages was FHA’s requirement that originators provide a formal audit,

costing about $5,000 each year. He suggests that more mortgage brokers would originate FHA

16
   For background on the market for surety bonds in general and mortgage broker surety bonds in particular, see
www.jwsuretybonds.com.
17
   Surety companies investigate the validity of claims before paying out. We are referring here to claims they consider
valid.

                                                           21
loans if this audit requirement were dropped in favor of having brokers maintain a $75,000 surety

bond. For established mortgage brokers with good credit, the cost of this bond would be about $750,

but Olson notes that “Brokers with low net worth and fewer years in the business will have a more

difficult time getting a bond at all.” In such cases, the broker could seek a more costly bond from a

surety company that specializes in serving higher-risk clients, but their premiums often reach 10 –

15% of the amount of the bond, compared to 1 – 2% for low-risk mortgage brokers. Thus, on just a

$50,000 bond, a high-risk premium could match or exceed the $5,000 audit cost that Olson judged

to be prohibitive for most brokers.

V. Methods

       We fit multivariate statistical models of mortgage broker labor market variables and

consumer mortgage market variables. These two classes of dependent variables are regressed on

measures of state mortgage broker regulations and variables intended to control for other factors

affecting these markets. Our analysis takes two main forms: panel data analyses using repeated

annual cross sections of labor and mortgage market data, and cross-sectional analyses of hundreds

to thousands of individual mortgages issued in 2005. Most of the panel data regressions utilize just

state-level average data, but for mortgage broker earnings we combine observations on individual

mortgage professionals with state averaged data. The panel data regressions allow for fixed effects

in each state as well as time trends. State-level fixed effects cannot be included in our cross-

sectional regressions, due to collinearity with our regulatory variables. As a check on our results, we

reestimate our cross-sectional regressions on a sample restricted to mortgages just in metropolitan

statistical areas (MSAs) that cross state boundaries, so that we can include MSA fixed effects.

VI. Results

Panel data results for labor market variables.

       Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for key labor market variables as well as other

                                                   22
mortgage market and regulatory variables used in our analysis. The table shows the growth in

occupational regulation and a measure of hourly wages and earnings from the annual American

Community Survey (ACS) of mortgage brokers and related lending professionals.18 We take

advantage of the variation across both space and time to analyze relationships between the intensity

of licensing and key labor market variables such as mortgage brokers’ employment (relative to the

population) and earnings. These relationships could be either positive or negative, based on the

theories discussed above. An additional complication, not reflected in the theoretical models, is that

brokers may accelerate entry into the occupation before the standards become fully effective,

leading to a spurious positive relationship between subsequent regulation and the number of

practitioners in the short run.19

         We begin by relating regulation to the employment of brokers and related lending

professionals. Table 3 shows the relationship between bonding and net worth requirements and

state-level employment from 2000 to 2005. Our measure of employment based on the ACS is the

number of mortgage brokers and related lending professionals per capita by state. We use pooled

time series and cross-section data that allow us to estimate fixed-effects models with a set of human

capital, labor market, and service market state controls.20 Our results show that the bonding/net

worth requirement is significant and negatively associated with employment. Using the values at the

mean of the distribution, we find that doubling the bonding requirement is associated with an 8 to


18
   The ACS is conducted annually by the Census Bureau and replicates the long form on the decennial Census. It
provides large samples of individuals even for relatively detailed occupational classifications such as loan officers and
brokers. As a check on the results using the ACS, we also use the Occupation Employment Survey (OES), which
produces employment and wage estimates for over 800 occupations by state on a biennial basis from 1999 on. The OES
also includes a category for loan officers and brokers. In both the ACS and OES, the data we use include mortgage loan
officers and agents, collection analysts, loan servicing officers, and loan underwriters. These state OES figures are
highly correlated (r=.81) with the National Mortgage Broker Association’s count of membership by state. Similar high
correlations were found between National Mortgage Broker Association memberships and the ACS figures we use.
19
   This was the case in accounting, where anticipated new regulations resulted in a surge of applicants just before more
stringent education requirements took effect (Cummings and Rankin 1999).
20
   We find that neither the linear summated rating scale nor the Rasch index is significantly related to mortgage broker
employment at the state level. We also estimate random effects for our models (available from the authors). The basic
findings hold whether the specification is fixed or random effects.

                                                           23
10% decrease in the number of brokers and related lending professionals in the state relative to the

population.

         The bonding requirement may have a stronger relationship to employment than the other

licensing components for several reasons. It may be both relatively onerous and easily enforced “up

front” and thus may reduce entry into the occupation. We also find that states with older mortgage

brokers and related lending professionals were the ones with lower per capita levels of employment

within the occupation. This may simply reflect the fact that most new entrants are younger, so that

impeding entry tends both to age the profession and reduce employment. It could also be that, as the

occupation matures and public policies on regulation evolve, the political clout of mortgage brokers

will grow, possibly leading to adoption of more rigorous educational and experience requirements

that will complement those on bonding.21

         Restricting entry could have direct effects on earnings. To examine this relationship, we

estimate the association between the bonding requirements and annual earnings, using individual-

level data in the ACS. Table 4 presents estimates of the relationship between regulation and annual

earnings from 2000 to 2005 using the individual practitioner data for each year. The basic earnings

equation can be stated as follows:

         1) Ln (Earningsit) = a + b1Rit + b2Xit + uit,

where Earningsit are the annual earnings of person i in time period t; Rit is the tightness of mortgage

broker licensing through bonding and net worth requirements in person i’s state in time period t; the

vector Xit includes covariates measuring characteristics of each person and state, along with year

time trends; uit is the error term; and a, b1, and b2 are the coefficients we estimate.


21
  We also estimated a quasi-difference-in-difference model to analyze mortgage broker employment changes in states
that adopted a mortgage broker licensing law or substantially increased the restrictiveness of the law (e.g., a change of
three using our summated rating scale). We found no statistically significant relationships for the summated index or the
bonding variable. We think that the noise relative to signal in these change results influenced the lack of precision in
these estimates, which are available from the authors.

                                                           24
        We find a positive relationship between mortgage broker licensing and mortgage broker

earnings ranging from an imprecisely estimated 7% to a marginally significant 6%.22, 23 As shown in

the table, the coefficients on the nonregulatory explanatory variables were consistent with the labor

economics and human capital literature. In column two, we present a standard human capital model

with experience and education included, and find that the coefficient values for bonding/networth

sum to 0.07 but are not significant. In column 4, we assume that bonding requirements could affect

selection into the occupation, potentially restricting entry to more educated and experienced brokers.

In this case, education and experience of brokers could be outcomes of regulation that should not be

controlled in the earnings regression. In column four, the bonding/net worth coefficient is

statistically significant at the .10 level with a value of 0.06. This suggests that bonding requirements

also may influence the level of education and experience and that may be, in part, impacting the

earnings of brokers.

        Below we find that tighter bonding/net worth requirements also are associated with lower

volumes of loans processed and a higher percentage of high-priced loans originated. One

interpretation of this set of results is that the demand for mortgage broker services is approximately

of unit elasticity, so that as the numbers of brokers and loans processed contract, brokers’ fees per

loan processed rise by enough to just offset the lower loan volume and higher operating costs that

result from tighter licensing, leaving the average broker’s net earnings only slightly higher.

Panel data results for mortgage market variables.

22
   Estimates for hourly earnings showed generally similar results. We use total earnings in our estimates because of the
variable nature of compensation for brokers that are commission-based. In addition, since many brokers are in small
offices where profits are shared, the earnings variable would capture this form of compensation. Further, as an
additional test for robustness of our results, we estimated the logarithm of earnings as a dependent variable and the
logarithm of the ACS measure of state population as an independent variable and found results similar to those shown in
Table 3. These estimates are also available from the authors.
23
   Estimates for changes in licensing and changes in wages also showed no statistically significant impact. In none of
the earnings or wage estimates were the licensing index variables significant when we used state-level controls. We also
estimated nonlinear models of the licensing variables, and they were also not significant. Further, tests using the OES
found significance for the licensing variables only when the Xit controls are omitted. The estimates also are available
from the authors.

                                                          25
       We also investigated the relationship between mortgage broker licensing and the volume of

subprime lending and rate of mortgage foreclosures. As discussed above, stricter licensing could

reduce the number of subprime loans, for example by restricting the number or work effort of

mortgage brokers. Alternatively, stricter licensing could boost effective loan demand by enhancing

the quality of broker services and thereby increasing the willingness of marginal borrowers to step

forward. To probe these potential outcomes, we estimated the following model:

       2) Ln(sp-loans originatedit) = α + β1Rit + β2Xit + µit,

where sp-loans originatedit is the number of new subprime mortgages in state i over period t; Rit are

the state-level mortgage broker licensing indices in time period t; the vector Xit includes covariates

measuring the characteristics of each state, along with year time trends; µit is the error term; and α,

β1, and β2 are the coefficients we estimate. Subprime loans originated were measured as the number

of all originations in a state for a given year that were made by lenders on the U.S. Department of

Housing and Urban Development’s list for that year, or for the most recent prior year available, of

institutions whose mortgage activity is primarily in the subprime market.

       The state fixed-effects results estimated over 2001-2005 with the bonding/net worth

requirements are presented in Table 5. The results show that two-lag specification of bonding

requirements is associated with fewer loans originated. These estimates are consistent with those on

employment. We find that imposing bonding requirements correlates with fewer brokers and fewer

subprime loans originated in the state. Quantitatively, our coefficients imply that a doubling of the

mean bonding requirement to approximately $54,000 would be associated with a cut in the number

of subprime loans originated by about 220,000 per year in 2004, or approximately 9%.

       If there are fewer loans with stricter licensing, does the quality of those loans, as measured

by fewer negative outcomes such as foreclosures, also vary with licensing requirements? If state

licensing improves the quality of broker services, the effects might include more appropriate loan

                                                   26
selection and more accurate loan underwriting, resulting in fewer foreclosures. Alternatively,

foreclosures could be positively correlated with tighter licensing, perhaps because a reduced

availability of brokers leads to less accurate underwriting or because states that have higher

foreclosure rates for other reasons (e.g., low or volatile incomes) are more likely to enact tighter

restrictions. To assess these possibilities, we estimate two versions of the following model with

regard to owner-occupied properties, one for just subprime mortgages and one for all mortgages:

       3) Home Foreclosuresit = α + β1Rit + β2Xit + µit,

where Home Foreclosuresit is the percentage of mortgages (on owner-occupied properties) in

foreclosure for state i over period t (as measured in the National Delinquency Survey of the

Mortgage Bankers Association of America, 1979–2005); Rit are the state-level measures of

mortgage broker bonding/net worth requirements in time period t; the vector Xit includes covariates

measuring characteristics of each state, along with year time trends; µit is the error term; and α, β1,

and β2 are the coefficients we estimate.

       As shown in Table 6 for the estimation period January 1999 through 2004, we find a

significant positive relationship between bonding/net worth requirements and foreclosure rates for

both subprime and all mortgages when state-level labor market and service market factors are also

controlled for. The estimates are consistent with the view, discussed above, that occupational

regulation reduces the quality of an occupation’s output. However, our results do not clarify the

mechanism by which mortgage broker bonding would lead to higher foreclosures.

       We have noted that the positive relationship between bonding and foreclosures could arise

because states enact bonding or net worth requirements in response to previous periods of high

foreclosure. As a check on this possibility (Autor 2003), we estimated the relationship between

lagged subprime and lagged overall foreclosures and subsequent passage of a bonding or net worth

requirement. Table 7, using a Weibull hazard model with similar covariates to those in Tables 5 and

                                                   27
6, shows that the relationship is not statistically significant, indicating an absence of this form of

simultaneity bias.24

        One final issue we address in this section is presented in Table 8, which shows the

relationship of bonding/net worth requirements to home ownership. Using the same type of model

as Table 6, we estimate the relationship of mortgage broker bonding/net worth requirements and

home ownership. We find that income is positively related to home ownership, but that there is no

statistically significant relationship between our measures of regulation and home ownership.

Although bonding may matter for the quantity and quality of subprime mortgages, it does not seem

to vary with the overall rate of state home ownership. This might reflect the fact that mortgage

originations are flow variables and hence can change more from year to year than a stock variable

like home ownership.

Cross-sectional data results for mortgage market variables.

        Brokers have short-term incentives to sell high-priced loans to consumers. The federal

banking regulators track high-priced loans through the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)

data collection, which records most home mortgage applications and originations in the United

States. We focus on first-lien mortgages in our analysis. A high-priced first-lien mortgage is defined

as one whose annual percentage rate (APR) is 3 or more percentage points above the

contemporaneous thirty-year Treasury bond yield. APR is defined essentially as an internal rate of

return, taking into account initial fees and introductory rates and setting any index variables in the

contract at current market values, assuming they remain constant for the scheduled maturity of the

loan.

        If mortgage broker licensing succeeds in protecting consumers, high-priced loans may be

24
  Appendix 2 discusses evidence that the political initiatives leading to higher mortgage broker bonding requirements
are often led by industry associations or state regulators, rather than consumer groups, although consumer issues and
competing consumer regulatory proposals sometimes serve to motivate mortgage broker associations to put forward
their own bonding proposals. Causality may involve complicated feedback chains and substantial time delays.

                                                          28
reduced.25 However, as discussed in our theory section, this is not the only possible outcome, and

the theoretical effects of licensing regulations are ambiguous.

        We assess the empirical relationship between mortgage broker regulation and the probability

that a mortgage will be high-priced. We primarily consider broker-originated loans. We could, in

addition, assess how broker regulation affects the chance that any mortgage, brokered or not, is

high-priced. This also would be plausible, since mortgage brokers compete strongly with other

mortgage origination providers. However, looking at the entire mortgage market could weaken our

ability to detect the direct effects of mortgage broker regulation, so we prefer to focus as closely as

we can on broker-originated mortgages.

        Focusing on brokered mortgages, however, confronts us with the problem that the HMDA

data do not indicate whether a mortgage was brokered. We use two strategies to proxy for this

missing information. For federally regulated banks and thrifts, we use the borrowers’ location

(available at the Census tract level from the HMDA data) to condition on whether the loan was

made outside the lender’s Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) assessment area. Under the CRA,

federally regulated banks and thrifts must declare an assessment area where the degree of services

they provide will be evaluated for compliance with the CRA. Typically these areas include the

lender’s principal retail offices, and lenders generally have fewer offices outside their assessment

area. Federally regulated lenders are presumed to rely on their retail offices to originate the majority

of their mortgages within their assessment areas but to rely much more on brokers to reach

mortgage customers outside their assessment areas (Avery, Brevoort, and Canner 2006; Apgar,

Bendimerad, and Essene 2007). Accordingly, for federally regulated banks and thrifts, we focus on



25
  Two separate studies, based on proprietary data from selected major lenders’ mortgages originated in 2002, suggest
that, on average, consumers using brokers did get lower-priced loans than other borrowers, when other factors were
controlled for. See El Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki (2005) and LaCour-Little (2007a). Results to the contrary
were found by LaCour-Little (2007b).

                                                          29
mortgages originated outside each reporting lender’s CRA assessment area.26

          For mortgage banks not subject to the CRA, we rely on reports from industry publications

and industry experts to identify a set of lenders known to rely almost exclusively on mortgage

brokers for loan applications. For one lender, Option One, we have confirmed with a senior

employee that in 2005, the year we study, the firm obtained almost all of its mortgage applications

through brokers. An industry expert, Thomas LaMalfa of Wholesale Access, helped us identify nine

other “broker-dependent” mortgage originators in 2005: Taylor, Bean, and Whitaker Mortgage Co.;

First Magnus Financial Corporation; American Mortgage Network; Loan City; Green Point

Mortgage Funding; Argent Mortgage Company; New Century Mortgage Corporation; Nova Star

Home Mortgage; and Résumé.27

          In Tables 9 and 10, we estimate linear probability models for whether a loan is high-priced

using four different data sets.28 We cluster observations by states to compute robust standard errors

that allow for less than full independence among the observations in each state. We control for the

state regulatory environment, borrower’s income and racial/ethnic identity, the loan amount, and

several economic and demographic properties of the Census tract where the property is located (the

distribution of credit scores, unemployment rate, median age, median age of housing stock, percent

minority population, median income, and the percentage of owner-occupied and vacant housing

units).

          For mortgage refinancing, the results are fairly consistent. However, there is a clear

difference in the size of the constant term, which is low for the CRA lenders outside their

assessment areas (0.10) and higher for the ten broker-dependent lenders (0.38). The 2005 national

26
   To keep the size of the data set manageable, we used a 50% random sample of the 2005 HMDA data from CRA-
regulated mortgage originators.
27
   Their respective HMDA respondent ID numbers are 7499100008; 7979400002; 1788100000; 7428900001; 13-
3210378; 1917700009; 7900200006; both 1512400000 and 1707500002 for Nova Star; and 1991500005. To make the
data more manageable, we again took a 50% random sample.
28
   We have estimated probit models for each of these regressions and obtained very similar results.

                                                     30
average was 0.26 for first-lien refinance mortgages. Although this gives a very different “starting

point” to the two refinancing regressions, the marginal effects of many of the explanatory variables

are similar. The coefficients on the mortgage broker regulatory variables for 2004 are of primary

interest here. In Tables 9 and 10, the coefficient on the bonding/net worth requirement is positive

and significant, indicating that a $100,000 increase in this requirement is associated with,

respectively, a 5.4 or a 3.5 percentage point increase in the probability that a refinancing is high-

priced. The coefficient on the index of other mortgage broker regulations is not significant in Table

9 but is marginally significant at a 10% level, with a negative coefficient, in Table 10.

           Our results for two other regulatory variables—an index of state anti-predatory-lending laws

and an indicator of states that prohibit deficiency judgments—are also consistent across the

refinancing regressions in Tables 9 and 10. The coefficient on the index of anti-predatory-lending

laws is negative but not significant at a 10% level. The coefficient on the indicator of no deficiency

judgments is significant but with an unexpected negative sign, suggesting that high-priced loans are

less likely in states that do not allow creditors to pursue deficiency judgments. A possible

explanation is that lenders ration credit more strictly in states that rule out deficiency judgments but

use risk-based pricing to lend to a wider selection of applicants where they have the right to pursue

a deficiency judgment.29

           The coefficient on the percentage of adults in the Census tract of the mortgaged property

who have very low credit scores is consistently positive and significant in Tables 9 and 10. A 10

percentage point increase in the percentage of adults in the tract with a very low score is associated

with about a 5–6 percentage point increase in the probability that a mortgage refinance loan in that




29
     We thank Karen Pence for bringing this possibility to our attention.

                                                              31
tract will be high-priced.30

         African-American, Hispanic, and female borrowers are significantly more likely to get a

high-priced mortgage refinancing than are non-Hispanic white male borrowers. The largest effect is

for African-American borrowers. For example, for mortgage refinance loans by federally regulated

banks and thrifts lending outside their CRA assessment areas, the probability of a high-priced loan

increases by 21 percentage points for an African-American borrower, compared to increases of 9

percentage points for Hispanics and 4 percentage points for women. For other racial groups, we find

no significant effects, except that Asian-Americans refinancing with the ten broker-dependent

lenders are about 6 percentage points less likely to get a high-priced loan.

         Our results for the regulatory variables are not as strong or as consistent with home-purchase

mortgages as with mortgage refinance loans. We again start with very different constant terms.

However, the bonding/net worth variable is positive and significant at a 10% level for the ten

broker-dependent lenders but has an insignificant and small negative coefficient for the CRA-

regulated lenders on loans outside their assessment areas. The index of the remaining mortgage

broker regulations is insignificant in the home-purchase regressions, as is the index of anti-

predatory-lending laws. The indicator of no deficiency judgments is again negative and significant

for the broker-dependent lenders, but it is now insignificant for the CRA-regulated lenders’ loans

outside their assessment areas. Apparently, the process for making home-purchase loans differs in

important ways from the process for making mortgage refinance loans, at least at the CRA-

regulated institutions.31

         In results not shown, but available from the authors, we repeated the estimates in Table 10

30
   In the full regression results underlying Tables 9 and 10, the coefficient on another credit score variable—the
percentage of adults with a credit file who lack a credit score—is significantly positive but smaller for the CRA-
regulated lenders but not significant for the ten broker-dependent lenders.
31
   For the home-purchase mortgages examined in Table 10, the coefficients on the credit score and racial/ethnic
variables have a pattern of statistical significance not too different than for the mortgage refinance loans in Table 9,
although the size of the coefficients often differs substantially.

                                                             32
for mortgages made within the CRA assessment areas of CRA-regulated lenders. None of the

regulatory variables were statistically significant, except the coefficient on the indicator of no

deficiency judgments was significant and positive for home-purchase mortgages. The insignificance

of the mortgage broker regulation variables in these regressions is consistent with our presumption

that loans within a CRA assessment area are much less likely to involve a mortgage broker. We

have no clear explanation yet for why the results for the indicator of no deficiency judgments

change. As Avery, Brevoort, and Canner (2006) note, CRA-regulated lenders’ mortgage

underwriting appears to be quite different inside, compared to outside, their assessment areas. They

speculate that one explanation may be the use of differing marketing channels, including greater use

of brokers outside assessment areas.

        To limit the potential effects of unmeasured location-specific effects, we reestimate with a

sample restricted to only observations in MSAs that straddle state borders, similar to the methods in

Holmes (1998) and Bostic et al. (2007). We have data on 51 MSAs that cross state boundaries,

touching parts of 39 states.32 We estimate the same equations as in Tables 9 and 10 but with fixed

effects for each MSA, which has the advantage of controlling for location-specific factors not

measured by our other variables, such as the percentage of loans with adjustable rates or the level or

rate of change in housing prices (LaCour-Little 2007c). This is useful, because the nature of our

interest rate data (a single cross section) precludes controlling for these factors by means of state

fixed effects (because they would be collinear with our state-level policy variables).

        For the data from the broker-dependent lenders, the results on the sample from multistate

MSAs for the bonding variable (and most of the other variables) are similar to those in Table 9.33 In

particular, for mortgage refinancing loans by the broker-dependent lenders, the coefficient on the
32
   Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Georgia, Idaho, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
33
   The parallels are even closer if we estimate on just the split MSAs but without fixed effects.

                                                        33
state broker bonding variable has a t-statistic of 2.05 and a coefficient of 0.048, compared to 0.054

in Table 9. For home-purchase mortgages from the same lenders, the coefficient on the bonding

variable has a 1.96 t-statistic and a coefficient of 0.041, compared to 0.050 in Table 9. By contrast,

for the sample from multistate MSAs, the results (with fixed effects) for refinanced mortgages by

the CRA lenders outside their assessment areas include an insignificant coefficient of just 0.01 on

the bonding variable, in contrast to the significant coefficient of 0.035 in Table 10. For home-

purchase loans by CRA lenders outside their assessment areas, the coefficient on the bonding

variable is -0.004 and insignificant for the multistate MSA sample with fixed effects, very similar to

the results in Table 10.

       Thus the results for Table 9, with data almost exclusively on broker-originated loans, are

reasonably robust to location-specific effects not explicitly controlled for in our model. These

results are also robust to the omission of data from the 12 states without multistate MSAs, including

California. However, the same is not true of our results for mortgage refinance loans by CRA

lenders outside their assessment areas, which probably consist of a mixture of broker-originated and

other loans. The coefficient on the bonding variable for those loans becomes marginally

insignificant when observations from the 12 states without border-crossing MSAs are dropped from

the full sample or when estimated on the multistate MSA sample without fixed effects. With fixed

effects on the multistate MSA sample, the coefficient becomes clearly insignificant.

VII. Conclusions

       Mortgage brokers are an emerging regulated occupation in the United States. About thirty

years ago, there were almost no mortgage brokers, because individuals who wanted a loan to buy or

refinance a house went to a bank or savings and loan. With deregulation of financial services and

technology improvements that allowed easy development and dissemination of credit scores, this




                                                  34
picture began to change, and in 2004 as much as two-thirds of all housing finance was initiated

through a mortgage broker.

       We examine the relationships between state regulation of mortgage brokers and outcomes in

the labor and mortgage markets. We find that the relationship between mortgage broker licensing

and market outcomes differs among the types of licensing requirements; in particular, financial

bonding or net worth requirements are associated with somewhat higher earnings, modest

reductions in the number of mortgage brokers and the number of subprime loans originated as well

as with somewhat higher foreclosure rates and higher interest rates on brokered loans.

       Further analysis is needed to more clearly establish whether these relationships are robust

and whether they reflect a causal link between broker regulation and market outcomes. However,

we would draw attention to a few features of the results presented above. First, the overall pattern of

our results suggests that requiring mortgage brokers to maintain a surety bond or a minimum net

worth may affect market outcomes, and that the net effects may not benefit consumers. Without a

deeper understanding of the causal linkages underlying our statistical associations, we cannot say

that bonding requirements are a bad idea, but we think our results underscore the need for both

more research on this topic and a cautious approach to imposing additional restrictions on entry into

the mortgage broker business and occupation.

       Our study period ends in 2006, just as U.S. foreclosure rates on nonprime adjustable rate

mortgages began to surge. Financial markets have reacted by raising the cost and cutting the

availability of funding for both subprime and mortgage-broker-originated mortgages. State

regulators have tightened regulations on mortgage contracts, mortgage origination, and mortgage

broker licensing as well, and the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 brings federal

oversight to mortgage broker licensing. Anecdotal and industry sources indicate that the number of

mortgage brokers and their market share have fallen substantially as a result. We speculate that

                                                  35
these developments could be part of a broader process by which the linkages between mortgage

broker regulation and market outcomes may well strengthen over time. Such a result would be

consistent with the findings of Law and Kim (2005) that showed that during the early periods of

occupational regulation in the United States, the monopoly impacts were modest. As in other

occupations that have evolved with near universal licensing in the states, surviving mortgage

brokers could also eventually benefit through higher earnings and the ability to control entry. We

anticipate that further analysis of the issue with updated statutes, statistical techniques, and better

measures of monitoring of the occupation may help policymakers assess the quality impacts and

monopoly implications of state regulations and whether federal regulation would provide a better

solution for consumers as well as the emerging occupation of mortgage brokers.




                                                    36
Figure 1: Growth of Subprime Loans and Loan Officers/Brokers



                                             6,000,000




                                                                                                                 300,000
                                                                                                                      number of loan officers/brokers employed
           number of subprime loans issued




                                                                                                                 280,000
                                             4,000,000




                                                                                                                 260,000
                                                                                                                 240,000
                                             2,000,000




                                                                                                                 220,000
                                                                                                                 200,000
                                             0




                                               1998q1    2000q1        2002q1             2004q1            2006q1
                                                                   Year and Quarter

                                                           subprime loans             loan officer/broker


Sources: The Occupation Employment Survey and the National Delinquency Survey of the Mortgage Bankers
Association of America.




                                                                            37
Figure 2: An Illustration of the Possible Effects of Raising Licensing Requirements




Key

ViL = the ith consumer’s utility of consuming low-quality services.
ViH = the ith consumer’s utility of consuming high-quality services.
QL = the quantity of services in the low-quality-only market.
QH = the quantity of services in the high-quality-only market.
PL = the price of services in the low-quality-only market.
PH = the price of services in the high-quality-only market.
DL = the demand curve for services in the low-quality-only market.
DH = the demand curve for services in the high-quality-only market (shown in mirror image).




                                                         38
Figure 3: Growth and Variation of Occupational Regulation by State over Time


                                          Summated Regulation Scores
               15
   Summated Regulation Score
      5        0   10




                               1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006


This box-and-whisker plot shows annual values of the median, interquartile range, and outliers of the summated rating
scale derived from Pahl’s (2007) catalogue of state (and District of Columbia) mortgage broker regulations. The line in
the middle of the box represents the median. The bottom and top edges of the box are the first and third quartile,
respectively. The whiskers extending from the box represent the most extreme point within the range of one and a half
times the interquartile range (the difference between the third and first quartile). The remaining points represent outliers
that do not fall within the range of the whiskers.




                                                             39
Table 1: Rankings of Top and Bottom Five Regulated States and Changes Using the Summated
Rating Scheme by State



               Top 5 regulated States 2004
               Florida                  16
               Montana                  14
               New Jersey               13
               Ohio                     12
               Texas                    12
               North Carolina           12
               Nevada                   12
               Bottom 5 regulated States 2004
               Colorado                  0
               Wyoming                   0
               Alaska                    0
               South Dakota              1
               Maine                     2

               Top 5 States by change in regulation 1999-2004
               Montana                  14
               Texas                    12
               North Carolina           11
               Oklahoma                  8
               Connecticut               7
               Nevada                    7
               Utah                      7




                                                40
Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Labor Market, Service Market, and Legal and Bonding
Provisions

                                                            2000                   2005
            State-Level and Individual Variables            Mean                   Mean
                                                            (S.D.)                 (S.D.)
            Broker/Loan Officer Hourly Wage                 20.12                  25.15
                                                           (12.74)                (16.87)
                                                          40,973.43              52,748.68
            Annual Broker/Loan Officer Earnings
                                                         (26,177.80)            (41,526.24)

                                                             .15                    .17
            Employment (Loan Officers and
            Brokers/Population, %)                          (.06)                  (.17)
                                                            18.49                  19.51
            Years of Experience
                                                           (10.54)                (11.51)

                                                            14.54                  14.69
            Years of Schooling
                                                            (1.79)                 (1.80)
                                                          537,109.57         736,032.00
            Mean Number of Loans
                                                         (679,999.52)       (880,192.82)
                                                          13,995.13              95,726.69
            Mean Number of Subprime Loans
                                                         (15,213.93             (129,101.6)
                                                           6,214.27              8,580.52
            Mean Number of Loans in Foreclosure
                                                          (8,883.82)            (9,444.91)
                                                         5,471,375.84        5,757,977.29
            Mean State Population
                                                        (6,101,905.36)      (6,498,035.30)
                                                         $58,574.57             $63,504.76
            Median Household Income
                                                         (7,641.51)             (10,326.91)
                                                                        2.33
            Licensing Index (1996)
                                                                       (1.96)
                                                                        6.84
            Licensing Index (2005)
                                                                       (3.68)

                                                                        1.70
            Bonding/Net Worth Index (2000)
                                                                       (1.37)

                                                                        1.88
            Bonding/Net Worth Index (2005)
                                                                       (1.35)
                                                                     $15,825.12
            Real Bonding/Net Worth Requirement (1996)
                                                                     (18,963.83)
            **base year 2000
                                                                     $27,479.08
            Real Bonding/Net Worth Requirement (2005)
                                                                     (25,928.68)
            **base year 2000


                                                   41
Table 3: Fixed-Effects Models of Loan Officer Employment/Population by State (ACS Data)

                                                                      (1)        (2)
Summated regulation index lagged once (no net worth/ bonding)/100     0.068      0.058
                                                                      (0.206)    (0.173)
Real net worth/bonding requirement lagged once /1,000,000             -0.545     -0.795
                                                                      (0.431)    (0.350)**
Summated regulation index lagged twice (no net worth /bonding)/100    -0.026
                                                                      (0.235)
Real net worth/bonding requirement lagged twice /1,000,000            -0.418
                                                                      (0.403)
Mean experience by state                                              -0.004     -0.004
                                                                      (0.003)    (0.003)
Mean experience by state squared/10,000                               0.993      0.994
                                                                      (0.659)    (0.658)
Mean years of school by state                                         -0.001     -0.001
                                                                      (0.005)    (0.005)
Lag median state household income/100,000                             0.218      0.211
                                                                      (0.162)    (0.161)
Lag state unemployment rate                                           0.010      0.010
                                                                      (0.006)*   (0.006)*
Lag state home ownership percentage                                   -0.001     -0.002
                                                                      (0.002)    (0.002)
Constant                                                              0.172      0.187
                                                                      (0.176)    (0.175)
Year Dummy Controls (2001 – 2005) base 2000                           Yes        Yes
Observations                                                          300        300
Number of states                                                      50         50
R-squared                                                             0.12       0.11
F-Test on one- and two-period lags of summated index                  0.06       -
F-Test for one- and two-period lags of bonding/net worth              3.16**     -
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                    42
Table 4: Pooled OLS Models of Log Annual Earnings Using ACS, 2000-2005

                                                                    (1)          (2)
Summated regulation index lagged once (no net worth/ bonding)/100   0.290        -0.485
                                                                    (0.520)      (0.204)**
Real bonding/net worth requirement lagged once/100,000              -0.076       0.060
                                                                    (0.099)      (0.033)*
Summated regulation index lagged twice (no net worth /bonding)      -0.009
                                                                    (0.006)
Real bonding/net worth requirement lagged twice/100,000             0.148
                                                                    (0.113)
Experience                                                          0.057        0.057
                                                                    (0.004)***   (0.004)***
Experience squared/1,000                                            -1.018       -1.020
                                                                    (0.089)***   (0.090)***
Log years of school                                                 1.262        1.263
                                                                    (0.059)***   (0.059)***
Lag median household income/1,000,000                               10.823       10.786
                                                                    (1.677)***   (1.668)***
Lag state population/1,000,000                                      4.950        4.653
                                                                    (1.721)***   (1.702)***
Lag state unemployment rate/100                                     -0.231       -0.046
                                                                    (1.465)      (1.453)
State homeownership percentage/100                                  -0.088       -0.070
                                                                    (0.226)      (0.222)
Constant                                                            6.430        6.407
                                                                    (0.262)***   (0.262)***
Year dummy controls (2001-2004) base 2000                           Yes          Yes
Observations                                                        6699         6699
R-squared                                                           0.13         0.13
F-Test on one- and two-period lags of summated index                3.54**       -
F-Test for one- and two-period lags of bonding/net worth            1.97         -
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                      43
Table 5: Fixed Effects Estimates of the Log of State Subprime Loan Originations

                                                                    (1)           (2)
Summated regulatory index lagged once (no net worth/ bonding)       -0.023        -0.020
                                                                    (0.011)**     (0.010)*
Real net worth/bonding requirement lagged once/100,000              0.104         -0.321
                                                                    (0.253)       (0.223)
Summated regulatory index lagged twice (no net worth /bonding)      -0.002
                                                                    (0.012)
Real net worth/bonding requirement lagged twice/100,000             -0.741
                                                                    (0.219)***
Lag state unemployment rate                                         -0.017        -0.014
                                                                    (0.034)       (0.035)
Lag state population/100,000                                        0.024         0.022
                                                                    (0.010)**     (0.010)**
Lag median state household income/100,000                           0.622         0.511
                                                                    (0.938)       (0.965)
State home ownership percentage                                     0.050         0.049
                                                                    (0.012)***    (0.012)***
Constant                                                            4.661         4.823
                                                                    (1.048)***    (1.076)***
Year dummy controls (2002 – 2005) base 2001                         Yes           Yes
Observations                                                        254           254
Number of states (including DC)                                     51            51
R-squared                                                           0.76          0.74
F-Test on one- and two-period lags of summated index                2.78*         -
F-Test for one- and two-period lags of bonding/net worth            6.91***       -
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                 44
Table 6: Fixed effects models of the percentage of loans (subprime and all loans) in foreclosure
                                                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                               subinfclose   subinfclose   allinfclose   allinfclose
Summated reg. index lagged once (no net worth/ bonding)        0.022         0.004         0.016         0.021
                                                               (0.093)       (0.078)       (0.016)       (0.014)
Real net worth/bonding requirement lagged once/100,000         1.357         3.186         0.217         0.540
                                                               (1.585)       (1.245)**     (0.280)       (0.226)**
Summated reg. index lagged twice (no net worth /bonding)       -0.100                      0.013
                                                               (0.104)                     (0.018)
Real net worth/bonding requirement lagged twice/100,000        3.659                       0.476
                                                               (1.598)**                   (0.283)*
Lag state unemployment rate                                    0.873         0.970         0.222         0.251
                                                               (0.224)***    (0.196)***    (0.040)***    (0.036)***
Lag state population/100,000                                   -0.005        -0.059        -0.032        -0.033
                                                               (0.069)       (0.055)       (0.012)***    (0.010)***
Lag median state household income/100,000                      -5.080        -7.396        -1.560        -3.003
                                                               (6.709)       (6.059)       (1.187)       (1.100)***
State home ownership percentage                                -0.292        -0.319        -0.057        -0.057
                                                               (0.087)***    (0.080)***    (0.015)***    (0.014)***
Constant                                                       27.444        28.629        6.617         6.673
                                                               (7.197)***    (6.168)***    (1.273)***    (1.120)***
Year dummy controls (2000 – 2004) base 1999                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                                                   255           306           255           306
Number of States (including DC)                                51            51            51            51
R-squared                                                      0.66          0.63          0.42          0.43
F-Test on one- and two-period lags of summated index           0.50          -             1.46          -
F-Test for one- and two-period lags of bonding/net worth       5.51***       -             3.29**        -
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          45
Table 7: Hazard Model Estimates of Time to Adoption of a Net Worth or Bonding Bill 1998–2005
(Using a Weibull Distribution of Duration)

                                                         (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)
Avg. percent of subprime loans in foreclosure 98-00      0.17         0.15
                                                         (0.19)       (0.26)
Avg. percent of all loans in foreclosure 98-00                                  0.53         0.98
                                                                                (0.75)       (1.25)
Avg. state unemployment rate 98-00                                    0.186                  0.185
                                                                      (0.386)                (0.390)
Avg. state population 98-00/1,000,000                                 -0.030                 -0.050
                                                                      (0.062)                (0.072)
Avg. state median household income 98-00/1,000                        -0.047                 -0.042
                                                                      (0.062)                (0.064)
Avg. state homeownership percentage 98-00                             -0.005                 0.003
                                                                      (0.085)                (0.089)
Constant                                                 -3.742       -2.029    -3.422       -2.858
                                                         (1.274)***   (7.921)   (1.113)***   (8.308)
Observations                                             17           17        17           17
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                           46
Table 8: Fixed-Effects Models of State Home Ownership Percentage

                                                                    (1)          (2)
Real bonding/net worth requirement lagged once/100,000              0.881        1.206
                                                                    (1.154)      (0.943)
Real bonding/net worth requirement lagged twice/100,000             0.582
                                                                    (1.188)
Lag state unemployment rate                                         -0.194       -0.191
                                                                    (0.155)      (0.155)
Lag state population/100,000                                        0.066        0.066
                                                                    (0.043)      (0.043)
Lag median state household income/100,000                           10.896       11.029
                                                                    (4.778)**    (4.763)**
Constant                                                            61.428       61.415
                                                                    (3.004)***   (2.999)***
Year dummy controls (2000–2004) base 1999                           Yes          Yes
Observations                                                        306          306
Number of states (including DC)                                     51           51
R2                                                                  0.26         0.26
F-Test for one- and two-period lags of net worth/bonding            0.94         -
requirements
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                 47
Table 9: Linear Probability of a High-Priced Loan in a Cross Section of Ten Broker-Dependent
Lenders’ Mortgages34

                                                                             Mortgage              Home-Purchase
                                                                             Refinance             Mortgage
                                                                             (N=273,365)           (N=185,773)

State broker bonding/net worth requirement ($100,000)                         0.054                  0.050
                                                                             (0.021)**              (0.028)*
Index of other state broker licensing requirements                            0.002                  0.002
                                                                             (0.003)                (0.003)
Index of state anti-predatory-lending laws                                   -0.012                  0.004
                                                                             (0.008)                (0.009)
State prohibition of deficiency judgments (dummy variable)                   -0.130                 -0.098
                                                                             (0.029)***             (0.027)***
Borrower’s income ($1,000)                                                   -0.505                 -0.280
                                                                             (0.077)***             (0.068)***
Borrower’s income squared ($1,000,000)                                        0.093                  0.035
                                                                             (0.020)***             (0.011)***
Adults in Census tract with very low credit score (%)                         0.005                  0.006
                                                                             (0.001)***             (0.001)***
African-American borrower (dummy variable)                                    0.146                  0.173
                                                                             (0.018)***             (0.011)***
Asian-American borrower (dummy variable)                                     -0.060                 -0.032
                                                                             (0.019)***             (0.023)
Hispanic borrower (dummy variable)                                            0.074                  0.119
                                                                             (0.013)***             (0.019) ***
Female borrower (dummy variable)                                              0.039                  0.163
                                                                             (0.006)***             (0.006)***
Constant                                                                      0.382                  0.537
                                                                             (0.073)***             (0.069)***

Number of State Clusters for Standard Errors (D.C. included)                 51                     51
R2                                                                           0.095                  0.107

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

34
  Ordinary least-squares estimate of the probability that a mortgage is high-priced, using a 50% random sample of
HMDA data on first-lien conventional mortgages originated in 2005 by 10 broker-dependent lenders. The sample is
further restricted to HMDA loan records in which the primary applicants’ ethnicity, sex, and race are available and
applicable to a person (not a business) and in which the property is an owner-occupied, 1- to 4-family nonmanufactured
unit. Additional explanatory variables not presented include loan size; loan size squared; dummy variables indicating if
the borrower is Asian, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, or American Indian/Alaska Native; percentage of credit files in the
Census tract that lack a credit score; tract-level Census variables for the unemployment rate, median age of persons,
median age of housing units, percent minority population, median income, percentage of housing units that are owner-
occupied, and percentage of housing units that are vacant. Full results are available upon request. See Appendix 3 for
more detailed definitions of the variables.


                                                           48
Table 10: Linear Probability of a High-Priced Loan in a Cross Section of CRA-Regulated Lenders’
Mortgages Made Outside Their CRA Assessment Areas in 2005 35

                                                                                Mortgage             Home-Purchase
                                                                                Refinance            Mortgage
                                                                                (N=625,573)          (N=523,464)

State broker bonding/net worth requirement ($100,000)                            0.035                 -0.011
                                                                                (0.014)**              (0.016)
Index of other state broker licensing requirements                              -0.0029                -0.0008
                                                                                (0.0017)*              (0.0015)
Index of state anti-predatory-lending laws                                      -0.006                  0.0005
                                                                                (0.004)                (0.0046)
State prohibition of deficiency judgments (dummy variable)                      -0.060                  0.016
                                                                                (0.024)**              (0.017)
Borrower’s income ($1,000)                                                      -0.272                 -0.183
                                                                                (0.022)***             (0.035)***
Borrower’s income squared ($1,000,000)                                           0.034                  0.035
                                                                                (0.004)***             (0.006)***
Adults in Census tract with very low credit score (%)                            0.0058                 0.0062
                                                                                (0.0005)***            (0.0004)***
African-American borrower (dummy variable)                                       0.211                  0.344
                                                                                (0.015)***             (0.015)***
Asian-American borrower (dummy variable)                                         0.002                 -0.012
                                                                                (0.010)                (0.012)
Hispanic borrower (dummy variable)                                               0.093                  0.197
                                                                                (0.013)***             (0.013)***
Female borrower (dummy variable)                                                 0.044                  0.028
                                                                                (0.002)***             (0.002)***
Constant                                                                         0.103                  0.010
                                                                                (0.032)***             (0.040)

Number of State Clusters for Standard Errors (D.C. included)                    51                     51
R2                                                                              0.093                  0.141

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


35
  Ordinary least-squares estimate of the probability that a mortgage is high-priced, using a 50% random sample of
HMDA data on first-lien conventional mortgages originated in 2005 by lenders subject to the Community Reinvestment
Act. The sample is further restricted to HMDA loan records in which the primary applicants’ ethnicity, sex, and race are
available and applicable to a person (not a business) and in which the property is an owner-occupied, 1- to 4-family
nonmanufactured unit. Additional explanatory variables not presented include loan size; loan size squared; dummy
variables indicating if the borrower is Asian, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, or American Indian/Alaska Native; percentage
of credit files in the Census tract that lack a credit score; tract-level Census variables for the unemployment rate, median
age of persons, median age of housing units, percent minority population, median income, percentage of housing units
that are owner-occupied, and percentage of housing units that are vacant. Full results are available upon request. See
Appendix 3 for more detailed definitions of the variables.

                                                            49
                                           \References

Akerlof, George. 1970. “The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(August): 488-500.

Alexander, William P., Scott D. Grimshaw, Grant R. McQueen, and Barrett A. Slade. 2002. “Some
Loans Are More Equal than Others: Third-Party Originations and Defaults in the Subprime
Mortgage Industry.” Real Estate Economics 30(4): 667-697.

Andrich, David (1988). Rasch Models for Measurement. Sage Publications, Newbury Park,
California.

Apgar, William, Amal Bendimerad, and Ren S. Essene. 2007. “Mortgage Market Channels and Fair
Lending: An Analysis of HMDA Data.” Harvard University, Joint Center for Housing Studies
Working Paper MM07-2 (April 25).

Apgar, William C., Mark Duda, and Rochelle Nawrocki Gorey. 2005. The Municipal Cost of
Foreclosures: A Chicago Case Study. Homeownership Preservation Foundation Housing Finance
Policy Research Paper 2005-1 (February).

Autor, David. 2003. “Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine to the
Growth of Employment Outsourcing.” Journal of Labor Economics 21(1): 1-42.

Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner. 2006. “Higher-Priced Home Lending
and the 2005 HMDA Data.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, September.

Backley, Christopher, Jeffrey M. Niblack, Cynthia J. Pahl, Terrence C. Risbey, and Jeff Vockrodt.
2006. “License to Deal: Regulation in the Mortgage Broker Industry.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, Community Dividend, Issue No. 3.

Barker, David. 2007. “Ethics and Lobbying: The Case of Real Estate Brokerage.” Journal of
Business Ethics (Spring).

Benham, Lee. 1980. “The Demand for Occupational Licensure.” In Occupational Licensure and
Regulation, edited by S. Rottenberg. American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C., pp. 13-25.

Bond, Ronald S., John E. Kwoka Jr., John J. Phelan, and Ira Taylor Whitten. 1980. “Effects of
Restrictions on Advertising and Commercial Practice in the Professions: The Case of Optometry.”
Staff Report, Bureau of Economics, Federal Trade Commission, Washington, D.C.

Bostic, Raphael W., Kathleen C. Engel, Patricia A. McCoy, Anthony Pennington-Cross, and Susan
M. Wachter. 2007. “State and Local Anti-Predatory Lending Laws: The Effect of Legal
Enforcement Mechanisms.” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve System Community Affairs
Research Conference, Washington, D.C. (March 29-30).

Conference of State Bank Supervisors. 2007. “40 State Agencies Commit to Participate in
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System.” Media release (November 5) available at
                                                50
http://www.csbs.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section=Press_Releases&TEMPLATE=/CM/ContentDispl
ay.cfm&CONTENTID=12840.

Cox, Carolyn, and Susan Foster. 1990. The Costs and Benefits of Occupational Regulation. U.S.
Federal Trade Commission, Bureau of Economics, Washington, D.C.

Cummings, John, and Larry J. Rankin. 1999. “150 Hours: A Look Back.” Journal of Accountancy
187(4): pp. 53-58.

El Anshasy, Amany, Gregory Elliehausen, and Yoshiaki Shimazaki. 2005. “The Pricing of
Subprime Mortgages by Mortgage Brokers and Lenders.” In Promises and Pitfalls: As Consumer
Finance Options Multiply, Who Is Being Served, and at What Cost? Papers from the 2005 Federal
Reserve System Community Affairs Research Conference, available at
www.chicagofed.org/cedric/files/2005_conf_paper_session1_elliehausen.pdf.

Engel, Kathleen C., and Patricia A. McCoy. 2002. “A Tale of Three Markets: The Law and
Economics of Predatory Lending.” Texas Law Review 80(6): 1255-1367.

Ernst, Keith, Debbie Bocian, and Wei Li. 2009. “Steered Wrong: Brokers, Borrowers, and
Subprime Loans.” Center for Responsible Lending (April 8).

Essene, Ren S., and William Apgar. 2007. “Understanding Mortgage Market Behavior: Creating
Good Mortgage Options for All Americans.” Harvard University, Joint Center for Housing Studies
Working Paper MM07-1 (April 25).

Feldman, Roger, and James W. Begun. 1978. “The Effects of Advertising: Lessons from
Optometry.” Journal of Human Resources 13(Supplement): 247-262.

Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Garcia-Fontes, Walter, and Hugo Hopenhayn. 2000. “Entry Restrictions and the Determination of
Quality.” Spanish Economic Review 2(2): 105-127.

Gerardi, Kristopher, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen. 2007. “Do Households Benefit from
Financial Deregulation and Innovation? The Case of the Mortgage Market.” NBER Working Paper
12967. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Gramlich, Edward M. 2007. Subprime Mortgages: America’s Latest Boom and Bust. The Urban
Institute Press, Washington, D.C.

Guttentag, Jack. 2000. “Another View of Predatory Lending.” University of Pennsylvania, The
Wharton School, Financial Institutions Center Working Paper 01-23-B (August 21).

Holmes, Thomas. 1998. “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence
from State Borders.” Journal of Political Economy 106(4): 667-705.

Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. 2007. http://www.ffiec.gov/hmda/online_rpts.htm.

                                               51
Jackson, Howell E., and Laurie Burlingame. 2007. “Kickbacks or Compensation: The Case of Yield
Spread Premiums.” Stanford Journal of Law, Business, and Finance 12(2): 289-361.

Jacobides, M. G. 2005. “Industry Change Through Vertical Disintegration: How and Why Markets
Emerged in Mortgage Banking.” Academy of Management Journal 48(3): 465-498.

Kandel, Eugene, and Edward Lazear. 1992. “Peer Pressure and Partnerships.” Journal of Political
Economy 100(4): 801-817.

Kim-Sung, Kellie, and Sharon Hermanson. 2003. “Experiences of Older Refinance Mortgage Loan
Borrowers: Broker- and Lender-Originated Loans.” AARP Public Policy Institute Research Report
(January).

Kleiner, Morris M. 2006. Licensing Occupations: Enhancing Quality or Restricting Competition?
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.

Kleiner, Morris, Robert Gay, and Karen Greene. 1982. “Barriers to Labor Migration: The Case of
Occupational Licensing.” Industrial Relations 21(3): 383-391.

Kleiner, Morris M., and Alan B. Krueger. 2008. “The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational
Licensing.” NBER Working Paper 14308, Cambridge, Ma., September.

Kleiner, Morris M., and Robert T. Kudrle. 2000. “Does Regulation Affect Economic Outcomes?
The Case of Dentistry.” Journal of Law and Economics 43(2): 547-582.

Kroszner, Randall S. 2007. “Legislative Proposals on Reforming Mortgage Practices.” Testimony
before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives (October 24).

LaCour-Little, Michael. 2007a. “The Home Purchase Mortgage Preferences of Low-and-Moderate
Income Households.” Real Estate Economics 35(4): 265-290.

——. 2007b. “The Pricing of Mortgages by Brokers: An Agency Problem?” Preliminary working
paper, Department of Finance, College of Business and Economics, California State University
Fullerton (February 5).

——. 2007c. “Economic Factors Affecting Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Reporting.”
Unpublished document, Department of Finance, College of Business and Economics, California
State University Fullerton (July 28).

——, and Gregory H. Chun. 1999. “Third-Party Originators and Mortgage Prepayment Risk: An
Agency Problem?” Journal of Real Estate Research 17(1/2): 55-70.

Law, Marc T., and Sukkoo Kim. 2005. “Specialization and Regulation: The Rise of Professionals
and the Emergence of Occupational Licensing Regulation.” Journal of Economic History 65(3):
723-756.


                                               52
Li, Yiting. 1998. “Middlemen and private information.” Journal of Monetary Economics 42:131-
159.

McGarity, Mary. 2001. “A Broker’s Market.” Mortgage Banking (March).

Mortgage Bankers Association of America. National Delinquency Survey, 1979–2005.

Olson, David. 2007. “FHA: An Alternative to Nonprime.” Scotsmanguide.com (June).

Pahl, Cynthia. 2007. “A Compilation of State Mortgage Broker Laws and Regulations, 1996-2006.”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Community Affairs Report No. 2007-2 (August),
www.minneapolisfed.org/community/pubs.

Pappalardo, Janis K., and James M. Lacko. 2007. “Improving Consumer Mortgage Disclosures: An
Empirical Assessment of Current and Prototype Disclosure Forms.” Federal Trade Commission
Bureau of Economics Staff Report (June).

Pence, Karen M. 2003. “Foreclosing on Opportunity? State Laws and Mortgage Credit.” Federal
Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2003-16.

Rogerson, William P. 1983. “Reputation and Product Quality.” The Bell Journal of Economics
14(2): 508-516.

Sichelman, Lew. 2003. “Brokers Dominate Lending.” Realty Times (July 2):
http://realtytimes.com/rtpages/20030702_lending.htm

Schloemer, Ellen, Wei Li, Keith Ernst, and Kathleen Keest. 2006. “Losing Ground: Foreclosures in
the Subprime Market and Their Cost to Homeowners.” Center for Responsible Lending
(December).

Shapiro, Carl. 1986. “Investment, Moral Hazard and Occupational Licensing.” Review of Economic
Studies 53: 843-862.

Shepard, Lawrence. 1978. “Licensing Restrictions and the Cost of Dental Care.” Journal of Law
and Economics 21(1): 187-201.

Shumer, Charles. 2007. “Sheltering Neighborhoods from the Subprime Foreclosure Storm.” Joint
Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, April 13.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2002. “Economic Analysis and Initial
Regulatory Flexibility Analysis for RESPA Proposed Rule to Simplify and Improve the Process of
Obtaining Mortgages to Reduce Settlement Costs to Consumers.” Office of Policy Development
and Research (July).

Wholesale Access. 2005. “New Research about Mortgage Brokers Published.” Press release (July
28) available at www.wholesaleaccess.com/7_28_mbkr.shtml.



                                                      53
Wholesale Access. 2007. “New Broker Research Published.” Press release (August 17) available at
www.wholesaleaccess.com/8-17-07-prs.shtml.

Woodward, Susan E. 2003. “Consumer Confusion in the Mortgage Market.” Typescript (July 14)
available at www.sandhillecon.com/pdf/consumer_confusion.pdf.

——. 2008. “A Study of Closing Costs for FHA Mortgages.” U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, Office of PolicyDevelopment and Research (May).

Yavas, Abdullah. 1994. “Middlemen in Bilateral Search Markets.” Journal of Labor Economics
12(3): 406-429.




                                               54
             Appendix 1: Minimum Bond plus Net Worth Requirements (current dollars)
      1996       1997     1998     1999     2000          2001     2002     2003     2004     2005     2006
AL       0          0        0        0        0             0    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
AK       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
AZ   10000      10000    10000    10000    10000         10000    10000    10000    10000    10000    10000
AR   50000      50000    50000    50000    60000         60000    60000    60000    75000    75000    75000
CA       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
CO       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
CT   40000      40000    40000    40000    40000         40000    65000    65000    65000    65000    65000
DE   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
DC   22500      22500    22500    22500    22500         22500    22500    22500    22500    22500    22500
FL       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
GA   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    25000    50000    50000    50000    50000
HA   15000      15000    15000    15000    15000         15000    15000    15000    15000    15000    15000
ID   20000      20000    20000    20000    20000         20000    20000    10000    25000    25000    25000
IL   55000      55000    55000    55000    55000         55000    55000    55000    70000    70000    70000
IN   25000      25000    25000    50000    50000         50000    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
IA   15000      15000    15000    15000    15000         15000    15000    15000    15000    15000    50000
KS       0          0        0    25000    25000         50000    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
KY   25000      25000    50000    50000    50000         50000    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
LA       0      25000    25000    25000    50000         50000    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
ME   10000      10000    10000    10000    10000         10000    10000    10000    10000    25000    25000
MD   12500      15000    15000    15000    15000         15000    15000    15000    15000    15000    15000
MS       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
MI   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
MN       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
MS   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
MO   20000      20000    45000    45000    45000         45000    45000    45000    45000    45000    45000
MT       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0    25000    25000    25000
NE   50000      50000    50000    50000    50000         50000    50000    50000    50000    50000   100000
NV       0          0        0    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
NH   20000      20000    20000    20000    20000         20000    20000    20000    20000    20000    20000
NJ   75000     100000   100000   100000   100000        100000   150000   150000   150000   150000   150000
NM   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
NY       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0    10000    10000    10000
NC       0          0        0        0        0             0    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
ND   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
OH   25000      25000    25000    25000    25000         25000    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
OK       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
OR   10000      10000    10000    25000    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
PA       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
RI   20000      20000    20000    20000    20000         20000    20000    20000    20000    20000    20000
SC   10000      10000    10000    10000    10000         10000    10000    10000    10000    10000    10000
SD       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
TN   50000      50000    50000    50000    50000        115000   115000   115000   115000   115000   115000
TX       0          0        0        0    25000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
UT       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0
VT       0      10000    10000    10000    10000         10000    10000    10000    10000    25000    25000
VA    5000       5000     5000     5000     5000         25000    25000    25000    25000    25000    25000
WA   20000      20000    20000    20000    20000         20000    20000    20000    20000    20000    20000
WV       0          0        0        0    25000         25000    50000    50000    50000    50000    50000
WI       0          0    10000    10000    10000         10000    10000    10000    10000    10000    10000
WY       0          0        0        0        0             0        0        0        0    25000    25000




                                                   55
      Appendix 2: Some Evidence on the Politics of Enacting Higher Bonding Requirements


       To examine the potential endogeneity of mortgage broker regulations, we gathered some

legislative history information from industry sources and regulators in eight states that have raised

their bonding requirements at least once. Overall, these conversations suggest a somewhat long and

complicated chain of legislative causality. Successful efforts to raise bonding requirements tend to

originate from the mortgage broker industry or from state regulators, rather than directly from

consumer groups. However, consumer advocacy and issues still can motivate the industry or

regulatory proposals, and there are also some signs of grass-roots industry opposition to proposals

made by state mortgage broker associations. In addition, the gestation time between an initial

legislative proposal and final passage and implementation may span several years, so that any

market outcomes that may have initiated the legislative process may have changed by the time of

implementation. Consumer issues seem to serve as the background from which industry and

regulatory agency initiated bonding requirements emerge, often via a multiyear process.

       Of the nine increases we discussed, five were described as first proposed or drafted by the

state’s mortgage broker association (Ohio 1999, Texas 1999, North Carolina 2002, Idaho 2004,

Montana 2004), and four were described as initiated by the state regulatory authority (New Jersey

2001, Tennessee 2001, Ohio 2002, Minnesota 2007). The distinction is somewhat blurred by the

industry’s frequent practice of vetting its proposals with state regulators, which often yields at least

technical drafting suggestions but sometimes yields more affirmative legislative support from the

regulator. No successful bonding proposal was said to have been opposed by state regulators.

Sometimes earlier proposals that had not been vetted with the regulator had failed. As a result,

regulators have been involved, actively or passively, in most of the successful bonding bills we

examined.

       The stated motivations of the industry and the regulators differed. Industry proposals were

                                                   56
described as attempts to make the occupation more professional and to provide a degree of

consumer protection by inhibiting some forms of fraud, thereby enhancing the occupation’s

reputation. However, industry-supported increases to bonding requirements were sometimes (e.g.,

North Carolina 2002) motivated on narrow grounds, such as to ensure that consumers could be

compensated if a broker absconded with the relatively small amount of cash the customer had

entrusted to the broker, but not to help the consumer collect on larger judgments for less narrow

forms of fraud or negligence. By contrast, proposals initiated by the regulatory authorities tended to

have bonding requirements that were higher and broader in scope, with the apparent intentions of

providing both more resources to compensate consumers and more incentives for appropriate broker

behavior.

       None of our sources (which did not include consumer groups) suggested that the bonding

requirement that passed had been either first proposed or subsequently opposed by consumer

advocates. However, the industry’s proposal in Texas was in part a response to a much higher

bonding proposal previously introduced by a legislator on the grounds of consumer protection, and

in at least two other cases (North Carolina 2002, Ohio 1999) the industry’s proposal was said to be

motivated in part by competing regulatory proposals (not including bonding) from consumer

groups. Opposition to the bonding bills that passed was said to be limited and mainly from

legislators who were concerned that it might be onerous enough to hurt their constituents in the

business. In some cases, this was thought to reflect, in part, grass-roots lobbying by mortgage

brokers at odds with their own industry association’s position.




                                                  57
                      Appendix 3: Data for High-Priced Lending Regressions

Sources: The data for the high-priced lending regressions come from multiple sources. The
dependent variable and several explanatory variables are from data on individual first-lien
mortgages originated in 2005 and reported per the requirements of the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act (HMDA). The HMDA data include the Census tract of the property securing the mortgage.
Using this information, each loan record has also been associated with Census data for the loan’s
census tract. In addition, staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System allowed us
to link the loan records to data on the distribution of credit scores in each Census tract as of
December 2004. Three types of “state” (including District of Columbia) regulatory variables are
also used: an index of anti-predatory-lending laws developed by Bostic et al. (2007), an indicator
from Pence (2003) on whether the state’s standard foreclosure process (as of the late 1990s) allows
for deficiency judgments, and indicators of state regulations on mortgage brokers taken from Pahl
(2007). All state variables are set according to the state in which the property securing the mortgage
is located.

Dependent variable

High-Priced Loan Indicator: Using the HMDA records, it is set to 1 if the mortgage meets the
HMDA definition of a “high-priced” mortgage and 0 otherwise. In 2005, a first-lien mortgage was
high-priced if its annual percentage rate (APR, or basically the internal rate of return on scheduled
mortgage payments over the full term of the loan assuming all market interest rates referenced in
the contract are unchanged) exceeds by 3 percentage points or more the average rate on a 30-year
Treasury bond for the month in which the mortgage was originated (as determined by a reference
rate published by the federal banking regulatory agencies).

Explanatory Variables Shown in Tables 9 and 10

State broker bonding/net worth requirement: Constructed by the authors from information in
Pahl (2007), this is the monetary value of the minimum bond or net worth required, in 2004, to enter
the mortgage broker business, expressed in $100,000. Because some states’ requirements differ by
characteristics of the firm or individual being licensed, the choice of the minimum amount needed
to enter is subject to judgment. The values we selected for this variable for each state are listed in
Appendix 2.

Index of other state broker licensing requirements: This is an index of the strictness of a state’s
mortgage broker regulations in 2004 that sums all of Pahl’s individual regulatory components
except those dealing with net worth or bonding.

Index of state anti-predatory-lending laws: An index of the overall strictness of a state’s anti-
predatory-lending laws, designed for use with 2004 and 2005 HMDA data (Bostic et al. 2007).

State prohibition of deficiency judgments: From Pence, an indicator variable set to 1 if a state’s
standard foreclosure procedure bars creditors from pursuing deficiency judgments when sale of a
foreclosed property yields less than the amount owed by the borrower, and 0 otherwise.

Borrower’s income: The borrower’s income, as stated in the HMDA loan record, in $1,000.

                                                  58
Adults in Census tract with very low credit score: In the loan’s Census tract, a measure of the
percentage of adults with a very low credit score. Specifically, 100 times the number of such adults
divided by all adults with a credit score.

African-American, Asian-American, Hispanic, or female borrower: Dummy variables set to 1
if, respectively, the borrower’s race is African-American, the borrower’s race is Asian-American,
the borrower’s ethnicity is Hispanic, or the borrower is female, as indicated by the HMDA loan
record’s information on the lead applicant for the loan. (Information on co-applicants is ignored.)
(Loan records with missing or “not applicable” ethnicity information are omitted.)

Additional Explanatory Variables in the Regressions

Loan size: The amount borrowed, as stated in the HMDA loan record, in $1,000.

Adults with a Missing Credit Score: In the loan’s Census tract, a measure of the percentage of
adults without a credit score. Specifically, 100 times the number of adults whose credit file lacks a
credit score divided by the number of adults with a credit file.

Unemployment rate: From Census 2000, the unemployment rate in the loan’s Census tract.

Median age: From Census 2000, the median age of all persons in the loan’s Census tract.

Median age of housing units: From Census 2000, the median age of all structures in the loan’s
Census tract.

Minority percentage: From Census 2000, the percentage of minority population in the loan’s
Census tract. (Minority signifies all but those who identify as only non-Hispanic white.)

Median income: From Census 2000, median family income in the loan’s Census tract, in $1,000.

Owner-occupied percentage: From Census 2000, owner-occupied housing units as a percentage of
all housing units in the loan’s Census tract.

Vacant-unit percentage: From Census 2000 records, vacant housing units as a percentage of all
housing units in the loan’s Census tract.




                                                  59
        Appendix 4: Results with Alternative Measurements of Mortgage Broker Regulation

        In this paper, we have focused on the relationship between mortgage broker bonding or net
worth requirements and market outcomes, largely because we think that these relationships are
relatively consistent and statistically significant, compared to the relationships between market
outcomes and the other components of mortgage broker regulation. In Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, and 10,
for example, the variable labeled “index of other state broker licensing requirements” performs
inconsistently. It is significant (and different in sign from the bonding variable) in Tables 4, 5, and
the mortgage refinancing column of Table 10 but not significant in Tables 3, 6, 9, and the home
purchase column of Table 10. However, using this index to summarize all of the mortgage broker
regulations besides bonding or net worth requirements might obscure some strong, consistent
relationships between individual components and market outcomes, just as our overall index of
mortgage broker regulation obscured the results we have presented on bonding and net worth. To
assess this possibility, we have reestimated a core set of our regression specifications, consisting of
the one-lag versions of Tables 3, 4, 6, and 9 and the two-lag version of Table 5. We modify these
regressions to include 20 other mortgage broker regulatory components, using the following
specification of the mortgage broker variables:

       1. The same bonding/net worth variable as in Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9.
       2. Pahl’s index for individual mortgage broker regulation component j, where j ranges over
          20 regulatory components other than bonding and net worth.
       3. A summated index of all the mortgage broker regulatory components not included in 1
          and 2.

        At the firm level, the components assessed are entry requirements for education, experience,
or knowledge (via an examination) of the firm’s principals as well as ongoing requirements for
continuing education of the principals. For firms’ managers, we assess similar requirements and an
overall dummy variable indicating whether any requirements apply to managers. Requirements
assessed for branch managers and for employees parallel those for managers, and we also assess the
requirement to maintain an in-state office location.

        We find that these specifications generally have little effect on the size or significance of the
coefficient on our bonding/net worth variable. That is, the results we have presented on the
relationship between bonding or net worth requirements and market outcomes are nearly always
robust to the alternative specifications described above. Most of the individual components are
significant for at least one of the seven labor and mortgage market relationships tested. (Tables 6
and 9 include two market outcomes each, with both subprime and all foreclosures in Table 6 and
both refinance and home purchase mortgages in Table 9). However, only 6 of the 20 components
are significantly related to 3 or more outcomes and only employee regulation provisions matter for
most labor and mortgage market outcomes. We will briefly summarize some of the relationships
that seem of potential interest for further research.

        The relationships between our bonding/networth variable and market outcomes were
generally robust. The coefficient on this variable retained its sign and at least a 10 percent
significance level in all of the new specifications for Tables 3 (number of brokers), 5 (subprime
originations), and 6 (foreclosures). In Table 4 (broker earnings), the bonding/networth variable was
only marginally significant. Not surprisingly, the p-value for its coefficient rose from below 10
percent in Table 4 to between 10 and 20 percent in 9 of the 20 alternative regressions. Its
                                                   60
coefficient changed little in most of these cases and never fell below 0.43, compared to 0.60 in
Table 4.

         In the alternative regressions for Table 9 (high-priced loans in 2005), the bonding/networth
variable retained its positive sign and at least a 10 percent significance level except when the
alternative variable was either the overall dummy for presence of employee regulation or the
requirement for continuing education for branch managers. The effect of the employee regulation
dummy in the refinance mortgage regression was somewhat marginal; it lowered the coefficient for
bonding/networth from 0.054 to 0.047 and raised its p-value to 15 percent. It had a stronger effect
in the purchase mortgage equation, cutting the coefficient in half and raising its p-value to 50
percent. The employee regulation dummy seems to parallel the bonding/networth variable in
equation 9, in that its coefficient is also positive. For purchase mortgages it is also significant, with
a p-value of 7.2 percent. The requirement for branch manager continuing education had similar
effects on the size and significance of the bonding/networth coefficient and also became significant
itself (p-value of 5.5 percent) in the purchase mortgage equation. However, its relationship to high-
price loans was negative, -0.08. One possible explanation for the significance of the branch-
manager continuing-education variable is that it is nonzero for only 4 states. Because Table 9 is a
cross-sectional regression where we cannot estimate state fixed effects, the branch-manager
continuing-education variable may be reflecting general fixed effects for those four states. Data for
additional years are needed to better resolve this question. These two exceptions in Table 9 and the
unsurprising sensitivity of the marginally significant results from Table 4 show the need for further
research on the relationship of bonding or networth and market outcomes. We nonetheless consider
our main results on these relationships to be relatively robust, in light of the many alternative
specifications we tested.

        Are other components of mortgage broker regulation also related to our labor and mortgage
market outcomes? Not to the same degree, with the possible exception of the overall dummy
variable for employee regulation. This regulatory indicator is significant at a 10-percent level or
better in six of the seven alternative regressions, excluding only the one for higher-priced refinance
mortgages from Table 9. In 5 of the 6 cases, its coefficient was of the same sign. Only for brokers’
earnings did it differ, with a coefficient of -0.05 (p-value 4.3 percent). This is another indication
that this component of mortgage broker regulation merits further research, although its statistical
relationships with market outcomes (fewer brokers, fewer subprime mortgages, and more
foreclosures) suggest caution about regarding it as a pro-consumer measure. Some of the individual
components of employee regulation, such as the entry requirements for education, experience, or
passage of an examination, paralleled the overall employee regulation dummy in many cases but
were not as consistently significant across the seven regression estimates.

        Only one other regulatory component was individually significant for both a labor market
outcome and a mortgage market outcome. This component, the educational background of new
branch managers, was significantly associated with fewer brokers, more subprime originations, and
fewer 2005 high-priced home purchase mortgages. We are inclined to discount the importance of
these results because this regulatory indicator was nonzero in only two states, Florida and Nevada,
as of 2004.

       The other individual regulatory components with significant effects mainly affected the
mortgage market but not the labor market. The human capital entry requirements for firm managers
(education, experience, examinations) are perhaps the most interesting in this group. Nineteen
                                                   61
states imposed at least one of these requirements in 2004, and the experience requirement was
significant in the alternative regressions for subprime originations, subprime and total foreclosures,
and 2005 high-priced home-purchase mortgages. In all four cases, the coefficient on the manager
experience requirement was opposite to the coefficient on the bonding/networth variable, or at least
superficially more pro-consumer. The overall dummy for the presence of manager requirements
parallels the manager experience requirement in the two foreclosure regressions. Likewise, the
requirement that the brokerage firm maintain an in-state office was associated with fewer subprime
originations and more subprime and total foreclosures. These regulatory factors also seem to be
candidates for further research.

        Two other human capital requirements for branch managers, experience and continuing
education, were significant (and opposite in sign to the bonding/networth coefficient) in the
alternative mortgage market regressions for subprime originations, foreclosures, and 2005 high-
priced home-purchase mortgages. We have already noted that branch-manager continuing
education requirements prevailed in only 4 states as of 2004, but the branch manager experience
variable was non-zero in 8 states and may thus be of some interest for future research.

        We omit a full discussion of the results for the third mortgage variable in each regression,
the index of the remaining mortgage broker regulation requirements.36 For the Table 3 alternative
regressions, it was significant in only two cases. For Table 4, it was often significant (9 of 17 cases)
when it directly or indirectly (via the overall employee regulation dummy) included the employee
education and examination indicators but not when these moved from the index to become the
individual component. In both Tables 3 and 4, when the index was significant, its coefficient was
opposite in sign to the bonding/networth coefficient. In Table 5 alternative regressions, the first lag
of the index was significant in 13of 15 cases when an employee regulation was not the individual
variable but in only 1 of the 5 cases when an employee requirement became the individual
component. (Its second lag was never significant.) In all cases, the coefficient on the index agreed
in sign with the bonding/networth coefficient. In the Table 6 alternative regressions, the index was
significant in 3 cases for subprime foreclosures (with a coefficient of opposite sign for the in-state
office and overall employee regulation variables) and in 7 cases for total foreclosures (with a
coefficient of opposite sign for the overall employee regulation variable). In the alternative
regressions for Table 9, the index was generally insignificant, except in some of the home-purchase
mortgage regressions with a managerial human capital variable as the individual component.

        The results in this appendix show that our paper has far from exhausted the information in
our data. We highlight, in particular, that opportunity for other researchers to create and analyze
alternative indices and sub-indices of mortgage broker regulation from the extensive regulatory
history in Pahl 2007.




36
     These and other detailed results from our alternative regressions are available from the authors.

                                                              62
