NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EXPLANATORY POWER OF MONETARY POLICY RULES
John B. Taylor
Working Paper 13685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13685

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by John B. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Explanatory Power of Monetary Policy Rules
John B. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 13685
December 2007
JEL No. E43,E52
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that the theory of monetary policy rules is able to explain, predict, and help understand
a variety of phenomenon in macroeconomics and finance, including the Great Moderation, the correlation
between exchange rates and interest rates, and the shift in the response of the term structure of interest
rates to inflation and output. Although the theory was originally designed for normative reasons, it
has turned out to have positive implications which validate it scientifically. And while initially focused
on the United States, it has applied equally well in other countries.

John B. Taylor
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
John.Taylor@stanford.edu

It is an honor to receive the Adam Smith Award, and it is a pleasure to give the Adam
Smith Lecture. Everything I have read about Adam Smith tells me that he was passionate about
his research and that his passion spilled over into his lectures. Many years ago, Woodrow
Wilson wrote about Smith’s lecture style in his essay, The Old Master. As then Professor
Wilson put it, “[Smith] constantly refreshed and rewarded his hearers…by bringing them to
those clear streams of practical wisdom and happy illustration which everywhere irrigate his
expositions.” You may have heard that Adam Smith would visit my introductory economics
lectures at Stanford from time to time, interrupting me and speaking enthusiastically from the
heavens. Well, it wasn’t really Adam Smith. It was my own recording of his voice piped through
the lecture hall PA system. “Professor Taylor, Professor Taylor” the voice would say in an
exasperated tone, “You told your students about economies of scale and you didn’t even mention
my famous story of the pin factory. Well let me tell them about it.” And then the students would
listen to him reading out loud his famous, clear, practical story from the Wealth of Nations.
In this lecture I would like to discuss a long-time—forty years actually—research interest
of mine: monetary policy rules. And I hope you will excuse me if I have trouble containing my
own passion for this subject. I want to take the opportunity to step back and look at how a vast
amount of recent theoretical and practical work on monetary policy rules by economists in
academia, government, and business has influenced the broader “scientific” landscape of
monetary and financial economics. Several years ago, the Wall Street Journal published a story
by David Wessel on monetary policy rules. To be specific, it was about what they called the
Taylor rule. It was headlined, “Could One Little Rule Explain All of Economics?” Today I will
argue that, while monetary policy rules cannot, of course, explain all of economics, they can
explain a great deal.

What is a monetary policy rule? At its most basic level it is a contingency plan that lays
out how monetary policy decisions are, or should be, made. Let me start with the example of the
Taylor rule. It says that the short term interest rate equals one-and-a-half times the inflation rate
plus one-half times the real GDP utilization rate plus one. So, in 1989, for example, when the
federal funds rate was about 10 percent in the United States you could say that the 10% was
equal to 1.5 times the inflation rate of 5% (or 7.5) plus .5 times the GDP gap of about 3% (or 1.5,
which takes you to 9) plus 1, which gives you 10. Now this is a very specific rule, and it can be
written down mathematically as shown in Figure 1, which also shows the way the rule was
written when first presented in 1992. Of course, I did not name it the Taylor rule. Others did that
later. Originally the rule was meant to be normative: a recommendation of what the Fed should
do. It was derived from monetary theory, or more precisely from optimization exercises using
new dynamic stochastic monetary models with rational expectations and price rigidities. Like
most rules or laws in economics it is not as precise as most physical laws, though that does not
mean it is less useful. It was certainly not meant to be used mechanically, though it now appears
that monetary policy might operate even better if it stayed closer to the rule. Figure 2 shows how
the inflation rate and GDP fed into the policy rule using the same illustrations I used in 1992.
They described actual monetary policy very well during the brief 1987-91 period, but that in
itself was not as surprising as what came later.
Now, there are many other monetary policy rules. Milton Friedman’s constant growth
rate rule said to hold money growth constant and let the interest rate go where it might. But the
kind of rule I am discussing here and which has become so ubiquitous in recent years has the
interest rate on the left hand side, and that is a big difference. There are also other monetary
policy rules for setting the interest rate. Some look at forecasts of inflation and real GDP rather

2

than their current values. Others gradually adjust the federal funds rate. Still others react to the
price level rather than to the inflation rate. But they are all very similar in that they describe the
settings for the interest rate.
There has been a great debate over the years about the use of monetary policy rules; they
were not always so pervasive and there was a great deal of resistance to them at central banks.
When I was in graduate school in the early 1970s, the textbook in monetary theory was Don
Patinkin’s Money, Interest, and Prices. If you flip through that book you will not find any
references to monetary policy rules, except token mention of the Friedman rule. Certainly there
were no references to interest rate rules. In contrast consider the modern day equivalent of
Michael Woodford’s book, Interest and Prices. It is about nothing but monetary policy rules.
Literally thousands of articles and papers have been written on monetary policy rules. The staffs
of the Fed and other central banks use policy rules. Even if they do not like to talk about the use
of policy rules in their own decision-making, central bankers assume that other central banks
follow such policy rules when they make forecasts and assess trends. Just last week at the annual
Jackson Hole conference Federal Reserve Governor Mishkin discussed policy rules and how
they could be improved. It is hard to find a research paper on monetary policy that does not use a
monetary policy rule in some form.
The break-through in the resistance to the practical use of policy rules appears to have
occurred during the period between the late 1980s and the early 1990s. Historians of monetary
thought can analyze why the change occurred. Academic work on the Lucas critique and time
inconsistency may have been factors, but those ideas were over a decade old by the late 1980s.
An important reason for the break-through, in my view, was that, following the Fed’s aggressive

3

disinflation effort under Paul Volker’s leadership, there was a need for a practical framework—a
practical rule—for setting interest rates in order to keep inflation low.
But whatever the reasons, let us examine some of the consequences of this development
for our understanding of monetary and financial phenomena.

Surprising Predictions, Good and Bad
The first thing to observe is that policy rules turned out to be pretty accurate at predicting
future interest rates. I illustrate the surprising aspects of this in Figure 3 where I reproduce a
very interesting chart originally published in March 1995 by John Judd and Bharat Trehan at the
research department at the Fed here in San Francisco. This was published 2-1/2 years after I first
presented the Taylor rule in November 1992. I had nothing to do with this chart. I can’t
remember when I first saw it, but I went back and found it because I thought it would be a good
way to illustrate my point. It includes data for the period I looked at in 1992, which I enclose
with the red oval, but also for the period back to the early sixties and then up to the present
(1995).
As Judd and Trehan report in their paper, “Taylor had already shown that his rule closely
fit the actual path of the funds rate from 1987 (when Alan Greenspan became Fed Chairman) to
1992 (when Taylor did his study). Figure 3 shows that the same close relationship continued to
hold over 1993 and 1994 as well.” I show this by the green oval around 1993 and 1994. This
was probably the most amazing thing to observers at the time because obviously, nobody had
any idea that this was going to happen back in 1992.

If they try, economists can always fit

equations very well to past data—during the “sample period,” but rarely do things come out so
well in the future, after the work is done. So it was a scientific validation of the approach.

4

Moreover, you seemed to be getting more out of policy rules than you were putting in,
which is a sign that you had something. Recall that policy rules were derived from monetary
theories which suggested that they would lead to good macroeconomic results: low inflation and
output variability. The rules were not designed to be useful for forecasting. They were meant to
be normative, not positive, yet now they were mysteriously shown to be both. Figure 4, which is
drawn from a paper published by Bill Poole, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
shows that this general ability to track continued over the years, though not as well as Judd and
Trehan had found in 1993-94. Note also that there are some particularly interesting periods
where the actual policy deviates from the rule, especially in 2003-2005, an issue which I will
return to.
In any case, this predictive value obviously interested business economists and policy
makers, especially those working in the financial markets. John Lipsky, then at Salomon
Brothers, and Gavyn Davies at Goldman Sachs, for example, wrote newsletters as early as 1995
and 1996 which used monetary rules to forecast and analyze Fed decisions. Janet Yellen, then a
member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, referred to monetary policy rules in a
speech at NABE in March 1996, mentioning their predictive power.
Another surprising feature of the predictions was discovered by looking back at the
1960s and 1970s, which I show by the blue oval in Figure 3. During this period the rule does not
fit very well. In fact it is a terrible fit. It would have predicted very poorly during this period.
Generally speaking, the actual interest rate is way too low compared to what the rule says it
should be. But this finding was interesting, because it was during this early period that monetary
policy was delivering pretty lousy results: inflation was high and volatile and there were many
business cycles.

5

Figure 3 shows that monetary policy decisions were quite different in the period before
the early 1980s. But is it possible to determine more precisely what exactly was different about
policy? Was it too reactive to change in the economy or not reactive enough? And did the size
of the response differ for inflation versus real GDP? The mathematical form of monetary policy
rules enables one to answer such questions. By regressing the short term interest rate on inflation
and output one finds that the response coefficients on both inflation and real GDP were much
smaller in the earlier period. Figure 5 illustrates that the coefficients nearly doubled, though the
precise size of the increase varies from study to study. Thus, policy became much more
responsive regarding inflation and real GDP. Figure 6 shows an example of this increased
responsiveness. In the late 1960s when inflation was rising above 4 percent, the federal funds
rate was still under 5 percent. In the late 1980s when inflation rose to that same level, the interest
rate rose to nearly 10 percent. Thus policy moved toward the policy rule by increasing both the
response coefficients on inflation and GDP. They started out too small and grew, rather than
starting out too big and shrunk.

Explaining the Great Moderation
Having looked at the predictive power of monetary policy rules let me now consider their
capability of explaining economic phenomenon that would otherwise be difficult to explain.
Perhaps the most important macroeconomic event in the last half century has been the
remarkable decline in the volatility of inflation and real GDP. Economists call this the Great
Moderation or the Long Boom. Econometricians have determined that the change occurred in the
early 1980s, which is what one observes clearly in Figure 7. There were 5 business cycles in the
earlier period, a remarkably poor performance compared to what has happened since. The theory

6

of policy rules has provided a good explanation of this phenomenon, as discussed recently by
Ben Bernanke (2004).
The elements of the explanation are based on the observed changes in the policy rule
coefficients, illustrated in Figures 5 and 6. During the period of the Great Moderation the
monetary policy response of the interest rate to increases in inflation and to real GDP was much
larger than in the period of poor economic performance. So there is a clear difference between
the policies in the two periods. And the change in policy occurs at the time the economic
performance changed. So the timing is right. To complete the explanation, one notes that
according to monetary theory the greater responsiveness leads to more stable inflation and more
stable real GDP. In fact, that the response was greater than one in the later period has become an
important principle of good monetary policy.
To be sure, there are rival explanations for this phenomenon (globalization, increased service
production), but none fit the facts so closely.

And the Great Moderation of Housing Volatility
Figure 8 shows that there has also been a great reduction in housing volatility. Before the
early 1980s the standard deviation of residential investment relative to trend was around 13
percent; in the later period it was only 5 percent, and this includes the most recent fluctuation
which is quite large. In fact, housing volatility came down more than the volatility of GDP, and
thereby more than the other components of spending. The theory of policy rules explains this
too.
The explanation starts with the explanation for the Great Moderation. By reacting more
aggressively to increases in inflation the Fed has prevented inflation from rising as much as in

7

the past and this has reduced the ultimate size of the interest rate swings. Again using the Taylor
rule, the response coefficient to inflation has increased from less than one to greater than one and
the response coefficient to real output has also increased. These larger responses have thus
reduced the boom-bust cycle and the large fluctuations in interest rates that had caused the large
volatility of housing. The reduction is larger than for the other components of spending because
housing is more sensitive to interest rates. Another possible explanation is that housing became
less impacted by a given change in the federal funds rate due to securitization and deregulation
of deposit rates. But that alternative does not stand up because the effect of changes in the federal
funds rate on housing show no evidence of a shift between these two periods. Moreover, no other
explanation I am aware of has the timing so precise.

It Works in Other Countries Too
Another striking finding is that the theory of policy rules seemed to work in other
countries too. I don’t think anybody anticipated that 15 years ago. Figure 9 is a nice illustration,
drawn from a paper published earlier this year by a group that includes both business economists
and academics. It shows the deviations from the Taylor rule in the U.S., Germany, U.K., and
Japan. It shows how off they were up until around 1980 and then how much closer they have
been since then. It shows that the same chart used by Judd and Trehan (Figure 2) in 1995 would
describe events in these other countries. Moreover, these countries also experienced a great
moderation (see Figure 8) with timing was different from country to country.

While the results in these figures pertain to developed countries, the policy rule concept
has also been useful for understanding monetary policy developments in emerging market

8

countries for which they were clearly not designed explicitly. In these countries, monetary
policy rules have been especially useful for implementing inflation targeting. There are very few
countries around the world where someone has not tried to see if monetary policy rules work
there.

Explaining Exchange Rates Puzzles
What else can we understand with monetary policy rules? When the U.S. inflation rate
rises by more than people in the markets anticipate, you usually see the dollar appreciate. At
least that’s been the case since the early 1980’s when monetary policy rules have described Fed
behavior. What has puzzled economists about this correlation is that, according to purchasing
power parity theory, a higher price level should mean a depreciation of the currency. But if you
bring a policy rule into play you get a nice simple explanation of what is going on. You see that
as the inflation rate rises, the Fed will increase interest rates (according to the policy rule), and
that will tend to make the dollar more attractive, so it appreciates. Engel and West (2006), Engle,
Mark, and West (2007), and Clarida and Waldman (2007) have been showing in detail how this
and other related exchange rate phenomenon can be explained by policy rules. .

Explaining Term-Structure Puzzles
Policy rules also help explain certain puzzling features of the term structure of interest
rates, as shown by Fuhrer (1996) and Ang, Dong, and Piazzesi (2005). For example, Smith and
Taylor (2007) empirically document a large secular shift in the estimated response of the entire
term structure of interest rates to inflation and output in the United States. As shown in Figure
11, the impact of inflation and real GDP on long term interest rates of all maturities increased

9

significantly. The shift occurred in the early 1980s and apparently had no previous explanation.
However, there is a direct link between these coefficients of the central bank's monetary policy
rule for the short term interest rate.
There are two countervailing forces: (1) the larger response of interest rates to these two
macro variables and (2) their reduced persistence due to the larger response. Using the link one
can see that the former dominates thereby showing that the shift in the policy rule for the short
term interest rate in the early 1980s, which I mentioned earlier, provides an explanation for the
puzzling shift in the long-term responses.
This approach also explains the “conundrum” in which policy rate increases in the 20042005 period had little effect on long term rates. In this case a model of shifts in policy rules
(Davig and Leeper (2007)) is needed for a complete explanation.

Explaining and Assessing Deviations from Policy Rules: 1998 and 2003-05
The increased focus on monetary policy rules has led monetary economists to focus more
on deviations from rules. I believe this is because there is less debate about the periods when the
central banks are on the policy rules, which must be interpreted as a real success for the policy
rule approach.
In their review of the Greenspan period, Blinder and Reis (2006), for example, focus
mainly on the deviations from a Taylor rule in assessing the Greenspan era. In commenting on
that paper at the Jackson Hole conference where it was delivered, I argued that following the
principles imbedded in such a rule is why the Greenspan policy was so successful.
In any case as mentioned at the start of this lecture there are a few periods where there
have been sizable deviations from the typical policy rule. By far the largest in the United States

10

was during the period from 2003 to 2005 when the federal funds rate was well below what
experience during the previous two decades of the Great Moderation would have predicted. This
deviation is quite evident in Figure 4, which was the biggest deviation shown, comparable to the
turbulent 1970s in Figure 2.
The rationale for this period of prolonged low interest rates was that it was needed to
ward off deflation, but the low rates were also a factor in the eventual housing boom and bust.
Similarly there was a deviation in 1998 and 1999, which may have been a factor in the boom and
bust in asset prices in 1999 and 2000. In any case, it is now possible to go back and assess such
deviations and learn lessons for the future about their advisability. As such episodes are being
reviewed, I see the disadvantages becoming more apparent compared to the advantages
perceived at the time. If this trend continues then the rationale for large deviations from
monetary policy rules will diminish. This will increase the likelihood of staying with systematic,
predictable, rules-based policy that has worked well for most of the Great Moderation period.
The short term interest rate would then adjust mainly according to inflation and real GDP.
Staying close to policy guidelines will also avoid moral hazard and show that there is no
“put” in which the central bank bails out individual investors. If investors understand and believe
that policy responds mainly to macroeconomic variables, then they will know that the central
bank will not help them out if their risky investments fail.

Conclusion
In this lecture I have focused mainly on the “scientific,” as distinct from the “policy,”
contributions of monetary policy rules. In other words, I have tried to look for predictions,
explanations, or better understandings of macroeconomic and financial phenomenon that

11

monetary policy rules have brought. And I think I have found quite a few. The scientific
contribution of an idea is measured by how much it helps us understand areas beyond the
original idea. The more you get out of an idea compared to what you put into it, the bigger is the
contribution. Of course, we live in a fluid economic world and we do not know how long these
explanations or predictions will last. I have no doubt that in the future—and maybe the not so
distant future—a bright economist—and maybe one right in this room—will show that some of
the explanations discussed here are misleading, or simply wrong. But in the meantime this is
really a lot of fun.

References
Ang, Andrew, Sen Dong, and Monika Piazzesi, (2005) “No Arbitrage Taylor Rules” Chicago
Business School.

12

Bernanke, Ben (2004), “The Great Moderation,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
Blinder, Alan and Ricardo Reis (2006), “Understanding the Greenspan Standard,”
Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Cecchetti, Stephen, Peter Hooper, Bruce Kasman, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Mark Watson
(2007) “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process,”
Clarida, Richard and Daniel Waldman (2007), “Is Bad News About Inflation Good News For the
Exchange Rate?” Columbia University
Davig, Troy and Eric M. Leeper (2007), “Generalizing the Taylor Principle,” American
Economic Review, June, 97, 3, 607 – 635.
Engel, Charles and Kenneth West (2006), “Taylor Rules and the Deutsche-Dollar Real Exchange
Rate,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 38, 1175-1194.
Engel, Charles, Nelson Mark, and Kenneth West (2007), “Exchange Rate Models are Not as Bad
as You Think,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2007.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey (1996) "Monetary Policy Shifts and Long-Term Interest Rates" Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111, 4, pp. 1183-1209.
Judd, John and Bharat Trehan (1995), “Has the Fed Gotten Tougher on Inflation?” The FRBSF
Weekly Letter, March 31, 1995, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Patinkin, Don (1965), Money, Interest and Prices, Harper and Row, New York.
Smith, Josephine M. and John B. Taylor (2007), The Link between the Long End and the Short
End of Policy Rules,” Stanford University.
Woodford, Michael (2004), Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

13

r = 1.5p+.5y+1
r = p +.5y +.5(p-2) +2

where
r is the federal funds rate
p is the inflation rate
y is real GDP gap
FIGURE 1

14

y

Output y

p

Inflation p

r

Interest rate r
FIGURE 2

From “Has the Fed Gotten Tougher
on Inflation?” The FRBSF Weekly
Letter, March 31, 1995, by
John P Judd and Bharat Trehan
of the San Francisco Fed

1965-79

1987-92
1993-94

FIGURE 3

15

From William Poole, “Understanding the Fed”
St. Louis Review, Jan/Feb 2007

FIGURE 4

1.5

.75

NEWER

OLDER

.5

.25

Growth of Response Coefficients to Both Inflation and Output
FIGURE 5

16

United States
14
12
10

Q2 1989: Fed
Funds rate
was 9.7%

Q1 1968: Fed
Funds rate
was 4.8%

8
6
4
2
0

FIGURE 6

The Great Moderation or the Long Boom
FIGURE 7

17

2001

1996

1991

1986

1981

1976

1971

1966

1961

1956

-2
1951

Percent

Smoothed Inflation
(four-quarter inflation)

Quarterly
Inflation

60
50
40

Percentage Change in
Residential Investment
(over previous four quarters)

30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
55

60 65

70 75

80 85

90 95

00 05

FIGURE 8

Source: Cecchetti, Hooper, Kasman, Shoenholtz, Watson (2007)

FIGURE 9

18

2.8
2.4

Median Volatility of Real GDP Growth
in the G7 Countries (standard deviation)

2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0.0
1970-79

1980-89

1990-99

FIGURE 10

19

2000-2006

Coefficient on Output Gap
1.4

Coefficient on Inflation
1.4
Post 1984Q1

1.2
Post 1984Q1

1.2

1.0

1.0

0.8
0.6

0.8
0.4
Pre 1980Q1

Pre 1980Q1

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

FIGURE 11

Maturity (Years)

Source: Smith and Taylor (2007)

20

3
Maturity (Years)

4

5

