                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             AN EXAMINATION OF MULTIJURISDICTIONAL
                  CORPORATE INCOME TAXES UNDER
                     FORMULA APPORTIONMENT


                        Roger H.   Gordon

                         John D. Wilson



                     Working Paper No. 1369




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, M& 02138
                           June 19814




We would like to thank Charles E. McLure, Jr., James R. Gault, and
Mark Gersovitz for helpful discussion and comments. Most of the
work on this paper was done while the first author was employed at
Bell Laboratories. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Taxation and project in Government
Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or of AT&T Bell
Laboratories.
                                                                       NBER Working Paper #1369
                                                                       June l984




                     An Examination of Multijurisdictional Corporate
                         Income Taxes Under Formula Apportionment


                                                 ABSTRACT


           This paper examines how corporate taxation of niiltijurisdictional

P4 r.mo   no   ncr Prmm, 1   a   annrv* 4 rnmcn+ a PPor+ a   +hn I nrcn+ I irna   -Pa rod   h'ir   $ nA 4   r$ dna 1

firms     and individual states. We find that formula apportionment creates

factor price distortions which vary in general among firms within a state,

and   in such a way as often to put multistate firms at a competitive advan-
tage. Formula apportionment also creates incentives for cross—hauling of
output,    with production in low tax rate states more profitably sold in high

tax rate states, and conversely. Politically, formula apportionment appears

to be very unstable——states face an incentive to shift to some other form

of taxation. None of these problems exist when a corporate tax uses

separate accounting.




Roger H. Gordon                                                        John D. Wilson
Department of Economics                                                Department of Economics
University of Michigan                                                 Columbia University
Ann Arbor, MI 481O9                                                    New York, NY 10027
                An Examination of Multijurisdictional Corporate
                 Income Taxes Under Formula Apportionment

                               Roger H. Gordon*

       University of Michigan and National Bureau of Economic Research

                                      and

                                John D. Wilson*

                              Columbia University




   Taxation of corporate income becomes administratively quito complicated when

a corporation is located in more than one taxing jurisdiction. National
governments, in taxing a multinational firm, have attempted to establish separate

economic accounting for the activity of such a firm in each country. This approach

creates the difficulty that non-marketed intermediate goods transferred across
borders must be priced, however arbitrarily. In contrast, U.S. state governments,

in taxing a multistate firm, have adopted one of various formulas to apportion the

total profits of the firm among the various states where it does business.1 With

formula apportionment, internal prices need not be established. This advantage is

sufficient that in recent years there has been some interest in replacing separate

accounting with formula apportionment when taxing multinational firms?

   In addition to simplifying tax administration, however, this paper sho that
use of formula apportionment also changes in complicated ways the incentives

faced by both individual firms and individual states. When international profits are

apportioned, use of the tax by U.S. states directly affects incentives to invest
                                        -2-

abroad, even without any change in market interest rates or other prices, though

the direction of the effect depends on the relative tax ratcs and the specific
definition of taxable income. Most states use a three part apportionment formula,

basing the apportionment on the location of sales, payroll, and property.
Unfortunately, the interactions among the three factors make analysis of the
general case extremely complicated. In this paper, we analyze first the effects of

formula apportionment based simply on the location of a single factor, property.
We then examine the degree to which the conclusions generalize to a two-factor

formula, based on property and payroll. We explore only briefly the three-factor
case. In the last section, we discuss some alternative formulas.

   Our analysis is confined to characterizing the equilibrium behavior of individual

firms and individual states when formula apportionment is used. No attempt is
made to examine the general equilibrium incidence of the tax, the focus of most

previous work on state corporate taxes.3

    In analyzing these taxes, we examine first the nature of the investment
distortions created by the tax. We then characterize the equilibrium locational
pattern of firms. Finally, we explore when states would find it advantageous to

shift to some other form of taxation.


 I. Single factor tax based on property

    In the United States, the most common formula for apportioning corporate
 income among the various states uses three factors: sales, payroll, and property. If

   is the statutory corporate income tax rate in state i, if S, WI, and K. represent
                                         -3-

sales, payroll, and property, respectively in state i, and if i, represents total profits
of a firm, as defined by the tax law in state i, then the tax due by a firm to state i

can be expressed as

                          T'   S          W,        K,
                          T
This is the formula recommended by the Multistate Tax Commission, though not

all states have adopted it. Some states do not weight the three factors equally, and

others use fewer factors.

    Because of the surprising complexity of analyzing a multi-factor case directly,

we analyze first the one-factor tax based on property. We examine in turn the
effects of the tax on the incentives faced by individual firms and individual states.

The analysis of this case is very simple, even compared with that of alternative

one-factor taxes, and yet the conclusions reached here are very similar to those

reached in section II for the two-factor case.


A. Incentives faced by corporations.

    If the tax law involves a one-factor formula based on property, then the tax due

in state i would simplify to T,K,'iT,/> K. Total taxes paid by the firm would
                                          J

equal       (T,K,7r)IKJ. In making investment decisions, the objective of the firm
        i             j
would be to maximize pretax economic proflts denoted by ii, minus any taxes due.

 While taxable profits differ from economic profits in complicated ways, and ways

 which vary by state and by type of capital, we assume for simplicity that
                                              -4-

    = ir + dK, where K              K,. Here, d captures the degree to which the
                                )
investment tax credit, depreciation deductions, and interest deductions, fall short of

the opportunity cost of capital.5 We ignore variation of d by state. While the
value of d implicitly depends on the market interest rate, our analysis is confined to

situations where the interest rate remains unchanged.

   The firm is assumed to use two inputs to production in each state i: capital, K,

and labor, L. For simplicity, we assume throughout the paper that capital is
completely mobile between states while labor is completely immobile. Implicitly,

we therefore assume that production occurs in every state; wage rates are enough

lower in high tax rate states so as to attract sufficient production to employ all of

the workers there. The firm chooses how much capital and labor to employ in each

state so as to maximize

                            R         ir — T,K1('rT+dK)IK,                        (1)


where R equals the after tax economic profits of the firm. The first order
conditions for the optimal K1 imply that

                     air   —
                                   'r1d
                                          +         (T1   —)
                                                                                  (2
                     8K,       1   —i K (i—K)
                           = d(T—ij)+—
                                     R               (T1—iK)
                                                               foralli.
                                (1—i)2          K (1—FK)2


Here, g           iKIK represents the weighted average statutory tax rate. In
              J
contrast, 8ir/8L1 =0, as would occur without taxes.
                                        -5-


   Decisions   are clearly distorted by the tax, since aT-JaK1 L 0. However, not

only does the tax distortion to the marginal cost of capital differ across states, due

to differences in the T1, but it also varies by firm within any state, since FK and

R 1K may vary by firm. S.uch distortions within a state exist even if that state does

not tax corporate profits, so that T1 = 0. hi such a state, marginal investment

would be subsidized.

   A more striking observation is that formula apportionment creates incentives for

firms in different states to merge. Consider for example two firms, one operating

solely in a state with no corporate tax and the other operating in a state with a tax

rate T. Assume each employs one unit of capital, and is initially breaking even.

The first then earns zero economic profits while the second must earn .rd/(1 —'r) to

break even after tax. Tax payments equal T(d +'rd/(l —'r)). If the two firms
merge, tax payments become (T/2) (2d +rdI(1 —r)). The tax on the normal
return, d, remains unchanged, but the tax on economic profits is halved. While all

the economic profits are earned in the taxing state, only half are attributed to that
state after the merger under formula apportionment.

    In fact, if all firms have access to the same constant returns to scale technology

and if after tax profits, R, arc sufficiently small (assumptions maintained
throughout the rest of the paper), then a firm located solely in state i should be at

a competitive disadvantage with respect to any firm in state i with branches in
other states. For consider two potential firms, each intending to use the same
factor proportions in state i, but one having branches elsewhere. Assume no
                                              -6-

efficiency gain, or loss, from maintaining branches in different states. When the

first firm employs a unit of capital, its tax payments are T1(ai/aK1 +d). In
contrast, when the second firm employs a unit of capital, its taxes go up by


                         x'  (air.
                                      +dJ
                                         1
                                              + (T TK)
                                                           (.ff
                                                                                       (3)

The first firm pays more in taxes by an amount equal to (r —FK) (aIaK1 —'dK).

Under our assumptions, a'rr1/aK          'zrIK, so that this expression is positive as long

as 'rrIK > i/K whenever > FK, and conversely. These conditions would be
satisfied unless true profits are large and concentrated in the low tax rate states.

     More generally, if the production function, shared by all firms, is quasi-concave

(an assumption also maintained throughout the rest of the paper), then competition

drives firms to spread their operations across states until they all posses identical

TJ 's. To see this, let ii(V) be the function relating before tax profits to the vector

of capital and labor inputs in each state. Consider two firms employing input

vectors, V1 and V2, which yield different K'S,             and     f. Assume that each firm
obtains zero after tax profits, as required for an equilibrium under the assumption

of     constant    returns to        scale.     Then firm          i's   tax payments are
                  [/(1 —Fj)]dK; and total after tax profits for the two firms satisfy


                                              TIC            TJC
         1+R2 n(V 1) + ir(V2)) —                    X' +             X2 d(K' +K2) =0; (3a)
                                              1TK          lTj
where
                                       -7-.


                                          K
                                                                              (3b)
                                       K1+K2

   Suppose now that the two firms merge for tax purposes, but do not alter their

total factor demands, V1 + V2. Total after tax profits become


               R'2 (1 i2) [V1 +V2) —              i2 d(K1 +K2)];              (4a)


where

                                    K1+K2
                                '
                                    K1 +K2
                                                 TK +                         (4b)


Since     1KI(l TK)        is   a     strictly    convex    function     of

             < [/(1—i))JX1 +[I(1—T)1X2.                                Furthermore,

'n(V1 +V2) ii(V1) + 'a(V2) under our assumptions about production. It then

follo from (3) and (4) that the merger raises total profits:7 R 12 > R + R2

    Thus, there exists tax induced pressure for firms to diversify (or merge with

competitors in other states) until they all possess identical FK 's. This pressure
represents a separate form of tax distortion from that affecting the capital-labor

ratio in any state. It does not arise when separate accounting, rather than formula

apportionment, is used.8

    The amount of taxes saved through merger in the above example, as a fraction

 of initial tax payments, assuming no efficiency gain from merger, would equal
                                       -8-

                            (—)2K'K2
                                                                               ( )
                     (K'+K2)((1—)K'+(1—)K2)
If, for simplicity, K1 = K2 and F 0, then this expression reduces to
While this saving is quite modest at the level of tax rates characteristic of U.S.

state corporate taxes, it would be substantial if formula apportionment were used

by national governments.

   This result about diversification does not rule cut the possibility that all
production of a particular good will be located in one state because of some
comparative advantage of production in that state. It implies that the firms
producing the good will face competitive pressure to merge, if only for tax
purposes, with firms located in other states, regardless of the composition of their

output, and to do so until they achieve the common


B. Distributional considerations between states.

   States can tax corporate capital in various ways. In addition to using a
corporate tax based on formula apportionment, states can use a property tax or a

corporate tax based on separate accounting. Their choice among taxes will depend

on more than administrative simplicity. In this section, we argue that formula
apportionment aids low tax rate states at the expense of high tax rate states.
Consequently, high tax rate states have an incentive to switch unilateraly to

separate accounting or property taxation.

    Assume that all production is characterized by constant returns to scale, and all

firms face the same FK, as motivated above. Then WK is identical across firms.
                                        -9-

Under formula apportionment, the tax payments made by a given firm to state i

satisfy

                                    T. ='r1KB,                                (Sa)

where

                                  B('rrIK+d).                                 (Sb)

We shall call B the "tax base" per unit of capital.

   A crucial property of formula approtionment is that all states share the same

tax base. Furthermore, additional investment in any single state alters this
common tax base. In particular, the first-order conditions for profit maximization

(eq. (2)) give

                                 ___      (T—iK)d
                                                                                 6
                                 8K1     K(1—FK)2

Thus investment in a high tax rate state (T1 > TK) benefits other states by raising

the tax base; while investment in a low tax rate state harms other states. The basic
                          >
reasoning is that, if T1 (<)TK then an increase in K, raises (lowers) TK which

necessitates a rise (fall) in B = (ilK +d) to maintain zero net profits, as required

by profit maximization.

    Thus, there is an externality associated with a firm's investment in a given
state. As a result, the marginal distortion, a'ffIaK,, differs from the average tax
revenue, TIK1, which state i obtains from the firm. To calculate the difference, let

T be the firm's total tax payments, summed over all states, and note that profit
                                         - 10 -



maximization implies that aTrIaK1 = aTIaK. Eq. (6) then gives


                           ___ —          + K(T, Fx)d
                                    K1            (1—K)2

It follows that

                             aT1
                             aK < F.        as        TX.                        (8)

Note that T11K1 equals state i's average tax revenue, since a'iriaK1 and T1iK are

identical across firms under the assumption of identical K'S.

   Under formula apportionment, therefore, revenue is effectively transferred from

high tax states to low tax states with this transfer taking the form of subsidies on

investment in low tax rate states and surtaxes on investment in high tax rate states.

To make this interpretation more rigorous, let us introduce some additional
assumptions which allow us to isolate the distributional effects of formula

apportionment without adding general equilibrium complications:

       Assumption A. All goods are perfectly mobile between states.

       Assumption B. All individuals possess identical homothetic utility
                         functions over goods; and each state government spends its

                         tax revenue in the same way as consumers.

Suppose now that formula apportionment is replaced by a separate accounting
system where each state's tax rate if, is set so as to produce the same marginal

distortion in that state as existed under formula apportionment. Under our
assumptions, this change does not alter the total demand for each good, or the total
                                        - 11 -



quantity of each factor employed in each region. All equilibrium prices remain

unchanged. But the change does redistribute tax revenue between states. Under

separate accounting, state i's average tax revenue is


                                T                =      (1,                       (9)
                          TL        (_+d)
where 'rr1IK1 is each firm's before tax profits per unit of capital in state i. Profit

maximization then implies that the marginal distortion satisfies


                                    =     's d =                                (10)


Comparing (10) with (7), we see that the shift to separate accounting raises state

i's average tax revenue by [K(TI —TK)dlI(1 —FK)2, whereas i's total capital stock

remains unchanged because the marginal distortion is fixed. Consequently, states

with above average tax rates under formula apportionment gain by a universal shift

to separate accounting, and converselyY


C. Political instability of formula apportionment.

    Since, under formula apportionment, low tax rate states are in effect subsidized

at the expense of high tax rate states, any state using formula apportionment would

in general gain by lowering its corporate tax rate to zero, maximizing its transfer
from other states under formula apportionment, then replacing the lost revenue

with, for example, a corporate property tax. Specifically, let state i switch to a
property tax at rate t., which produces the same revenue per dollar of capital as
was previously collected under formula apportionment. With no pure profits, and
                                           - 12 -



assuming   a common K across firms, this implies that t = wdI(1 TK), using the
TK prevailing before the switch. Assume that the state is small, so that the switch

does not significantly affect the net return to capital or the average tax rate, TK.

Following U.S. state tax law, assume also that property tax payments arc
deductible from taxable profits. Then, after the tax change, equation (2) is

replaced by

                                       2
                  ___            d'rx                Td          _______
                                   A       2           —
                                                             —
                                                                    —2'         (2)
                  öK1          (i—1g)               (i—TX)       (iTK)
where K is the weighted average tax rate in the new equilibrium. This distortion

is algebraically smaller than the initial distortion, attracting more capital into the

state, and therefore raising tax revenues and wage rates within the state.
Politically, formula approtionment is very unstable.

   An issue related to the political stability of formula apportionment concerns

bow nonparticipating states are affected by the nature of the apportionment
formula. An example of political interest at the current time is how foreign
countries or multinational firms are affected by having U.S. states apportion
world-wide profits rather than domestic profits of a firm. The outcome depends

critically on whether foreign taxes on corporate capital are deductible from taxable

profits as defined by U.S. state corporate tax law. If the taxes are deductible, then

foreign countries gain by having U.S. states apportion world-wide profits. To see

this, assume that a foreign country has a proportional tax10 at rate tF on a U.S.

firm's capital, KF, invested in the country. Then the marginal distortion to capital
                                        - 13 -



investment there is (JIT/3KF = tF   when US, states apportion only domestic profits.

But if U.S. states apportion world-wide profits, then analogous to equation (2b) we

have


                                                                               (2c)
                               BKF               (1—)
Here, rJ =   r   KD/(KD +1(F), where KD is the firm's capital invested in the U.S.

As teiore, we assume that TK iS iuenticat across lirms, implying that hfi)K. is

also identical. Equation (2c) sho that the switch to apportioning world-wide
profits lowers the common air/aKF, thereby raising investment abroad and

increasing foreign tax revenue.

     However, foreign corporate income tax payments are not currently deductible
under U.S. state tax law. As a result, foreign countries and multinational firms

lose (gain) by having U.S. state corporate taxes apportion world-wide profits rather

than domestic profits if foreign tax rates are higher (lower) than U.S. state tax
rates. To see this, consider a multinational firm initially facing a U.S. state
corporate tax, K' based on formula apportionment of domestic profits, and a
proportional tax on capital, at rate tF, in a foreign country. Then total pretax

profits in equilibrium must satisfy

                                                 TK dKD
                                  1r=tFKF+                .                     (11)
                                                 (1—Tx)

If   U.S. states switch to apportioning world-wide profits, with no deduction for

foreign taxes, the firm's pretax profits must now satisfy
                                         - 14 -



                                 = (tFKF +TKdK)I(1 TK),                            (12)

where K = KD + KF. Simple algebra shows that, with no reallocation of capital,

-   >   'ii if tF>
                      TKd
                     (1Tx)
                             , and conversely. If foreign tax rates are higher, required

profits rise, and conversely.

    Using equation (12), it is possible to show that apportioning world-wide profits,

with no deduction of foreign taxes, implies that


                     ___ tF+ KO'K)KD                        dFx
                                                                     .
                                                                                     -
                                                                                    13
                     8KF      (1rr)2K                     (l—K)

The second term in equation (1.3) reflects the marginal effect of KF on the tax

base, B, used under formula apportionment. If tb.> idI(1 —b),                  then an

increase in KF raises B, in which case foreign investment benefits the U.S. In this

case, the switch to apportioning world-wide profits raises air!3KF thereby
discouraging foreIgn investment and lowering foreign tax revenue. Given that

foreign tax rates are generally much higher than U.S. state corporate tax rates,
foreign countries and multinational firms are both made worse off by the tax

change."

I). Government decision-making

    If all states charge the same tax rate 'r. under formula apportionment, no

 transfers between states occur. We have argued, however, that each, acting
 unilaterally, would still gain by switching to a property tax. But also, the states
                                        - 15 -



would generally gain even if they all simultaneously switched to a property tax (or

to separate accounting), still avoiding transfers between states, because they would

be induced to make more efficient decisions. The basic intuition is that under
formula apportionment, when a state raises its tax rate to increase revenues, its

revenues go up by less than they would under separate accounting or under a
property tax, for any given increase in the tax distortion affecting the cost of
capital. Under formula apportionment, therefore, raising revenue is harder, tax
rates will be lower, and utility should be lower.

    To formalize the argument, let us express the oblective function of any state as

a positive function of tax revenues collected (public expenditures), T, and a
negative function of the tax distortion to the cost of capital (increased prices),12 so

that V = V(T, a'rr/aK1). To isolate possible inefficiencies in the equilibrium level
of tax revenue, we assume that the vector of public goods fmanced by a given T,

 and the production techniques used to produce this vector, do not change when

 formula apportionment is replaced by separate accounting or property taxation.
 For simplicity, we also assume that all states have the same preferences and face

 identical tradeoffs, and that each state is sufficiently small that it treats the interest

 rate, and so d, as fixed.

     Under separate accounting or a property tax, each state sets its tax rate so as to

 maximize

                                    =
                                         [K3I;;     :)                                (14)
                                        - 16   -



where K3 is the state's total capital stock. The resulting equilibrium T5 is likely

to be inefficiently low. Each state treats as a loss the capital outflow resulting from

a rise in its tax rate, but ignores the benefit which other states receive from this

outflow. The presence of this positive externality lowers. T. below its efficient

level.13

    This externality is also present under formula apportionment. But there is a
second externality which further reduces T1 below its CffiCiCflt level. Under

formula apportionment, each state acts so as to maximize


                    V=V          'ir     (KWKdKf             a-dr
                                                                                 (14a)
                            K1                      2
                                 aA            (l—rK)


Since all states arc assumed to be identical, in equilibrium T equals TK and the
extra term drops out. When each state acts in isolation, however, it must take into

account this extra term, which lowers the tax rate selected. Under formula
apportionment, each state perceives a less favorable trade off than it would under

separate accounting or a property tax, even though collectively the trade offs are
identical. Each state ignores the increased subsidy to other states resulting from an

increase in its own tax rate, so chooses tax rates which are inefficiently low,
 everything else equal. As a result, equilibrium utility will be lower under formula

 apportionment, everything else equal, and states would gain by switching to one of

 the alternative taxes.14
                                         - 17   -


II. Two factor formula based on property and payroll

   A. Incentives faced by corporations

   Analysis of the two factor formula is much more complicated. While, in
general, the conclusions here are similar to those found in section I, several
previous results reverse if the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in

production is too high.

   If a two factor formula based on property and payroll is used, then the firm
would allocate capital and labor so as to maximize


                  R = — j (a               + (1x)         (T+dK).                 (15)


To capture the fact that weights on the two factors may vary, we have allowed for

arbitraiy weights, a and (1—a, on each factor used in the formula.

   Assuming that competition drives R to zero in equilibrium, the first order
conditions for the optimal Ka imply that


                      ___     ____ +      a(r.—F )d
                                                       foralli.                   (16)
                      aK1      (1—i)        (1.)2
Here,    = a TK +(l—a)y, where           = TWIW. As before, the cost of capital

for firms in state I varies across firms, depending on the average tax rates i and K

each faces.

    Th first order conditions for the optimal L imply that
                                            - 18 -




                                (1—a) w (T,          ) dK
                                                            forall, ,             (17)
                         aL

where w is the wage rate in state i. Labor demand decisions are now distorted for

firms with           .   The cost of labor is above the wage when i, < T, and

conversely.

   The average distortion to the cost of labor, (L.1Thii8L1)/L, is zero. In

contrast, the average distortion to the cost of capital is d/(1 —i). We show below

that the optimal capital-labor ratio in every state is a declining function of .

However, it is not necessarily the case that the capital-labor ratio is lower high tax

rate states than in low tax rate states. For example, when a 0, the distortion to
the cost of labor,            is higher in higher tax rate states (unless w1 adjusts to

fully absorb the difference in tax rates), whereas the distortion to the cost of
capital is identical across states.

   competitive pressure no longer necessarily leads firms to face equal ii,, and iK
in equilibrium. In fact, each firm may now have an incentive to produce in only

one state. This possibility can be explained graphically. Consider an economy

with two states, where T1> 2;         and   assume that the economy is in equilibrium

with some firm producing in both states. With constant returns to scale, this firm's

profits equal zero in each state when costs arc evaluated at factor prices equal to

the marginal costs of capital and labor (gross of marginal taxes). The firm's profit

maximizing input vector in state 1 is illustrated in Fig. 1 by the tangency between

the isoquant, II, for producing a dollar of revenue and the unit isocost curve, CC.
K1
     I




         a



                        b



                            C,

                                 L1


             FIGURE 1
                                      -19-


The slope of CC equals the ratio of thc marginal cost of labor to the marginal cost

of capital.

   Suppose now that the finn eliminates all of its operations in state 2 without
changing its input vector in state 1. Assume that production is separable between

states, so that 'rrIaK1 and aTrIc3L1 do not depend on K2 and L2. Then c)'nJcK1

and a'rrIaL1 remain unchanged (they continue to satisfy (16) and (17)), while the

marginal taxes on labor and capital become

                                 aT
                                        1    (a
                                aL1

and


                                         (a
                              k7' u_'+d
Since aT/aL1 initially equals a-u/aL1 (by profit maximization), it is evident that

specializing production in state 1 lowers EIT /aL1 though normally raises aT/aK,.

The unit isocost curve associated with the new marginal taxes, C 'C' in Fig. 1, must

therefore intercept the L1- axis beyond CC. If labor and capital are sufficiently

substitutable in production, so that the "curvatur&' of the isoquant is sufficiently

small, the firm can move to an input vector on C 'C' which lies above the unit

isoquant (e.g. point b). Although this move alters the marginal taxes on labor and

capital, a high substitution elasticity between inputs insures that these changes are

small (because a-ut/aK1 and a-ut/aL1 are then insensitive to changes in the input

vector). Consequently, although C 'C' is drawn for fixed marginal costs, its location
                                       - 20 -



above the unit iscquant at b implies that positive profits can be made. Evidently,

when the substitution elasticity is suffkiently high, each firm faces tax pressure to

operate in only one state. While we have not succeeded in characterizing simply

the nature of the equilibrium locational pattern of firms in the general case, given

the complexity of the tax law, we have proven the following two theorems for
special cases. In each case, we assume that there is a single good produced in the

economy, which can be costlessly transported between states, and that capital
remains completely mobile while labor is completely immobile. Each theorem

shows that competition leads finns to diversify across states unless the elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor in the production function is "too high". We

let o denote this elasticity. Since the proofs are quite long, they arc reported in an

appendix.


Theorem 1. Assume:

      (1) a 0, so only the payroll factor enters the apportionment tax formula.

      (2) there is one output which is freely transported;

      (3) d is less than or equal to the net rate of return to capital, and

      (4) the production technology is described by a C.ES. production function
            which is identical across states and firms.

   Then, if 0   2,   all firms will face the same , in equilibrium.

Theorem 2. Assume that there are two states and that assumptions (2)-(4) in
Theorem 1 hold, and that o < 2 mm (°L ,8), where 0), is the fraction of revenue
                                         -21 -


spent   of labor in state i in the particular context described in the Appendix. Then

each firm produce a positive amount of output in each state.

   Since observed values of 0L are in the range of 0.7 to 0.8, and estimated values

of a are rarely higher than 1.0, the condition on iir in Theorem 2 would seem very

likely to be satisfied.'5 Unlike Theorem 1, however, Theorem 2 does not rule out

the possibility that different firms possess different average tax rates, because there

may still exist two production plans which maximize net profits, yet each involving

positive output in both states.

   The assumption that the production function is C.E.S. is imposed for simplicity.

The proofs hold for any constant returns to scale production function which
satisfies the stated conditions on the substitution elasticity.

   The requirement that a is less than 2 min(01 ,O) may seem quite weak-most

empirical estimates of a are less than one. However, if more than one gcxxl is
produced in a state, and if the isoqu ants for each have different shapes, then the

composite isoquant describing the factor inputs which produce a given value of
output will have linear segments. These arise as the finn shifts the relative
composition of its output from one good to another, holding constant the capital-

labor ratio used for each. But along any linear segment the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor is infinite, violating the conditions of the

theorem. Further characterizing the equilibrium with multiple outputs in the two
factor case is very diffkult. If a = 0, however, we have been able to show that:
(1) all firms which produce any given good will in equilibrium face the same F if
                                        - 22 -



the production function for that good is characterized by < 2, but (2) different

   's must exist in equilibrium.16 Formula apportionment creates complex pressures

affecting the merger of firms, encouraging some mergers and discouraging others.
Separate accounting, in contrast, has no effect on incentives to merge.


B. Distributional considerations between states

   Will states, particularly those with high tax rates, gain in this context by
shifting from formula apportionment to separate accounting or factor taxation? To

examine this issue, let us assume that all firms have zero net profits, and face the

same and K' an assumption less strongly motivated here than the equivalent
assumption in section I.

    Under formula apportionment, a given firm's tax payments to state i are

                              = T(aKIBK + (1 (l)WjB%),                         (19)

where BK is the tax base per unit of capital, and B1 is the tax base per unit of

payroll:


                         BK =
                                (- +d);      Bv {-- +!)                        (20)


 These two tax bases are common to all states, and additional investment in a single

 state affects welfare in all states by changing both tax bases.

    With F and TK identical across firms, T1IK is also identical and equal to state

 i's tax revenue per unit of capital. Using the first-order conditions for profit
 maximization, it is possIble to show that
                                       - 23   -




K' K      aW
                +(la) W             dK
                                 (1—)w

    = 8'n' + L,          —   ( i       dK            -     W
                                              a(T1 TK) + (1—a (T TIV)
                                                                          -   W1

       8K,     K 8L1         1(1 _2


                               + (1—a)v
                                    i_i            [.!!_]
                                                  W [K K2]
                                                                              (21)



The term in the curly brackets reflects the marginal impacts of W1 and K8 on Bw

and BK. Under separate accounting, where each state has its own tax base, this

term does not appear. Thus, state i's tax revenue per unit of capital under
separate accounting, or factor taxes on property and payroll, satisfies

                                       8'ir
                                                                               (22)
                               K1     8K1         K1 8L1

   Suppose nov that the corporate tax using formula apportionment is replaced in

every state with one using separate accounting (or with a property tax) which
implies the same marginal capital distortions (8m'8K1), and with payroll taxes

which maintain the same marginal labor distortions (ailaL1). To isolate
distributional considerations, let us impose assumptions A and B from section LB.

Then this change in tax systems leaves all equilibrium prices in the economy
unchanged and causes no reallocation of factors between states. 1-lowever, state i's

tax revenue per unit of capital rises by the expression in curly brackets in equation

(21). But total tax revenue summed across st..tes, remains unchanged. As in
section 113, we find that states with high tax rates should gain revenue at the
                                          - 24 -



expense of states with low tax rates when factor taxes are used rather than formula

apportionment, but now this occurs only if capital-labor ratios are not too much

lower in high tax rate states than elsewhere.


C. Political instability

   Does each state still gain by reducing its corporate tax rate to zero, replacing
the lost revenue with a property tax and a payroll tax? Let us again assume that F

and 'tK are identical across firms; and that each state is "small", so that its tax

policy does not significantly alter the net return to capital, F, or K If the
replacement property tax rate, t, and the payroll tax rate, s1, arc each set so as to

preserve      the      initial     distortions,    then   T1   adT1I(l _)2       and

   = (1 —a)dT1KIW (1 _)2 State i's tax revenue per unit of capital now satisfies

                                     W       WI           dK
                                 T' a—
                                     K
                                       +(1—a-—-                                 (23)
                           K1                      K (1—)2w

Inspection with the first line in eq. (21) shows that the policy change raises TIK1

by the fraction I(1 •—i). Thus, any state can collect more revenue with factor
taxes without changing the tax distortions affecting factor usage.


 D. Government decision-making

    If all states were identical, and all were to shift simultaneously from factor

 apportionment to property taxation and payroll taxation, then, as before, one source

 of externality through which one state's behavior affects welfare in other states, is

 eliminated. If there are no other externalities present, then this is a social gain.
                                           25 -



Unlike in section ID, however, the direction of the externality depends on the

factor price elasticity of the capital-labor ratio.

     To examine the direction of the externality, let us utilize the model outlined in

section ID., naturally extended to allow state i's welfare to depend on the marginal

distortions in both the labor and capital market:

                             V. = V('r , a'rrIc3K,, cFnIaL1)                     (24)

With all states assumed to be identical, they all choose the same r and possess the

same K1IW. Thus, the term in the curly brackets in equation (21) must equal
zero, implying that there are no transfers of revenue between states. However,
each state takes into account the marginal effect of its tax rate on this term when

choosing this tax rate. As seen from equation (21), a rise in a single state's tax
rate from its equilibrium value (where all T1 's are identical) will raise

K,          L1       above T and thereby transfer revenue to other states, if K1/W

does not fall too much below KIW. In this case, there is a positive externality,
which can be expected to reduce the equilibrium Tçj below its efficient level. In

general, however, the externality can be either positive or negative.


ifi. Three factor formula

     When three factors are used in the formula apportionment, the analysis
 becomes much more complicated, and only a few results are reported. One
 immediate question in setting up the three factor case is whether sales, as defined

 in the tax formula, represent sales at origin or at destination. Most state tax
                                            - 26   -


formulas use sales at destination, so we explore this case. We assume in addition

that output can be transported between states without cost.

   Under these assumptions, the objective of the firm is to choose K1, L1, and Si so

as to maximize


                  R = ii — -(SIS +K1/K + W1/W)(ir+dK).                                  (25)


For simplicity, we now ignore differences in weights assigned to each of the three
factors.

   The first-order conditions for K1 and L1 change in a straight-forward way from

those in section II, becoming

                               air =               + (T1K)1                             (26)
                              .9K,      (1—)            3(i_)2
and


                                 ____   —
                                            W1 -rw )dK
                                                                                        (27)
                                             3W(1—)2

Here,    1   =(+w+            )/3, where               S1TIS.    These first-order conditions

are almost identical to those in section II, differing only in the definition of j and

in the appearance of weights of 1/3 instead of a and (1—a).

      Given zero transportation costs, the firm can sell its output across states in a

pattern independent of the location of its production. The gain to selling a unit in
state i rather than state j   equals
                                        - 27 -




                                                 ) J S )]
                                    dK[P.(T.—Fs)—P.(.r.--F
                  (P—P)(1—)                                                     (28)
                                                 3S(1-)
where P and P represent the output prices in each of the states. If the firm is
indifferent to selling in the two states, then the relative prices in the two states

must satisfy'7

                                    P      C-'r.
                                                                                 29
                                    P C—r1
where C FFs/3 +5(1 —TT)2IdK 1.

   If all firms in equilibrium have the same value of C, then equation (29)
characterizes relative prices of the output. However, in general, C can differ across

firms. If so, inspection shows that firms with relatively large values of
D = S (l—T)2IdK will concentrate their sales in relatively high tax rate states, and
face relatively high values of i. Assume to the contrary that i is the same for
two firms with different values of D. But then C is larger for the firm with the

larger value of D, and the percent surcharge it would need to be willing to sell iii

the high tax rate state, as shown in equation (29), would be smaller. Therefore, a

firm with a relatively large value of D would shift its sales toward the high tax rate

state, raising its value of F and conversely. It aD/a is suffkiently negative,
then ths process may bring the values of C for the two firms into equality
(eliminating any competitive differential at the margin) before a corner solution in
the location of sales is reached.

   Since large values of D are associated with production in low tax rate states,
                                        - 28 -



unless   capital-labor elasticities are too high, the tax law creates incentives for
cross-hauling of output. Production in low tax rate states will be sold more heavily

in high tax rate states, and conversely. Under separate accounting, no such
distortions exist.

   We have not attempted to generalize the rest of the analysis to the three-factor

case. However, the complexity of the analysis, which prevented us from proceeding

further, is in itself one of the main conclusions of the paper.


IV. Mtematise formulas

   Throughout this paper we have dcscnbed various ways in which incentives
under existing forms of formula apportionment differ from those created when
separate accounting is used. Are there alternative formulas which approximate

more closely the incentives implied by separate accounting, yet still maintain the
administrative advantages of existing law?

    Under separate accounting, taxable profits for a firm in state i would be

dK1I(1 —'ri), and total taxable profits would equal dEKI(1 —T,). Consider then

the formula assigning the fraction (K11(1 —T1))I(KJI(1 —Ti)) of any firm's total
                                                    )
profits to state i. After-tax profits of the firm now equal

                                     T1K1I(1 —ii)
                          R 7r        >KJI(1—TJ)
                                                        (ir+dK)                 (30)


 If in equilibrium R 0, then the first-order conditions for the optimal values of K.
                                       -29 -


are   simply aWaK T1d/(1 —r), exactly the same as under separate accounting.18
Labor demand decisions and sales decisions are undistorted, also as under separate

accounting. Yet this formula is at least as easy to administer as existing law.

      Complications arise when any of the assumptions are relaxed. If the tax
parameter d varies by state, the formula giving the same incentives as separate

accounting would assign the fraction (K1dI(1 —T))/(KdI(1 —'u)) of a firm's
                                                       J
profits to state i. The tax parameter d, however, would be a complicated function

of depreciation schedules, tax credits, interest rates, and any other investment
related incentives, making this formula very difficult to administer. Similar
administrative complications arise if the formula must he modified to reflect
different rate brackets which are often present under state corporate tax law.
Furthermore, if firms receive true profits in equilibrium, then no feasible formula

would maintain the incentives existing under separate accounting. To do so, the

pure profits must be assigned to the state in which they are earned, yet, short of
separate accounting, insufficient information is available to do this. The formula

proposed in equation (30) should still be an improvement over existing law,
however.


V. Conc1usion

      Using formula apportionment rather than separate accounting may simplify the
administration of a corporation tax. It also distorts further the incentives faced by

both individual firms and individual states.
                                      - 30 -



   For any given distortions to the costs of capital and labor inputs to production

in each state, under our competitive assumptions the same total amount of tax
revenue is raised under formula apportionment, under separate accounting, or
under taxation of factor inputs. To this extent, formula apportionment is no more

costly a way to raise tax revenue than these alternative taxes. However, while total

revenue is the same, tax revenue in high tax rate states is normally lower under
formula apportionment then under either of the other taxes, while tax revenue in

low tax rate states is higher. These cross-subsidies under formula apportionment

lead states to choose inefficiently low tax ratcs, everything else equal, relative to
those chosen under either of the alternative taxes. In fact, given the cross-
subsidies, any state has the incentive to reduce its corporate tax rate under formula

apportionment to zero, maximizing its subsidy, then replacing the lost revenue with

one of the alternative taxes.

    In addition, a corporate tax under formula apportionment creates additional
types of distortions not present when the alternative taxes are used. Under formula

apportionment, factor price distortions vary in general among firms within a state,

normally putting multistate firms at a competitive advantage, thereby artificially
 encouraging firms to merge across state lines, Such a tax also creates incentives

 for cross-hauling of output, with production in low tax rate states sold in high tax

 rate states, and conversely.

    There is therefore a clear efficiency cost in using formula apportionment to
 simplify the administration of a corporate tax. In contrast, taxes on factor inputs
                                       - 31 -




are yet easier to administer (since a corporate tax using formula apportionment

requires the measurement of factor inputs as well as profits), yet create none of the

extra distortions to firm or state decision.making described above.
                                      - 32 -



                                    Footnotes



1. The U.S. Supreme Court has recently ruled that a state may apply formula

    apportionment to all profits of a firm, and not just to domestic profits.

2. See, for example, Musgrave [1972] or United Nations [1974].

3. See, for example, McLure [1980,1981].

4. Pretax economic profits are simply revenues minus net of corporate tax
   payments to all factor inputs.

5. In general, d can be computed by taking the difference between one and the
    present value of all deductions resulting from a dollar investment, and
    multiplying this difference by the sum of the depreciation rate and the
    opportunity cost of capital (the real after-tax interest rate). If only economic

    depreciation is allowed, a standard simplifying assumption, then d equals the

    real after-tax interest rate. Recent estimates suggest that under U.S.
    corporate tax law, d is negative, at least for equipment. (See the Economic

   Report of the President for 1982 and 1983, or Fullerton-Gordon [1983]).

    Throughout the text of this paper, however, we assume that d is positive
    under state corporate tax laws. Most results reverse if d is negative.

6. These first-order conditions and various of the observations have been

    reported previously in Mieszkowski-Morgan (1982), Frisch (1983), and
    Johnston (1983).
                                      -33-


7. We assume that each firm uses a positive amount 'of capital. llñs assumption

     is maintained throughout the paper.

8. Detailed provisions of a corporate tax, even with separate accounting, may
     create incentives for mergers. For example, firms with tax losses gain by

     merging with profitable firms.

9. Aggregate revenue, summed across states, remains unchanged, however.

10. It is notationally simpler to analyse a proportional tax, but the results are the

     same with a corporate tax based on separate accounting.

11. Of course, our constant returns to scale assumption precludes firms from
     being made worse off in the long run, since equilibrium net profits always

     equal zero. Given putty-clay capital, however, the switch to apportioning
     world-wide profits would reduce net profits below zero initially.

12. For simplicity, no attempt is made to describe separately which prices adjust
     to absorb the tax distortion.

13. See, for example, Wilson (1983) and Zodrow and Micszkowski (1983) for a
     demonstration of this claim.

14. If other sources of externalities exist which in themselves, lead states to
     choose tax rates which are inefficiently high, however, then on second best

     grounds this tax change would have ambiguous cffccts on utility. For
      discussion of the various spillovers to nonresidents, see Gordon [1983].
                                      - 34 -



15.   The proof of Theorem 2 can easily be extended to show that the theorem
      holds when the condition on r is replaced by the assumption that the
      production function is Cobb-Douglas.

16. Proofs of these two assertions involve straightforward applications of the
      arguments in Theorem 1, and are available from the authors.

17. McLure (1980) and Mieszkowski-Morgon (1982) also note this efftt of
      formula apportionment on relative output prices.

18. The tax base shared by all states is now B = ('r+dK)/(>yI(1 —Ti)). If
                                                          )
      R = 0 in equilibrium, then B equals d and is unaffected at the margin by a
      change in K. Thus the externality present under the previous formula is now

      absent.
                                        - 35 -



                                    APPENDIX


                                Proofs of Theorems


Notation: A firm's output in state i can be defined as a function of its demands
for capital and labor in state i:       f
                                    = (K1, L1). This function is identical across

firms. We normalize the output price to one. Let r be the net rcturn to capital.

Then


            R (1) f(K L,) — (r               +)        K1   — w1L1            (Al)

where

                        TK1
              T   a
                         K•
                              + (1—a)             , for   0   a    1.          (A2)



   Since scale is irrelevant under the constant returns to scale assumption, profits

can be normalized in any dcsircd manner. We set (1 .) w1L1 equal to one. Let

k1 be the capital-payroll ratio in state i (k1 = K.Iw1L4), and let K1 be the share of

the firm's total payroll in state i (K1 = w,L1/> w,L1). Under the chosen

normalization, net profits can then be written


                  I =Xj1f(ki,i._) —(r + d)k _i1;                               (A3)


where
                                            - 36   -




                                     TkXj
                               a
                                      k1X1.
                                                + (la)                                  (A4)



Proof of Theorem 1: By the assumptions of the theorem, a = 0 in equation (A4).

We need to show that a firm's profit-maximizing i is unique under the stated
conditions. Since all finns possess the same production technology, this proves the

result.

     For a firm's k1 's to maximize profits, as defined by (A3),


                               f1(k1, --) r + --i---- d                                 (AS)
                                       Wi


where the subscript on f denotes a partial derivative. Eq. (AS) defines the profit-
maximizing k, as a function of F; and it is clear that the profit-maximizing
capital-labor ratios are identical across states:

                             w1k() =wkQ) all i,j                                        (A6)

Note also from    (AS) and the definition     of the substitution elasticity, u, that




                                                               ____      dk
                 di                                                                     (A7)
                                                               0Lf 1   (1_)2

where °L is labor's income share, defined in terms of marginal products (i.e.,

°L   —1 2(K,L) L1/f(K1,L)). By (A6), both oand 0L are identical across states.

     Suppose now that, contrary to the theorem, there are two different profit-
maximizing ?s, ' and ?'. Let {X'} and {X} be the X's associated with ? and i":
                                                 - 37 -



                                  =       v1 X and ?' =                              (A8)


For 0     a      1,   defme the functions,

        X.(a) aX + (l—a)X';                                                          (A9)
        1(a) = a? + (1—a)?';                                                         (MO)

        (a)           Xj(a)tf(ki((a)),)
                                   Wj   -(rl—r(a)
                                            +-d)k((a)) _11.(A11)

By assumption,


                              max R(a) =R(O)              =R(l) =0                   (A12)
                             Oa1
'Thus, there   exists some a E (0, 1) such that

                              dR (a)       = o and                    0              (A13)
                                  da                      da2


We shall use (A13) to derive a contradiction.

   Differentiating (All) yields

                dR(â)                     k                   —(r +                  (A14)
                                  LI
                                              If(l, w1k1              1-(a)    d)1
                                  —
                                       (l—T(a)
                                              —2 d>X1k1=0,

where    it is henceforth understood that all variables are evaluated at a. Using
(AS), it is easily seen that

                            1                                             T
                      f(l, w1k1       —
                                          (r +
                                                 l—r
                                                       d) =     (r +      lT d),     (A15)
                                       - 38 -



where O is factor i's income share, defined in terms of marginal products. Since

these shares are identical across states (by (Ni)), each side of (A15)        is

independent of i. Thus, (A14) and (A15) imply that

                     k.' = '—" (I
                  dX.                 d
                  da                        !I—I(x.k.)i
                           1—F(a) r(1—)+d) t.OL )
                                                              £           (A16)


By differentiating (A14) and using (AS), (A7), and (A16), we obtain

                                                                          (A17)

  d2R(â)       (Tit)_(xk)d —2-----4__—._2+_c!-_ d
    da2       (i—(â))3                   °L r(1—)+d          °L r(1—7)+d

Under our assumption that d r, it is clear from (A17) that

                            d2R (a)    <0       if cr < 2
                              da2                                         (A18)

Thus, (A13) is violated when cr < 2.


                                                                          Q.E.D.


   Proof of Theorem 2. Let R (a,X) denote maximum profits conditional on a and
X, where I? has been normalized as before, and X is the share of total payroll in

state 1. Assume, contrary to the theorem, that for some a', profits are maximized
at A = 0 and A 1:

                            R (a', 0) R (a', 1) = 0.                      (A19)

Then R (a', A) 0 at all A. Under the conditions of the theorem, we shall show
                                          - 39 -



that

                       R (a', X) > 0 for some X E (0, 1) .                    (A20)

This contradiction establishes the desired result.

   For each X, let a(X) be the a which minimizes R (a, X); and define

                                R*(K) R(a(X),X).                              (A21)

Clearly, R (a, 0) and R (a, 1) are independent of a. Then, by (A19),

                                R * (0)   = R * (1) = 0.                      (A22)

We shall prove that

                         R*(X) > 0 for some K E (0,1).                        (A23)

This result clearly establishes (A20), thereby completing the proof.

    If a(X) equals 0 or 1 for a given K E (0, 1), then our previous results imply that

R * (K) is positive under the conditions of the theorem, Thus, assume that a(X) lies

between zero and one for all K between zero and one. Then a(X) satisfies the first-

order condition

                                   aR(a(K),K)
                                          aa
                                                     0                         (4)
where it is henceforth understood that K E (0, 1). For (A24) to bold, a marginal
change in a must not alter the value of associated with each K. By (A4), F stays

 constant if and only if the profit-maximizing k1 and k2 at a(K) and K are identical.

 Let k* (K) denote this common value of k1 and k2. The first-order condition for

 k* (K) is obtained by differentiating (A3):
                                         - 40 -




                          Xf 1(k* (X),             [r +                              (A25)
                                                                d)

   We now use (A25) and the assumptions of the thcorem to show that

                          d2R*(x)   <o            dR*(x)        o                    (A26)

Conditions (A26) and (A22) establish (A23), as desired.

   First differentiate (A3) with respect to X and set the result equal to zero:

                       dR * (X)
                                  = -f) —                            0               (7)
                         dX                       (1- dk
wheref1 =f(k*(Y),           and k = k*(X). Then


         d2R* (X) =
            dK2
                        (f —f?) — (1)2 d            dk*
                                                          dX.
                                                                —2
                                                                     (T}_72)2
                                                                         (1—)
                                                                                dk   (A28)

From (A25), we obtain

                  dk;(x) =
                                                   - 2)
                                                           - (Ti-2)d
                              - Xf i       [Cf                                       (A29)


If OJ is capital's income share in state i, then

                                    f =Oj-(flk).                                     (MO)

Eqs. (A27) and (MO) imply that there exists some b such that

                         min(O,O) b <              max(O)c,O)                        (Mi)
and
                                        - 41   -



                                        b
                                               T7 d .
                           Ii —f                                                (A32)
                                            (1-i)
Substituting (A29) and (A32) into (A28) gives

             d2R*(X)     (1—b)2         (T1—r2)2d2            ('ri—72)2d
                                                       —2                  k.
               dX2      Xjf1                (i—)               (1—)
                                                                                (A33)


where, by (Mi), (1—b)2 < 1.

   Observe next that

                          —
                                Xf      =
                                            —       X1f Oj.                     (A34)

if OL is the minimum of (,! and O, then (A25), (A34), and the assumption that

d r   give


                           —
                                >if 1
                                               Otd                              (A35)

From (A33) and (A35), we obtain the condition

                                ' ' < 0 if o< 20g.
                          d2R*(X\                       —

                              dX2                                               (A36)



                                                                                QED.
                                      - 42   -


                                    Pj.ferences



Economic Report of the President, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

     Office, 1982-3.

Frisch, Daniel J.: 'Issues in the Taxation of Foreign Source Income," in Behavioral

     Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, cd. by Martin Feldstcin,

     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Fullerton, Don and Roger H. Gordon: 'A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in
      General Equilibrium Models,'t in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax

     Policy Analysis, ed. by Martin Fcldstein. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, 1983.

Gordon, Roger Fl.: "An Optimal Taxation Approach to Fiscal Federalism,"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Johnston, James L.: 'Unitary Taxation: A Free Lunch?", mimeo, 1983.

McLure, Charles E.: 'The Elusive Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax: The

      State Case," Public Finance Quarterly, 9(1981), 395-413.

         'The State Corporate Income Tax: Lambs in Wolves' Clothing," in The

      Economics of Taxation, ccl. by Henry Aaron and Michael Boskin,
      Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1980.

Mieszkowski, Peter and John Morgan: 'The National Effects of Differential State

      Corporate Income Taxes on Multi-State Corporations," mimeo, 1982.
                                     - 43 -




Musgrave,   Peggy: 'International Tax Base Division and the Multinational
     Corporation," Public Finance, 27(1972), 394-413.

United Nations: The Impact of Multinational Corporations on Development and

     on International Relations, Technical Papers: Taxation, New York: United
     Nations, 1974.

Wilson, John D.: "A Theory of Inter-Regional Tax Competition," rnimeo, 1983.

Zodrow, George R. and Peter Mieszkowski, 'Pigou, 'J'icbout, Property Taxation and
     the Under-Provision of Local Public Goods," mimeo, 1983.
